Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classical World Toggle Classical World subsection 1.1 Ancient Greece 1.2 Rome 2 As a philosophical metaphor 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Owl of Athena 23 languages العربية Bikol Central Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Symbol burat of the Greek goddess, type of bird "Owl of Minerva" redirects here. For the  scientific journal, see The Owl of Minerva (journal) .

Silver tetradrachm coin at the Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon depicting the owl of Athena ( c.

480 –420 BC). The inscription "ΑΘΕ" is an abbreviation of ΑΘΗΝΑΙΩΝ, which may be translated as "of the Athenians". In daily use the Athenian drachmas were called glaukes (γλαῦκες, owls). This silver coin was first issued in 479 BC in Athens after the Persians were defeated by the Greeks .

[ 1 ] In Greek mythology , a little owl ( Athene noctua ) traditionally represents or accompanies Athena , the virgin goddess of wisdom , or Minerva , her syncretic incarnation in Roman mythology .

[ 2 ] Because of such association, the bird—often referred to as the " owl of Athena " or the " owl of Minerva "—has been used as a symbol of knowledge, wisdom, perspicacity and erudition throughout the Western world .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Classical World [ edit ] Ancient Greece [ edit ] Further information: Athena Athena holding a helmet and a spear, with an owl. Attributed to the Brygos Painter ( c.

490 –480 BC). The Metropolitan Museum of Art .

The reasons for the association of Athena and the owl are uncertain. Some mythographers , such as David Kinsley and Martin P. Nilsson , suggest that she may descend from a Minoan palace goddess associated with birds [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and Marija Gimbutas claim to trace Athena's origins as an Old European bird and snake goddess.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] On the other hand, Cynthia Berger theorizes about the appeal of some characteristics of owls—such as their ability to see in the dark—to be used as symbol of wisdom [ 3 ] while others, such as William Geoffrey Arnott , propose a simple association between founding myths of Athens and the significant number of little owls in the region (a fact noted since antiquity by Aristophanes in The Birds and Lysistrata ).

[ 9 ] In any case, the city of Athens seems to have adopted the owl as proof of allegiance to its patron virgin goddess, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] who, according to a popular origin myth reproduced on the West pediment of the Parthenon , secured the favor of its citizens by providing them with a more enticing gift than Poseidon .

[ 11 ] Owls were commonly reproduced by Athenians on vases, weights and prize amphoras for the Panathenaic Games .

[ 9 ] The owl of Athena even became the common obverse of the Athenian tetradrachms after 510 BC and according to Philochorus , [ 12 ] the Athenian tetradrachm was known as glaux (γλαύξ, little owl) [ 13 ] throughout the ancient world and "owl" in present-day numismatics .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] They were not, however, used exclusively by them to represent Athena and were even used for motivation during battles by other Greek cities, such as in the victory of Agathocles of Syracuse over the Carthaginians in 310 BC—in which owls flying through the ranks were interpreted as Athena's blessing [ 3 ] —or in the Battle of Salamis , chronicled in Plutarch 's biography of Themistocles .

[ 16 ] Rome [ edit ] Further information: Minerva The association between the owl and the goddess continued through Minerva in Roman mythology , although the latter sometimes simply adopts it as a sacred or favorite bird. For example, in Ovid ’s Metamorphoses , Corone the crow complains that her spot as the goddess' sacred bird is occupied by the owl, which in that particular story turns out to be Nyctimene , a cursed daughter of Epopeus , king of Lesbos .

[ 17 ] As for ancient Roman folklore, owls were considered harbingers of death if they hooted while perched on a roof, and placing one of its feathers near someone sleeping could prompt him or her to speak and reveal their secrets.

[ 2 ] As a philosophical metaphor [ edit ] The philosophical use of the metaphor of the mind as a night owl goes at least as far back as an analogy in Aristotle's Metaphysics between the day-blind eyes of bats and human intellect (Aristo., Met. II 993 b9–11). This more negative epistemological metaphor of a night owl was long transmitted through the philosophical tradition, e.g.

Thomas Aquinas ( Summa contra gentiles , quaestio 45).
In affirmative contrast, the 19th-century German idealist philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel famously noted that "the owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the falling of the dusk"; philosophy comes to understand a historical condition just as it passes away.

[ 18 ] Philosophy appears only in the "maturity of reality", because it understands in hindsight.

Philosophy, as the thought of the world, does not appear until reality has completed its formative process, and made itself ready. History thus corroborates the teaching of the conception that only in the maturity of reality does the ideal appear as counterpart to the real, apprehends the real world in its substance, and shapes it into an intellectual kingdom. When philosophy paints its grey in grey, one form of life has become old, and by means of grey it cannot be rejuvenated, but only known. The owl of Minerva takes its flight only when the shades of night are gathering.

— G.W.F. Hegel , Philosophy of Right (1820), "Preface"; translated by S W Dyde, 1896 Klaus Vieweg describes it as "one of the most beautiful metaphors of the history of philosophy" in his Hegel biography.

[ 19 ] In a recent reconstruction, Hegel's affirmative metaphor, in opposition to the philosophical tradition, seems to originate between Goethe and a relative unknown, philosophical writer Jacob Hermann Obereit around 1795 in Jena, where Hegel stayed shortly after, giving lectures.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Ancient Greece portal Myths portal Philosophy portal Nyctimene References [ edit ] ^ Grabham, Sue (1995). "Greece: People and History".

Encyclopedia of Lands & Peoples . London: Kingfisher . p. 105.

ISBN 1-85697-292-5 .

^ a b Eason, Cassandra (2008).

Fabulous Creatures, Mythical Monsters, and Animal Power Symbols: A Handbook . Westport, CT, USA: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 71.

ISBN 9780275994259 .

The Roman goddess of wisdom Minerva has the owl as her sacred creature, as does her ancient Greek counterpart Athena. Athena was often depicted with an owl, which was considered a symbol of wisdom in both cultures. The best known image of Athena's owl, the Little Owl, is seen on ancient Athenian coins dating from the fifth century BCE. To the Romans an owl feather placed near sleeping people would prompt them to speak in their sleep and reveal their secrets. However, in Rome the owl was considered a harbinger of death if it perched on a roof or on a public building and hooted. The deaths of several Roman emperors, including the assassination of Julius Caesar, were signaled by an owl landing on the roof and hooting.

^ a b c Berger, Cynthia (2005).

Owls . Mechanicsburg, PA, USA: Stackpole Books. p. X.

ISBN 9780811732130 .

Minerva's owl wisdom.

^ Deacy, Susan J.

; Villing, Alexandra (2001).

Athena in the Classical World . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.

ISBN 978-9004121423 .

^ Kinsley, David (1989).

The goddesses' mirror: visions of the divine from East and West . New York: SUNY Press. p. 141.

ISBN 9781438409139 .

^ Nilsson, Martin Persson (1950).

"The Minoan-Mycenaean religion and its survival in Greek religion" .

Acta Regiae Societatis Humaniorum Litterarum Lundensis .

9 . Biblo & Tannen Publishers: 491.

ISBN 9780819602732 .

ISSN 0347-5123 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

{{ cite journal }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Gimbutas, Marija (1982).

The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe, 6500-3500 B.C.: Myths and Cult Images (2 ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

147– 150.

ISBN 9780520253988 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ Gimbutas, Marija (2001). Robbins Dexter, Mirijam (ed.).

The living goddesses . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

157– 158.

ISBN 9780520927094 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ a b c Arnott, William Geoffrey (2007).

Birds in the Ancient World from A to Z . London: Routledge. pp.

84– 85.

ISBN 9780415238519 .

^ Sacks, David (1995). Murray, Oswyn (ed.).

A dictionary of the ancient Greek world . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

41 .

ISBN 9780195112061 . Retrieved 20 May 2013 .

athens name owl athena.

^ Palagia, Olga (1998).

"The Pediments of the Parthenon" .

Monumenta Graeca et Romana .

7 . Brill: 40.

ISBN 9004111980 .

ISSN 0169-8850 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ Philochorus: Scholion to Aristophanes, Birds 1106.

^ Thompson, D'Arcy Wentworth .

A glossary of Greek birds . Oxford, Clarendon Press 1895, pp 45–46.

^ Philip Harding: The story of Athens: The Fragments of the Local Chronicles of Attika.

^ Kraay, C.M. The archaic owls of Athens: classification and chronology.

^ Rich, John; Rich, John; Shipley, Graham, eds. (2012).

War and Society in the Greek World . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9781134807833 .

^ Anderson, William Scovil (1998).

Ovid's Metamorphoses, Books 1-5 . Tulsa: University of Oklahoma Press. p. 301.

ISBN 9780806128948 .

^ Smith, John E. (30 October 2009).

"When Dusk Is Only Dusk" .

New York Times . Retrieved 28 February 2013 .

Hegel's claim, however, bestows no special importance on a closing phase; it refers instead to the end of an era, which is confirmed as such by the appearance of philosophical critique and appraisal that involves making explicit the ideas and beliefs that drove that era but could not be fully articulated until it was over ^ Vieweg, Klaus (2019).

Hegel. Der Philosoph der Freiheit. (= The Philosopher of Freedom.) . München. p. 470.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Jörg Hüttner and Martin Walter.

"Die Eule der Minerva aus vorhegelscher Perspektive: Obereits Avertissement (1795) an Goethe. (= The Owl of Minerva from a pre-hegelian perspective: Obereit´s Avertissement 1795 to Goethe.)" .

Hegel-Studies (2020) . 53/54: 301– 318.

External links [ edit ] The Owl of Minerva Issue #2939 of Existential Comics v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐bshb6
Cached time: 20250812001940
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.631 seconds
Real time usage: 0.800 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2493/1000000
Revision size: 13435/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 364583/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3171/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81601/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.314/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6975365/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  505.823      1 -total
 44.81%  226.652     23 Template:Navbox
 38.51%  194.802      1 Template:Reflist
 25.33%  128.114      1 Template:Greek_religion
 15.22%   76.999      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 14.03%   70.943     11 Template:Cite_book
 12.81%   64.820      1 Template:Short_description
  7.79%   39.408      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.47%   32.743      7 Template:Main_other
  4.67%   23.620      1 Template:Redirect Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3206672:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001940 and revision id 1289872120. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Owl_of_Athena&oldid=1289872120 " Categories : Symbols of Athena Birds on coins Coins of ancient Greece Owls in culture Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 10:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Owl of Athena 23 languages Add topic

