Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background of British rule in Ireland 1.2 1627 Hispano-Irish proposal 1.3 Society of United Irishmen and the Irish Rebellion of 1798 1.4 Acts of Union 1.5 Robert Emmet 1.6 Young Ireland and the Irish Confederation 1.7 Fenian movement 1.8 Nineteenth century onward 1.9 Irish Free State and Republic of Ireland 2 Republicanism in Northern Ireland Toggle Republicanism in Northern Ireland subsection 2.1 1921–1966 2.2 1966–1969 2.3 1970–1985 2.4 Since 1986 3 Ideology Toggle Ideology subsection 3.1 Rejection of the British state 3.2 Violence 3.3 Connection to left-wing politics 3.4 Relationship with the Christian churches 3.5 Historiography 4 Political parties Toggle Political parties subsection 4.1 Active republican parties 4.2 Defunct republican parties 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Irish republicanism 24 languages العربية Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Italiano Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Irish Republicanism ) Political movement Part of a series on Irish republicanism Concepts Abstentionism Anti-imperialism Armalite and ballot box strategy Dissident republican Éire Nua Fenian Irish nationalism Irish republican legitimism New Departure Radicalism Republicanism United Ireland History Irish Rebellion of 1798 Acts of Union 1800 Irish rebellion of 1803 Young Ireland rebellion Fenian Rising Fenian raids Fenian dynamite campaign Easter Rising 1918 general election Irish revolutionary period Irish War of Independence Irish Civil War 1932 general election S-Plan Border Campaign The Troubles Arms Crisis 1981 Irish hunger strike Good Friday Agreement Dissident Irish republican campaign People Gerry Adams Cathal Brugha Neil Blaney Tom Clarke James Connolly Seamus Costello Éamon de Valera Robert Emmet Cathal Goulding Thomas J. Kelly Seán Mac Stíofáin Seán MacBride Terence MacSwiney Constance Markievicz Bernadette Devlin Martin McGuinness John Mitchel Ruairí Ó Brádaigh Dáithí Ó Conaill Peadar O'Donnell John O'Mahony Patrick Pearse Seán Russell Bobby Sands Seán South James Stephens Wolfe Tone Moss Twomey Active parties Aontú Éirígí Fianna Fáil Irish Republican Socialist Party Republican Network for Unity Republican Sinn Féin Saoradh Sinn Féin Defunct parties All Ireland Anti-Partition League Anti H-Block Aontacht Éireann Clann na Poblachta Clann Éireann Communist Party of Ireland (Marxist–Leninist) Córas na Poblachta Cumann na Poblachta Cumann Poblachta na hÉireann Fianna Uladh Independent Fianna Fáil Irish Anti-Partition League Irish Independence Party Irish Socialist Republican Party Irish Workers' Group (1976) National Corporate Party Northern Council for Unity Republican Congress Republican Labour Party Republican Socialist Collective Saor Éire SLISO Socialist Republican Party Militant groups Active Arm na Poblachta Continuity IRA Cumann na mBan‎ Fianna Éireann Irish Republican Liberation Army Irish Republican Movement New IRA Inactive Irish National Liberation Army Óglaigh na hÉireann (Real IRA splinter group) Defunct Connolly Column Irish Brigade Irish Citizen Army Irish National Invincibles Irish People's Liberation Organisation Irish Republican Army (1919–1922) Irish Republican Army (1922–1969) Irish Republican Brotherhood Irish Revolutionary Forces Irish Volunteers Official IRA Provisional IRA Real IRA Republican Action Against Drugs Republican Defence Army Saor Éire (1967–1975) Saor Uladh Society of United Irishmen South Armagh Republican Action Force Young Ireland Active organisations 32 County Sovereignty Movement Anti-Imperialist Action Ireland Cabhair Connolly Association Connolly Youth Movement IRPWA Irish National Congress IRSCNA NORAID National Graves Association National Graves Association, Belfast Ógra Fianna Fáil Ógra Shinn Féin Revolutionary Housing League Wolfe Tone Societies Defunct organisations Clan na Gael Clann na hÉireann Comhairle na Poblachta Dungannon Clubs Emmet Monument Association Fenian Brotherhood Friends of Irish Freedom Irish Republican Brotherhood Irish Republican Voice Irish Socialist Federation League of Communist Republicans Northern Resistance Movement People's Democracy Phoenix National and Literary Society Troops Out Movement Media An Phoblacht Daily Ireland Evening Press Guerrilla Days in Ireland IRIS Magazine Irish Freedom Republican News Saoirse Irish Freedom Sinn Féin The Gaelic American The Hibernia Magazine The Irish Felon The Irish People The Irish Press The Nation The Phoenix The Starry Plough The Sunday Press United Irishman (1848 newspaper) United Irishman (1948 newspaper) Culture Celtic F.C.

Christy Moore Black 47 The Dubliners Easter Lily Flying Column (music group) Irish rebel songs Marxman Kneecap The Wolfe Tones Politics portal Ireland portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Irish republicanism ( Irish : poblachtánachas Éireannach ) is the political movement for an Irish republic , void of any British rule . Throughout its centuries of existence, it has encompassed various tactics and identities, simultaneously elective and militant and has been both widely supported and iconoclastic .

The modern emergence of nationalism , democracy , and radicalism provided a basis for the movement, with groups forming across the island in hopes of independence. Parliamentary defeats provoked uprisings and armed campaigns, quashed by British forces. The Easter Rising , an attempted coup that took place in the midst of the First World War, provided popular support for the movement. An Irish republic was declared in 1916 and officialized following the Irish War of Independence . The Irish Civil War , beginning in 1922 and spurred by the partition of the island , then occurred.

Republican action, including armed campaigns, continued in the newly-formed state of Northern Ireland, a region of the United Kingdom. Tensions in the territory culminated in widespread conflict by 1969. This prompted paramilitaries: republicans assembled under the Provisional Irish Republican Army , who waged a campaign against the British state for approximately three decades—the most pronounced and prolonged republican campaign.

[ 1 ] Represented by Sinn Féin , republicans would gradually invest in political action, including the Northern Ireland peace process and the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. The PIRA have since decommissioned and republicans have been elected to various echelons of government: those within the movement opposed to this outcome are often referred to as dissident republicans .

History [ edit ] Background of British rule in Ireland [ edit ] Map of Ireland in 1609 showing the major Plantations of Ireland Following the Norman invasion of Ireland in the 12th century, Ireland, or parts of it, had experienced alternating degrees of rule from England. While some of the native Gaelic population attempted to resist this occupation, [ 2 ] a single, unified political goal did not exist amongst the independent lordships that existed throughout the island. The Tudor conquest of Ireland took place in the 16th century. This included the Plantations of Ireland , in which the lands held by Gaelic Irish clans and Hiberno-Norman dynasties were confiscated and given to Protestant settlers ("Planters") from England and Scotland . The Plantation of Ulster began in 1609, and the province was heavily colonised with English and Scottish settlers.

[ 3 ] Campaigns against English presence on the island had occurred prior to the emergence of the Irish republican ideology. In the 1590s and early 1600s, resistance was led by Hugh O'Neill (see the Nine Years' War ). The Irish chieftains were ultimately defeated, leading to their exile (the ' Flight of the Earls ') and the aforementioned Plantation of Ulster in 1609.

[ 3 ] 1627 Hispano-Irish proposal [ edit ] In Europe, prior to the 18th and 19th centuries, republics were in a minority and monarchy was the norm, with few long-lasting republics of note at time, such as the fully-fledged Dutch Republic and the Republic of Venice , as well as the Old Swiss Confederacy and the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , which had republican aspects. However, as noted by Cardinal Tomás Ó Fiaich , the first ever document proposing a republic of Ireland independent from connections to England dates from 1627.

[ 4 ] Summaries of these plans are held in the Archives générales du Royaume in Belgium and were made familiar to Irish historians by the work of Fr. Brendan Jennings, a Franciscan historian, with his work Wild Geese in Spanish Flanders, 1582–1700 (1964).

[ 4 ] This early republican spirit was not ecumenical and was formed by exiled Irish Catholic Gaels with the support of Habsburg Spain as part of the Irish military diaspora who had fled into Spanish service in the aftermath of the Flight of the Earls during the Thirty Years' War .

[ 4 ] This was in the context of the break-down of the Spanish match and the onset of the Anglo-Spanish War of 1625–1630.

[ 4 ] Proposals were made at Madrid, with the involvement of Archbishop Florence Conry and Owen Roe O'Neill , for the Irish Regiment in the Spanish Netherlands then in the service of the Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia , to invade and reconquer the English-controlled Kingdom of Ireland and set up an Irish government loosely aligned with the Habsburg Empire .

[ 4 ] Arms of 1627 proposed "Captains General of the Republic" Arms of the Ó Néill Arms of the Ó Domhnaill One of the main problems was that within the leadership of the Hispano-Irish diaspora, there were rivalries and factionalism between two primary contenders, Shane O'Neill and Hugh O'Donnell , over who should be the overall leader and thus have rights to an Irish throne if the project was a success.

[ 4 ] A third option was to resolve the conflict between the two factions before an invasion by making them family, with a marriage proposed between Hugh O'Donnell's sister Mary Stuart O'Donnell and Shane O'Neill, but this broke down.

[ 4 ] Ministers in Madrid , to Philip IV of Spain , instead drew up proposals on 27 December 1627 for a "Kingdom and Republic of Ireland" and that "the earls should be called Captains General of the said Republic and one could exercise his office on land and the other at sea." These proposals were approved by Philip IV and forwarded to Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia in Brussels. As the Anglo-Spanish War became more tepid, the plans were never put into practice.

[ 4 ] A decade later, the Irish Rebellion of 1641 began. This consisted of a coalition between the Irish Gaels and the Old English (descendants of the Anglo-Norman settlers who settled during the Norman Invasion) rebelling against the English rulers. While some ideas from the 1627 proposals were carried on, the attempt to rally both Gaels and Old English to the banner, mean't trying to find common ground and one of these concessions was support for the Stuart monarchy under Charles I of England whom the Old English were strongly attached to. The motto of the Confederation would thus become Pro Deo, pro Rege et Patria, Hibernia unanimis ('Irishmen United for God, King and Country'), with any idea of a republic ditched.

[ 4 ] Beginning as a coup d'état with the aim of restoring lost lands in the north of Ireland and defending Catholic religious and property rights, [ 5 ] (which had been suppressed by the Puritan Parliament of England ) it evolved into the Irish Confederate Wars . In the summer of 1642, the Catholic upper classes formed the Catholic Confederation , which essentially became the de facto government of Ireland for a brief period until 1649, when the forces of the English Parliament carried out the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland and the old Catholic landowners were permanently dispossessed of their lands. The most explicit Irish separatist viewpoint from the period, found in Disputatio Apologetica , written in Lisbon in 1645 by Fr.

Conor O'Mahony , a Jesuit priest from Munster, argued instead for a Gaelic monarchy to be set up in an explicitly Catholic Ireland, with no mention of a republic.

[ 4 ] Society of United Irishmen and the Irish Rebellion of 1798 [ edit ] Main articles: Society of United Irishmen and Irish Rebellion of 1798 The origin of modern Irish republicanism exists in the ideology and action of the United Irishmen. Founded in 1791 and informed by the Enlightenment , popular sovereignty and the likes of John Locke and Thomas Paine , they initially propagated parliamentary reform and Catholic emancipation .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Degradation in the legal achievement of these outcomes, coupled with the burgeoning perception of England as a foreign conqueror, inspired revolutionary sentiment and eventual action.

[ 8 ] [ 7 ] Wolfe Tone circa 1794. Tone is considered by many as the father of Irish Republicanism At this stage, the movement was led primarily by liberal Protestants, [ 9 ] particularly Presbyterians from the province of Ulster . The founding members of the United Irishmen were mainly Southern Irish Protestant aristocrats. The key founders included Wolfe Tone , Thomas Russell , Henry Joy McCracken , James Napper Tandy , and Samuel Neilson . By 1797, the Society of United Irishmen had around 100,000 members. Crossing the religious divide in Ireland, it had a mixed membership of Catholics, Presbyterians, and even Anglicans from the Protestant Ascendancy . It also attracted support and membership from Catholic agrarian resistance groups, such as the Defenders organisation, who were eventually incorporated into the Society.

[ 10 ] The Society sought to unite the denominations of the island under the simple distinction of Irish.

[ 11 ] The Battle of Killala marked the end of the rising The Irish Rebellion of 1798 began on 23 May, with the first clashes taking place in County Kildare on 24 May, before spreading throughout Leinster , as well as County Antrim and other areas of the country. French soldiers landed in Killala on 22 August and participated in the fighting on the rebels' side.

[ 12 ] Even though they had considerable success against British forces in County Wexford , [ 13 ] rebel forces were eventually defeated. Key figures in the organisation were arrested and executed.

Acts of Union [ edit ] Main articles: Acts of Union 1800 and Parliament of Ireland Michael Dwyer Though the Rebellion of 1798 was eventually put down, small republican guerrilla campaigns against the British Army continued for a short time afterward in the Wicklow Mountains under the leadership of Michael Dwyer and Joseph Holt , involving attacks on small parties of yeomen . These activities were perceived by some to be merely "the dying echoes of an old convulsion", [ 14 ] but others feared further large-scale uprisings, due to the United Irishmen continuing to attract large numbers of Catholics in rural areas of the country and arms raids being carried out on a nightly basis.

[ 14 ] It was also feared that rebels would again seek military aid from French troops, and another rising was expected take place by 10 April.

[ 15 ] This perceived threat of further rebellion resulted in the Parliamentary Union between the Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. After some uncertainty, the Irish Parliament voted to abolish itself in the Acts of Union 1800, forming the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, by a vote of 158 to 115.

[ 16 ] A number of tactics were used to achieve this end.

Lord Castlereagh and Charles Cornwallis were known to use bribery extensively. In all, a total of sixteen Irish borough-owners were granted British peerages . A further twenty-eight new Irish peerages were created, while twenty existing Irish peerages increased in rank.

[ 17 ] Furthermore, the government of Great Britain sought to replace Irish politicians in the Irish parliament with pro-Union politicians, and rewards were granted to those that vacated their seats, with the result being that in the eighteen months prior to the decision in 1800, one-fifth of the Irish House of Commons changed its representation due to these activities and other factors such as death.

[ 17 ] It was also promised by Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger that he would bring about Catholic emancipation , though after the Acts of Union were successfully voted through, King George III saw that this pledge was never realised, [ 16 ] and as such Catholics were not granted the rights that had been promised prior to the Acts.

Robert Emmet [ edit ] A second attempt at forming an independent Irish republic occurred under Robert Emmet in 1803. Emmet had previously been expelled from Trinity College , Dublin for his political views.

[ 18 ] Like those who had led the 1798 rebellion, Emmet was a member of the United Irishmen, as was his brother Thomas Addis Emmet , who had been imprisoned for membership in the organisation.

Depiction of Robert Emmet 's trial Emmet and his followers had planned to seize Dublin Castle by force, manufacturing weaponry and explosives at a number of locations in Dublin.

[ 19 ] Unlike those of 1798, preparations for the uprising were successfully concealed from the government and law enforcement, and though a premature explosion at an arms depot attracted the attention of police, they were unaware of the United Irishmen activities at the time and did not have any information regarding the planned rebellion. Emmet had hoped to avoid the complications of the previous rebellion and chose not to organise the county outside of Dublin to a large extent. It was expected that the areas surrounding Dublin were sufficiently prepared for an uprising should one be announced, and Thomas Russell had been sent to northern areas of the country to prepare republicans there.

[ 20 ] A proclamation of independence, addressed from 'The Provisional Government' to 'The People of Ireland' was produced by Emmet, echoing the republican sentiments expressed during the previous rebellion: You are now called on to show to the world that you are competent to take your place among nations, that you have a right to claim their recognisance of you, as an independent country ... We therefore solemnly declare, that our object is to establish a free and independent republic in Ireland: that the pursuit of this object we will relinquish only with our lives ... We war against no religious sect ... We war against English dominion.

[ 21 ] — Robert Emmet, Proclamation of the Provisional Government However, failed communications and arrangements produced a considerably smaller force than had been anticipated. Nonetheless, the rebellion began in Dublin on the evening of 23 July. Emmet's forces were unable to take Dublin Castle, and the rising broke down into rioting, which ensued sporadically throughout the night. Emmet escaped and hid for some time in the Wicklow Mountains and Harold's Cross , but was captured on 25 August and hanged on 20 September 1803, at which point the Society of United Irishmen was effectively finished.

Young Ireland and the Irish Confederation [ edit ] Main articles: Young Ireland , Young Ireland rebellion , Repeal Association , and Irish Confederation The Young Ireland movement began in the late 1830s. The term 'Young Ireland' was originally a derogatory one, coined by the press in Britain to describe members of the Repeal Association (a group campaigning for the repeal of the Acts of Union 1800 which joined the Kingdom of Ireland and the Kingdom of Great Britain) who were involved with the Irish nationalist newspaper The Nation .

[ 22 ] Encouraging the repeal of the Acts of Union, members of the Young Ireland movement advocated the removal of British authority from Ireland and the re-establishment of the Irish Parliament in Dublin.

[ 23 ] The group had cultural aims also, and encouraged the study of Irish history and the revival of the Irish language .

[ 24 ] Influential Young Irelanders included Charles Gavan Duffy , Thomas Davis and John Blake Dillon , the three founders of The Nation .

[ 22 ] William Smith O'Brien , leader of the Young Ireland movement The Young Irelanders eventually seceded from the Repeal Association. The leader of the Repeal Association, Daniel O'Connell , opposed the use of physical force to enact repeal, and passed 'peace resolutions' declaring that violence and force were not to be employed.

[ 25 ] Though the Young Irelanders did not support the use of violence, the writers of The Nation maintained that the introduction of these peace resolutions was poorly timed, and that to declare outright that physical force would never be used was 'to deliver themselves bound hand and foot to the Whigs .' [ 26 ] William Smith O'Brien , who had previously worked to achieve compromise between O'Connell and The Nation group, was also concerned, and claimed that he feared these resolutions were an attempt to exclude the Young Irelanders from the Association altogether.

[ 26 ] At an Association meeting held in July 1846 at Conciliation Hall , the meeting place of the Association, Thomas Francis Meagher , a Young Irelander, addressing the peace resolutions, delivered his 'Sword Speech', in which he stated, "I do not abhor the use of arms in the vindication of national rights ... Be it for the defence, or be it for the assertion of a nation's liberty, I look upon the sword as a sacred weapon." [ 27 ] John O'Connell , Daniel O'Connell's son, was present at the proceedings and interrupted Meagher's speech, claiming that Meagher could no longer be part of the same association as O'Connell and his supporters. After some protest, the Young Irelanders left Conciliation Hall and the Repeal Association forever, founding the Irish Confederation 13 January 1847 after negotiations for a reunion had failed.

The Young Ireland movement culminated in a failed uprising (see Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848 ), which, influenced by the French Revolution of 1848 and further provoked by government inaction during the Great Famine and the suspension of habeas corpus , [ 28 ] which allowed the government to imprison Young Irelanders and other political opponents without trial, was hastily planned and quickly suppressed. Following the abortive uprising, several rebel leaders were arrested and convicted of sedition. Originally sentenced to death, Smith O'Brien and other members of the Irish Confederation were transported to Van Diemen's Land .

[ 29 ] Fenian movement [ edit ] Some of the founding members of the Irish Republican Brotherhood The Fenian movement consisted of the Fenian Brotherhood and the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB), fraternal organisations founded in the United States and Ireland respectively with the aim of establishing an independent republic in Ireland.

[ 30 ] The IRB was founded on Saint Patrick's Day 1858 in Dublin.

[ 31 ] Members present at the first meeting were James Stephens , Thomas Clarke Luby , Peter Langan, Joseph Denieffe, Garrett O'Shaughnessy, and Charles Kickham .

[ 32 ] Stephens had previously spent time exiled in Paris, along with John O'Mahony , having taken part in the uprising of 1848 and fleeing to avoid capture. O'Mahony left France for America in the mid-1850s and founded the Emmet Monument Association with Michael Doheny . Stephens returned to Ireland in 1856.

The original oath of the society, drawn up by Luby under Stephens' direction, read: I, AB., do solemnly swear, in the presence of Almighty God, that I will do my utmost, at every risk, while life lasts, to make [other versions, according to Luby, establish in'] Ireland an independent Democratic Republic; that I will yield implicit obedience, in all things not contrary to the law of God [ 'laws of morality'] to the commands of my superior officers; and that I shall preserve inviolable secrecy regarding all the transactions [ 'affairs'] of this secret society that may be confided in me. So help me God! Amen.

[ 33 ] The Fenian Brotherhood was the IRB's counterpart organisation, formed in the same year in the United States by O'Mahony and Doheny.

[ 34 ] The Fenian Brotherhood's main purpose was to supply weapons and funds for its Irish counterpart and raise support for the Irish republican movement in the United States.

[ 35 ] The term "Fenian" was coined by O'Mahony, who named the American wing of the movement after the Fianna [ 36 ] – a class of warriors that existed in Gaelic Ireland . The term became popular and is still in use, especially in Northern Ireland and Scotland, where it has expanded to refer to all Irish nationalists and republicans, as well as being a pejorative term for Irish Catholics.

Public support for the Fenian movement in Ireland grew in November 1861 with the funeral of Terence MacManus , a member of the Irish Confederation, which Stephens and the Fenians had organised  – having "recognized the potential of street parades for mobilizing supporters and influencing onlookers".

[ 37 ] The popularity endowed by the procession and oration established the tradition of republican funerals , a ritual instrumental as evidenced by the oration at Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa's funeral .

[ 38 ] [ a ] Popular perception elsewhere deemed the movement as terrorisitic – a persistent perception of republicanism thereafter.

[ 40 ] Nevertheless, the likes of Rossa would raise the public profile of the movement by their evocation of martyrdom and highlighting of prisoner maltreatment.

[ 41 ] [ b ] Support from America proved both lucrative and troublesome as transatlantic members waged a dynamite campaign in Britain.

[ 43 ] A total of twenty-five major explosions beset Irish nationalism's perception and dictated Britain's approach towards Ireland and the " Irish question ".

[ 44 ] In 1865 the Fenian Brotherhood in America had split into two factions. One was led by O'Mahony with Stephens' support. The other, which was more powerful, was led by William R. Roberts . The Fenians had always planned an armed rebellion, but there was now disagreement as to how and where this rebellion might be carried out. Roberts' faction preferred focusing all military efforts on British Canada (Roberts and his supporters theorised that victory for the American Fenians in nearby Canada would propel the Irish republican movement as a whole to success).

[ 45 ] The other, headed by O'Mahony, proposed that a rising in Ireland be planned for 1866.

[ 46 ] In spite of this, the O'Mahony wing of the movement itself tried and failed to capture Campobello Island in New Brunswick in April 1866.

[ 46 ] Following this failure, the Roberts faction of the Fenian Brotherhood carried out its own, occupying the village of Fort Erie, Ontario on 31 May 1866 and engaging Canadian troops at the battles of Ridgeway and Fort Erie on 2 June.

[ 46 ] It was in reference to Fenians fighting in this battle that the name "Irish Republican Army" was first used.

[ 47 ] These attacks (and those that followed) in Canada are collectively known as the " Fenian raids ".

Nineteenth century onward [ edit ] Main article: Irish War of Independence A depiction of the Easter Rising Seán Hogan 's IRA flying column during the Irish War of Independence .

Irish republican and other independence movements were suppressed by the British authorities following  the  merging of Ireland with Britain into the United Kingdom after the Act of Union in 1801 . Nationalist rebellions against British rule in 1803, by Robert Emmet, 1848 (by the Young Irelanders) and 1865 and 1867 (by the Fenians) were followed by harsh reprisals by British forces.

The National Council, was formed in 1903, by Maud Gonne and Arthur Griffith , on the occasion of the visit of King Edward VII to Dublin. Its purpose was to lobby Dublin Corporation to refrain from presenting an address to the king. The motion to present an address was duly defeated, but the National Council remained in existence as a pressure group with the aim of increasing nationalist representation on local councils.

[ 48 ] The first annual convention of the National Council on 28 November 1905 was notable for two things: the decision, by a majority vote (with Griffith dissenting), to open branches and organise on a national basis; and the presentation by Griffith of his 'Hungarian' policy, which was now called the Sinn Féin policy.

[ 49 ] This meeting is usually taken as the date of the foundation of the Sinn Féin party.

[ 50 ] In 1916 the Easter Rising , organised by the Irish Republican Brotherhood , was launched in Dublin and the Irish Republic was proclaimed, albeit without significant popular support.

[ citation needed ] The Rising was suppressed after six days, and most of its leaders were executed by the British authorities. This was a turning point in Irish history, leading to the War of Independence and the end of British rule in most of Ireland.

From 1919 to 1921 the Irish Republican Army (IRA) was organised as a guerrilla army, led by Richard Mulcahy and with Michael Collins as Director of Intelligence and fought against the British. During the Anglo-Irish War , the British government formed a paramilitary police force consisting of former soldiers, known as the " Black and Tans ", to reinforce the Royal Irish Constabulary 's Auxiliary Division .

[ citation needed ] Republicans were the primary adversary of these forces, whose warfare included pillaging and extrajudicial executions.

[ 51 ] Both sides used similar tactics: hair cutting , arson attacks, taking of hostages and executions.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Republicans also established sovereign courts , a considerable symbol of the movement's public support.

[ 54 ] In August 1920 Irish Republican prisoners went on a hunger strike demanding release from prison, and reinstatement of their status as political prisoners ( 1920 Cork hunger strike ). Three men died during this time including the Sinn Féin Lord Mayor of Cork Terence MacSwiney . Among the most infamous of the Black and Tans actions were the Bloody Sunday massacre in November 1920 and the burning of half the city of Cork in December that same year. These actions, together with the popularity of the republican ideals in Ireland and repression of republican political expressions by the British government, led to widespread support across Ireland for the Irish rebels.

In 1921, the British government led by David Lloyd George negotiated the Anglo-Irish Treaty with republican leaders led by Arthur Griffith who had been delegated as plenipotentiaries on behalf of the Second Dáil , thus ending the conflict.

Irish Free State and Republic of Ireland [ edit ] Main articles: Anglo-Irish Treaty , Irish Free State , and Irish Civil War Though many across the country were unhappy with the Anglo-Irish Treaty (since, during the war, the IRA had fought for independence for all Ireland and for a republic, not a partitioned dominion under the British crown ), some republicans were satisfied that the Treaty was the best that could be achieved at the time. However, a substantial number opposed it.

Dáil Éireann , the Irish parliament, voted by 64 votes to 57 to ratify it, [ 55 ] the majority believing that the treaty created a new base from which to move forward.

Éamon de Valera , who had served as President of the Irish Republic during the war, refused to accept the decision of the Dáil and led the opponents of the treaty out of the House. The pro-Treaty republicans organised themselves into the Cumann na nGaedheal party, while the anti-Treaty republicans retained the Sinn Féin name. The IRA itself split between pro-Treaty and anti-Treaty elements, with the former forming the nucleus of the new Irish National Army .

Michael Collins became Commander-in-Chief of the National Army. Shortly afterwards, some dissidents, apparently without the authorisation of the anti-Treaty IRA Army Executive, occupied the Four Courts in Dublin and kidnapped JJ "Ginger" O'Connell , a pro-Treaty general. The new government , responding to this provocation and to intensified British pressure following the assassination by an anti-treaty IRA unit in London of Henry Wilson , ordered the regular army to take the Four Courts , thereby beginning the Irish Civil War . It is believed that Collins continued to fund and supply the IRA in Northern Ireland throughout the civil war, but, after his death, W. T. Cosgrave (the new President of the Executive Council , or prime minister) discontinued this support.

By May 1923, the war ended in the order by Frank Aiken , telling IRA members to dump arms. However, the harsh measures adopted by both sides, including assassinations, executions and other atrocities , left a bitter legacy in Irish politics for decades to follow. In October 1923 mass hunger strikes were undertaken by Irish republican prisoners protesting the continuation of their internment without trial by the newly formed Irish Free State - three men died during the 1923 Irish Hunger Strikes .

De Valera, who had strongly supported the Republican anti-treaty side in the Civil War, reconsidered his views while in jail and came to accept the ideas of political activity under the terms of the Free State constitution. Rather than abstaining from Free State politics entirely, he now sought to republicanise it from within. However, he and his supporters – which included most Sinn Féin TDs – failed to convince a majority of the anti-treaty Sinn Féin of these views and the movement split again. In 1926, he formed a new party called Fianna Fáil ("Soldiers of Destiny"), taking most of Sinn Féin's TDs with him. In 1931, following the enactment of the Statute of Westminster , the country became a sovereign state along with the other Dominions and the United Kingdom.

[ 56 ] The following year, De Valera was appointed President of the Executive Council of the Free State and began a slow process of turning the country from a constitutional monarchy to a constitutional republic, thus fulfilling Collins's prediction of "the freedom to achieve freedom".

[ 57 ] By then, the IRA was engaged in confrontations with the Blueshirts , a quasi-fascist group led by a former War of Independence and pro-Treaty leader, Eoin O'Duffy . O'Duffy looked to Fascist Italy as an example for Ireland to follow. Several hundred supporters of O'Duffy briefly went to Spain to volunteer on the Nationalist side in the Spanish Civil War , and a smaller number of ex-IRA members, communists and others participated on the Republican side.

In 1937, the Constitution of Ireland was drafted by the de Valera government and approved via referendum by the majority of the population of the Free State. The constitution changed the name of the state to Éire in the Irish language ( Ireland in English) and asserted its national territory as the whole of Ireland.

[ 58 ] [ c ] The new state was headed by a President of Ireland elected by universal suffrage. The new Constitution removed all reference to the monarchy but foreign diplomats continued to present their credentials to the King in accordance with the Executive Authority (External Relations) Act 1936 which had not been repealed. The new state had the objective characteristics of a republic and was referred to as such by de Valera himself, but, it remained within the British Commonwealth and was regarded by the British as a Dominion, like Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. Furthermore, the claim to the whole of the island did not reflect practical reality and inflamed anti-Dublin sentiment among northern Protestants.

In 1948, Fianna Fáil went out of office for the first time in sixteen years.

John A. Costello , leader of the coalition government, announced his intention to declare Ireland a republic.

[ 59 ] The Republic of Ireland Act 1948 , which "described" the state as the Republic of Ireland (without changing its name or constitutional status), led the British government to pass the Ireland Act 1949 , which declared that Northern Ireland would continue as part of the United Kingdom unless the Parliament of Northern Ireland consented to leave; [ 60 ] and Ireland ceased to be a member of the Commonwealth. As a result of this – and also because continuing struggle against the Dublin government was futile – the republican movement decided to focus on Northern Ireland from then on. The decision was announced by the IRA in its Easter statement of 1949.

[ 61 ] Republicanism in Northern Ireland [ edit ] 1921–1966 [ edit ] The area that was to become Northern Ireland amounted to six of the nine counties of Ulster, in spite of the fact that in the last all Ireland election ( 1918 Irish general election ) counties Fermanagh and Tyrone had Sinn Féin/Nationalist Party (Irish Parliamentary Party) majorities.

[ 62 ] In 1921, Ireland was partitioned. Most of the country became part of the independent Irish Free State . However, six out of the nine counties of Ulster remained part of the United Kingdom as Northern Ireland. During this time (1920–1922) the newly formed Northern Ireland saw "savage and unprecedented" communal violence between unionists and nationalists (see The Troubles in Ulster (1920–1922) ).

In the 1921 elections in Northern Ireland: Antrim , Down and the borough of Belfast had Unionist majorities of over 25%.

In Londonderry , the breakdown in that election was 56.2% Unionist / 43.8% Nationalist.

In Armagh , the ratio was 55.3% Unionist / 44.7% Nationalist.

In Fermanagh and Tyrone (a single constituency), the ratio 54.7% Nationalist / 45.3% Unionist. (Tyrone was 55.4% Catholic in the 1911 census and 55.5% in the 1926 census, though of course only adults had votes on the other hand religious and national affiliations while closely linked are not as absolute as commonly assumed.) Within most of these counties there were large pockets which predominantly nationalist or Unionist (South Armagh, West Tyrone, West Londonderry and parts of North Antrim were largely nationalist whereas much of North Armagh, East Londonderry, East Tyrone and most of Antrim were/are largely Unionist).

[ 63 ] This territory of Northern Ireland, as established by the Government of Ireland Act 1920 , had its own provincial government which was controlled for 50 years until 1972 by the conservative Ulster Unionist Party (UUP). The tendency to vote on sectarian lines and the proportions of each religious denomination ensured that there would never be a change of government. In local government, constituency boundaries were drawn to divide nationalist communities into two or even three constituencies and so weaken their effect (see Gerrymandering ).

The (mainly Catholic) Nationalist population in Northern Ireland, besides feeling politically alienated, was also economically alienated, often with worse living standards compared to their Protestant (mainly Unionist) neighbours, with fewer job opportunities, and living in ghettos in Belfast , Derry, Armagh and other places. Many Catholics considered the Unionist government was undemocratic, bigoted and favoured Protestants. Emigration for economic reasons kept the nationalist population from growing, despite its higher birth rate. Although poverty, (e)migration and unemployment were fairly widespread (albeit not to the same extent) among Protestants as well, on the other hand the economic situation in Northern Ireland (even for Catholics) was for a long time arguably still better than in the Republic of Ireland.

During the 1930s the IRA launched minor attacks against the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and British Army in Northern Ireland.  During World War II the IRA leadership hoped for support from Germany, and chief of staff Seán Russell travelled there in 1940; he died later that year after falling ill on a U-boat that was bringing him back to Ireland (possibly with a view to starting a German sponsored revolution in Ireland). Suspected republicans were interned on both sides of the border, for different reasons.

The Border Campaign in the mid-50s was the last attempt at traditional military action and was an abject failure.

1966–1969 [ edit ] In the late 1960s, Irish political activist groups found parallels between their struggle against religious discrimination and the civil rights campaign of African Americans against racial discrimination in the US. Student leaders such a Bernadette Devlin McAliskey and Nationalist politicians such as Austin Currie tried to use non-violent direct action to draw attention to the blatant discrimination.

[ citation needed ] Republicans, largely demilitarised at the time, engaged considerably with the civil rights campaign .

[ 64 ] By 1968, Europe as a whole was engulfed in a struggle between radicalism and conservativism. In Sinn Féin, the same debate raged. The dominant analysis was that Protestant Irishmen and women would never be bombed into a united Ireland . The only way forward was to have both sides embrace socialism and forget their sectarian hatreds. They resolved to no longer to be drawn into inter-communal violence.

As a response to the civil rights campaign, militant loyalist paramilitary groups started to emerge in the Protestant community. The Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) was the first. The UVF had originally existed among loyalist Ulster Protestants before World War I to oppose Home Rule . In the 1960s it was relaunched by militant loyalists, encouraged by certain politicians, to oppose any attempt to reunite Northern Ireland with the Republic of Ireland , which is how they saw any change in their status vis-a-vis Catholics.

By mid-1969 the violence in Northern Ireland exploded. Consistent with their new political ideology, the IRA declined to intervene. By late August, the British government had to intervene and declare a state of emergency , sending a large number of troops into Northern Ireland to stop the intercommunal violence. Initially welcomed by some Catholics as protectors, later events such as Bloody Sunday and the Falls Road curfew turned many against the British Army.

1970–1985 [ edit ] Divisions began to emerge in the Republican movement between leftists and traditional militants. The leader of the IRA, Cathal Goulding believed that the IRA could not beat the British with military tactics and should turn into a workers' revolutionary movement that would overthrow both governments to achieve a 32-county socialist republic through the will of the people (after WWII the IRA no longer engaged in any actions against the Republic). Goulding also drove the IRA into an ideologically Marxist–Leninist direction which attracted idealistic young supporters in the Republic, but alienated and angered many of the IRA's core supporters in the North. In particular, his decision to regard the UVF as deluded rather than as the enemy, was anathema to traditionalists and those who were its potential victims.

The argument led to a split in 1970, between the Official IRA (supporters of Goulding's Marxist line) and the Provisional IRA (also called Provos, traditional nationalist republicans). The Provos were led by Seán Mac Stíofáin and immediately began a large scale campaign against British state forces and economic targets in Northern Ireland. The Official IRA were also initially drawn into an armed campaign by the escalating communal violence. In 1972, the Official IRA declared a cease-fire, which, apart from feuds with other republican groups, has been maintained to date. Nowadays the term 'Irish Republican Army' almost always denotes the Provisional IRA.

Throughout the 1970s and 1980s the conflict continued claiming thousands of lives, with the UVF (and other loyalist groups) extending attacks into the Republic of Ireland and the IRA launching attacks on targets in England. However some things slowly began to change. In the 1980s Provisional Sinn Féin (the Provisional IRA's political wing) began contesting elections and by the mid-1990s was representing the republican position at peace negotiations. In the loyalist movement splits occurred, the Ulster Unionist Party made tentative attempts to reform itself and attract Catholics into supporting the union with Britain, while the radical Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) led by Ian Paisley began attracting working-class Protestant loyalists who felt alienated by the UUP's overtures towards Catholics.

In 1976 the British government withdrew Special Category Status (prisoner of war rather than criminal status) for convicted paramilitary prisoners. Republican prisoners began a blanket protest which escalated into a dirty protest in 1978. In 1980, seven republican prisoners participated in a hunger strike , which ended after 53 days.

[ 65 ] The 1981 Irish hunger strike was carried out over a seven-month period with the goal of re-establishing the prisoners political status. This hunger strike drew worldwide attention due to the deaths of ten hunger strikers including Bobby Sands . During the 20th century a total of 22 Irish Republicans have died while on hunger strike.

[ 66 ] Since 1986 [ edit ] During the late 1980s the British Government became increasingly willing to give concessions to Irish Nationalism , such as the Anglo-Irish Agreement and extending to, the Northern Ireland Secretary , Peter Brooke's declaration of "no selfish, strategic or economic interest in Northern Ireland.", causing uproar amongst strands of Unionism .

[ 67 ] However, violent Republican action didn't cease, giving Unionism and Britain less reason to work with violent Republicans. This situation changed in 1992–93 with Hume's-Adams' talks producing a commitment from Sinn Féin to move towards peaceful methods.

[ 68 ] The funeral procession of Irish republican politician Martin McGuinness , Derry, Northern Ireland In 1994 the leaders of Northern Ireland's two largest nationalist parties, Gerry Adams , the leader of Sinn Féin and John Hume , the leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) entered into peace negotiations with Unionist leaders like David Trimble of the UUP and the British government. At the table most of the paramilitary groups (including the IRA and UVF) had representatives. In 1998 when the IRA endorsed the Good Friday Agreement between nationalist and unionist parties and both governments, another small group split from the IRA to form the Real IRA (RIRA). The Continuity and Real IRA have both engaged in attacks not only against the British and loyalists, but even against their fellow nationalists (members of Sinn Féin, the SDLP and IRA).

Since 1998, the IRA and UVF have adhered to a ceasefire.

Today the republican movement can be divided into moderates who wish to reunite with the Republic through peaceful means and dissident republicans who wish to continue an armed campaign. Ideological divides in Northern republicanism has its origins in the late 1970s.

[ 69 ] Dissidents emphasis the importance of ideology and reject reformism, regarding institutional change as ineffective and whitewashing.

[ 69 ] Dissidents assert that basis of armed republicanism is sovereignty rather than equality.

[ 70 ] Some dissidents support the emergence of peace while critiquing the political means.

[ 71 ] In late July 2005, the IRA announced that the armed conflict was over and that their weapons were to be put out of use. A large stock of weapons was reportedly "decommissioned" later that year.

[ 72 ] Some Unionists disputed the claim that this represented the entire stock of IRA weaponry.

Ideology [ edit ] Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e Irish republicanism has encompassed various schools of thought and praxis thereof: "It has embraced ‘militant nationalists, unreconstructed militarists, romantic Fenians, Gaelic Republicans, Catholic sectarians, Northern defenders , international Marxists , socialists, libertarians and liberal Protestants,’" [ 71 ] Recurrent ideals include national self-determination and ethno-religious identity.

[ 71 ] Rejection of the British state [ edit ] Irish republicans view British rule in any part of Ireland as an inherently illegitimate, foreign regime.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] A variant of this is Irish republican legitimism , which also rejects the Republic of Ireland because of its tacit acceptance of partition and continuing British rule in Northern Ireland.

[ 75 ] The rejection of the legitimacy of British rule extends to all institutions of the British state.

[ 76 ] This includes rejection of the British parliament ( abstentionism ), [ 74 ] [ 76 ] and rejection of British police and court systems, [ 77 ] [ 78 ] which has led to republicans developing alternatives.

[ 78 ] Several Irish Republican political parties have, however, contested Northern Irish local elections since the 1970s.

Violence [ edit ] The neutrality of this section is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) According to Malachi O'Doherty , Sinn Féin politicians often presented republican terrorist violence as an inevitable result of partition and British rule. This rhetorical device allowed for some republican politicians to evade responsibility for violence and further their political goals of a reunited Ireland.

[ 79 ] Colonialism and neocolonialism have been invoked by republicans in relation to the movement's militancy.

[ 80 ] Connection to left-wing politics [ edit ] Irish republicanism was influenced by French radicalism . Typical of these classical Radicals are 19th century such as the United Irishmen in the 1790s, Young Irelanders in the 1840s, Fenian Brotherhood in the 1880s, as well as Sinn Féin , and Fianna Fáil in the 1920s.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Although recurring, socialist thought has proven contentious: class interests prioritised by some while others emphasis nationalist rhetoric.

[ 83 ] The Land War was used to organise republican action with little regard to class conflict.

[ 84 ] Class politics – coupled with the Northern Irish civil rights movement - have been credited by some republicans to have unduly demilitarised the movement, especially at the onset of the Troubles.

[ 64 ] Relationship with the Christian churches [ edit ] A 1983 article examined statements by Irish republicans on the issue of religion, and found that the attitudes contrasted with "the commonsense view" that Sinn Féin and the Provisional IRA supported Catholics and opposed Protestants. There has been long-standing mutual dislike between the Catholic hierarchy and the Republican movement, with the latter seeing the former as complicit in British occupation of Ireland.

[ 85 ] In Belfast, during the time of partition, republicanism was rejected by the majority of the Catholic population, including the clergy.

[ 86 ] Articles in An Phoblacht often upheld the morality of parish priests and pastors of all Christian denominations rather than bishops and church leaders, with respect for the Christian tradition of social justice.

[ 87 ] The article said that An Phoblacht "bends over backwards to be sympathetic to men who have expressed consistently anti-Catholic sentiments", including at times the Loyalist leader Ian Paisley , as they are seen as fellow Irish citizens whereas the British forces are seen as the principal enemy.

[ 88 ] Republicans have often denied that their attacks on the Ulster Defence Regiment or Royal Ulster Constabulary are sectarian attacks on Protestants by claiming that they attack these groups because they are seen as complicit in "the oppression of the nationalist people" and not because of the religious beliefs of the members.

[ 89 ] However, a series of attacks in the Troubles, such as the Kingsmill massacre , that collectively killed 130 Protestant civilians were classified as "sectarian" in Malcolm Sutton's work on those killed during the Troubles.

[ 90 ] This makes sectarian killings of civilians 7% of the total killings attributed to the IRA (1,823), as opposed to the loyalist paramilitaries , of whose 1,027 killings, 70% or 718 were deliberate sectarian killings of Catholic civilians.

[ 91 ] Historiography [ edit ] The history of republicanism is paramount to the ideology: "The story of the past told by republicans is one of oppression, resistance, solidarity, and sacrifice...which both defines and justifies the movement".

[ 92 ] The remembrance of republicans as equally dutiful and ordinary is used to justify action and assert victimhood, with memorialisation at large assuming a rhetorical purpose.

[ 70 ] [ 93 ] "[M]aintain[ing] fidelity" and upholding sacrificial notions function as an "imperative" for republicans: commemoration, thus, is both ubiquitous and political as evidenced by Sinn Féin's literature and rationale during the peace process.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] During the process, the ambitions of the civil rights movement were contended as "the ultimate goal of the conflict", thus emphasing a continuity.

[ 71 ] The predominance of memory is a point of critique, lambasted as limiting and dogmatic and, in terms of Northern Ireland, commemoration has inspired controversy.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Events of particular significance include the United Ireland Rebellion, the Easter Rising and the War of Independence – the centenary of the Rising unified nationalists in commemoration, "loyalty to the 1916 Republic" being a fundamental present in all sects of republicanism.

[ 92 ] [ 98 ] [ 83 ] The proclamation of said republic drew upon the past itself in justifying action.

[ 7 ] Political parties [ edit ] Active republican parties [ edit ] The following are active republican parties in Ireland.

Sinn Féin [ 99 ] is a republican party in Ireland. Throughout the Northern Ireland troubles , it was closely allied with the Provisional Irish Republican Army , publicly arguing for the validity of its armed campaign. Its policy platform combines civic nationalism with democratic socialist views on economic and social issues. It is led by Mary Lou McDonald and organises in both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland. The Party was also known as " Provisional " Sinn Féin by the media and commentators, having split from what later became known as the " Official " Sinn Féin (later the Workers' Party ) in 1970, because the latter had voted to enter a 'partitionist parliament'.

[ 100 ] In 1986, it reversed its original policy of not taking seats in Dáil Éireann , prompting another split, when Republican Sinn Féin was formed. By the early 21st century it had replaced the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) as Northern Ireland's largest nationalist party. As of 2020, it holds seven seats in the British parliament, thirty-seven seats in the Dáil, six in the Seanad and 26 in the Northern Ireland Assembly . Sinn Féin members contest elections to the British parliament on an abstentionist basis, that is, they refuse to take their seats in that parliament as they refuse to accept the right of that body to rule in any part of Ireland.

The Workers' Party is a communist political party in Ireland. It formed as a result of the 1970 split in Sinn Féin , where the more nationalist faction split to form 'Provisional Sinn Féin' and the remaining rump faction became known as 'Official Sinn Féin'.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] It also continued to use Sinn Féin's 'Republican Clubs' name in Northern Ireland to evade censorship until 1982.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] During the troubles the officials were allied to the Official IRA .

[ 105 ] Later another split occurred in 1974 occurred when discontent members formed the Irish Republican Socialist Party , led by Seamus Costello .

[ 106 ] In 1977, the party changed its name to 'Sinn Féin - The Workers’ Party' and finally to the 'Workers’ Party' in 1982.

[ 107 ] [ 104 ] In 1992, following a failed attempt to reform the party, six of their seven TDs split to form Democratic Left .

[ 108 ] In 2021 factional infighting occurred in the leadership of the party that culminated in a split, with the minority faction naming itself the 'Workers’ Party - Republicans Clubs', and both claiming leadership of the party.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] The party is Marxist-Leninist and rejects traditional Irish nationalism and physical force republicanism.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] It instead supports Catholics and Protestants uniting in a class war to bring about a Socialist Republic .

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] Following the ceasefire of the Official IRA in 1972, the Workers' Party opposed and condemned the use of armed struggle .

[ 113 ] Fianna Fáil was founded as an expressly republican party, one born out of Sinn Féin but which dropped abstentionism in order to engage in constitutional politics in Ireland. In fact, Seán Lemass had originally desired for the name of the party to simply be "The Republican Party", [ 114 ] however, Éamon de Valera muted that idea in favour of a name inspired by the Irish language and culture.

[ 114 ] Since the 1930s and 1940s, a period which saw Fianna Fáil imprison physical force Republicans en masse, to what degree Fianna Fáil can be still described as "Republican" has been contested. The party itself, however, continues to frame itself as a Republican party; indeed in 1971 the party's commitment to this was signalled when the formal name of the party was altered to "Fianna Fáil – The Republican Party".

[ 114 ] Following the 2020 Irish general election , Sinn Féin leader Mary Lou McDonald spoke often of forming a coalition which would produce a "Republican programme for Government". Some suggested this choice of language was chosen to encourage Fianna Fáil to work with Sinn Féin under a united "Republican" banner.

[ 115 ] Éirígí [ 116 ] is a socialist republican political party that formed by a small group of community and political activists who had left Sinn Féin, in Dublin in April 2006 as a political campaigns group, and became a full-fledged political party at the party's first Ardfheis (conference) in May 2007.

[ 117 ] An Independent Monitoring Commission report said the group was "a small political grouping based on revolutionary socialist principles". While it continues to be a political association, albeit, with aggressive protest activities, it was not seen as paramilitary in nature.

[ 118 ] Saoradh is a socialist republican party created in 2016. It is associated with dissident Republicans and is alleged to have ties to the New IRA .

[ 119 ] Republican Sinn Féin [ 99 ] was formed in 1986 by former Sinn Féin leader Ruairí Ó Brádaigh who led traditional republicans in a break with Sinn Féin over the ending of the policy of abstention in relation to elections to Dáil Éireann . The party continues to operate on an abstentionist basis: it would not take seats in the assemblies of either the Republic of Ireland or Northern Ireland because it views neither as legitimate. It is linked to the Continuity IRA , whose goals are the overthrow of British rule in Northern Ireland and the unification of the island to form an independent country. In November 2009, Des Dalton replaced Ó Brádaigh as leader of Republican Sinn Féin.

Irish Republican Socialist Party [ 120 ] (IRSP) was founded in 1974 by former Official IRA militant Seamus Costello , who possibly had an eye towards James Connolly 's Irish Socialist Republican Party of the late 19th/early 20th century when coining the party's name. Costello led other former Official IRA members dissatisfied with Cathal Goulding 's policies and tactics. The party quickly organised a paramilitary wing called the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) which has decommissioned recently. It claims to follow the principles of republican socialism as set out by the 1916 rebellion leader Connolly and radical 20th-century trade unionist James Larkin .

Aontú , who split from Sinn Féin in 2019 in opposition to the party's support for the Repeal of the Eighth Amendment , which allowed for the legalisation of abortion in Ireland in 2018. As of 2024, Aontú has two TDs including party leader Peadar Tóibín , and five councillors across Ireland.

Republican Network for Unity was formed in 2007 in opposition to the Sinn Féin special Ard Fheis's vote of support for the Police Service of Northern Ireland . A number of commentators view RNU as the political wing of Óglaigh na hÉireann , [ 121 ] a militant dissident republican paramilitary group. That group committed to a ceasefire in 2017, which RNU supported.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Anti-Imperialist Action Ireland (AIA) are a socialist republican organisation founded in 2017. The group opposes the Good Friday Agreement and abstains from elections.

Defunct republican parties [ edit ] The following were republican parties in Ireland which are no longer active.

Clann Éireann split from Cumann na nGaedheal in 1926 after the results of the Irish Boundary Commission confirmed partition between Ireland and Northern Ireland . They called for a "one and indivisible" Ireland, but found little support as those already of the anti-partition mindset were already aligned with Fianna Fáil, and were not favourable to those who had previously been in Cumann na nGaedhael.

The Republican Congress was an attempt in 1934 by left-wing republicans to set up an explicitly socialist republican party in Ireland, however, it was hampered by the fact the IRA had no interest in supporting the endeavour (and in fact, the IRA expelled members who tried to be a part of both), and because it was torn apart almost immediately because of infighting. Members of the Republican Congress, which counted amongst its membership several of the most prominent socialists in Ireland at the time, could not decide whether they should immediately seek a "Workers Republic" or not, nor could they agree if they should embrace the idea of a Popular Front with non-socialists or not.

Córas na Poblachta were an Irish republican party set up in 1940, supported by elements of the IRA. With the IRA at this point under the control of Seán Russell , it had seen a swing heavily to the right. Córas na Poblachta reflected that, the party entertaining relations with the Fascist party Ailtirí na hAiséirghe and some meetings of Córas na Poblachta were even attended by Eoin O'Duffy and members of the Irish Christian Front , all of whom had bitterly opposed the IRA in the early 30s. With "The Emergency" in full effect, there was little appetite or room to grow a political party in Ireland at the time and thus in practical terms Córas na Poblachta did very little.

Clann na Poblachta were an Irish republican party set up in 1947 by former IRA Chief of Staff Seán MacBride . The party contained a broad political spectrum of Irish republicans, from former Communists to "traditionalist" republicans. The party settled on a centre-left platform promoting Social Democracy and New Deal style politics that suited the new political era of post-World War 2 Europe. Initially, they hoped to overtake Fianna Fáil as the main republican party in Irish politics and were projected to do very well, but savvy electoral manoeuvring by Éamon de Valera saw them falter in their first election. After they entered a coalition that included the traditional opponents of Irish republicanism, Fine Gael and ran into political turmoil over the Mother and Child Scheme , the party rapidly lost support. However, they were successful in formally declaring that Ireland was a Republic in 1948 . Their influence waned throughout the 1950s and they were formally wound up by 1965.

Aontacht Éireann were an Irish republican party set up in 1971 following a major political rift in Fianna Fáil caused by the Arms Crisis , in which Fianna Fáil ministers Charles Haughey and Neil Blaney were dismissed from cabinet following allegations they were involved in arranging for the IRA to be supplied with weaponry. The fallout of this caused many Fianna Fáil members to resign, amongst them Fianna Fáil minister Kevin Boland . Boland left Fianna Fáil and setup Aontacht Éireann to be a more openly republican party in Irish politics. He was joined by the likes of sitting Fianna Fáil TD Seán Sherwin . Although there was quite an amount of interest in Aontacht Éireann initially, with branches set up across Ireland, the party struggled to maintain its momentum. When Boland had resigned from Fianna Fáil, he not only gave up his cabinet position but also his seat in the Dáil as well. Without the platform to the speak in the Dáil, Boland was somewhat sidelined. The party also struggled to meaningfully separate itself from Provisional Sinn Féin, with much of the policies and the rhetoric of the party membership mirroring each other. The party only managed to take 0.9% of the national vote at the 1973 Irish general election and by 1976 the vast majority of the original membership had moved on from the party. It was formally wound up in 1984, after a period in which a far-right group has usurped the party's name and used it for their own ends for a time.

[ 124 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Irish republicanism .

Dissident republican Protestant Irish nationalists Notes [ edit ] ^ Of republican funerals, Guy Beiner wrote "Unlike the near contemporaneous public funerals in Third Republic France, which were civic ceremonies, Irish nationalist funerals were demonstrations of opposition and resistance. The making of martyrs out of former rebels marked the rise of a nationalist counter-hegemony that challenged British hegemony by audaciously occupying a public sphere previously dominated by imperial iconography." [ 39 ] ^ The legitimacy and recognition of republican prisoners is a central concern of republican thought and action.

[ 42 ] ^ While Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution defined the national territory to be the whole island, they also confined the state's jurisdiction to the area that had been the Irish Free State.

References [ edit ] ^ Patterson, Henry (2013b).

"The Provisional IRA, the Irish border, and Anglo-Irish relations during the Troubles" .

Small Wars & Insurgencies .

24 (3): 493– 517.

doi : 10.1080/09592318.2013.802607 .

ISSN 0959-2318 .

^ Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 11 ^ a b Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 12 ^ a b c d e f g h i j "The Republic" . 17 August 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016.

^ Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 15 ^ Patterson, James G. (2013).

In the Wake of the Great Rebellion . Manchester University Press. p. 1.

doi : 10.7228/manchester/9780719076930.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-7190-7693-0 .

^ a b c Ward, Lee (2016).

"Republican Political Theory and Irish Nationalism" .

The European Legacy .

21 (1): 19– 37.

doi : 10.1080/10848770.2015.1097137 .

ISSN 1084-8770 .

^ Patterson 2013 , p. 2.

^ Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 51 ^ Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 74 ^ Malcolm, Elizabeth (2013).

"A new age or just the same old cycle of extirpation? Massacre and the 1798 Irish rebellion" .

Journal of Genocide Research .

15 (2): 151– 166.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2013.789187 .

ISSN 1462-3528 .

^ Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 134 ^ Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 92 ^ a b Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 149 ^ Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 150 ^ a b Webster, Hollis, The History of Ireland , (Greenwood, 2001) ISBN 0-313-31281-8 p. 83 ^ a b Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 158 ^ Greoghan, Patrick M., Robert Emmet: A Life . Gill & Macmillan, 2004.

ISBN 978-0-7171-3675-9 ^ Robert Emmet Archived 22 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopædia Britannica Online . 2009. Retrieved 9 June 2009.

^ Kee, Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 165 ^ Proclamation of the Provisional Government , Robert Emmet, 1803 ^ a b Duffy, Charles Gavan, Young Ireland , Cassell, Petter, Galpin & Co. (1880). p. 291 ^ Bartoletti, Susan Campbell, Black Potatoes: The Story of the Great Irish Famine, 1845–1850 (2001) ISBN 0-618-00271-5 ^ Young Ireland Archived 11 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopædia Britannica Online . 2009. Retrieved 2009-23-12.

^ Michael Doheny, The Felon's Track , M.H. Gill &Sons, LTD 1951, p. 105 ^ a b Kee, Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 253 ^ The Sword Speech , Thomas Francies Meagher (1846) ^ Kee, Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 276 ^ Kee, Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 287 ^ McGee, Owen, The IRB: The Irish Republican Brotherhood from The Land League to Sinn Féin , Four Courts Press Ltd (2005) ISBN 1-84682-064-2 ^ Ryan, Desmond, The Fenian Chief. A Biography of James Stephens , Gill & Son (1967) ^ An Phoblacht – The Founding of the Fenians Archived 30 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine 13 March 2008. Retrieved 9 June 2009.

^ O'Leary, John, Recollections of Fenians and Fenianism , Downey & Co., Ltd, London, (1896) (Vol. I & II) p. 82 ^ Ryan, Desmond, The Fenian Chief. A Biography of James Stephens , Gill & Son (1967) p. 92 ^ Kee, Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 312 ^ O Broin, Leon Fenian Fever: An Anglo-American Dilemma , Chatto & Windus (1971) ISBN 0-7011-1749-4 p. 1 ^ Janes & Houen 2014 , pp. 200–201.

^ Janes & Houen 2014 , pp. 201, 219–220.

^ Janes & Houen 2014 , p. 201.

^ Janes & Houen 2014 , p. 200.

^ Janes & Houen 2014 , p. 204.

^ McGlinchey 2019 , p. 54.

^ Janes & Houen 2014 , pp. 210–212.

^ Janes & Houen 2014 , pp. 212–218.

^ Kee, Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 323 ^ a b c Kee Robert, The Green Flag: A History of Irish Nationalism , (1972) ISBN 0-297-17987-X p. 325 ^ Kee, p. 326 ^ Davis, Richard P. (1974). Arthur Griffith and non-violent Sinn Féin. Dublin: Anvil Books. p. 21.

^ Davis (1974), pp. 23–24 ^ Maye, Brian (1997).

Arthur Griffith . Dublin: Griffith College Publications. p. 101.

^ Leeson 2011 , pp. 177, 190–191.

^ Leeson 2011 , pp. 157, 211, 222.

^ Hughes 2016 , p. 140.

^ Hughes 2016 , p. 86.

^ Alvin Jackson , Ireland, 1798–1998: Politics and War , 1999, Wiley-Blackwell, p. 262.

ISBN 978-0-631-19542-9 ^ "Black v Chrétien: Suing a Minister of the Crown for Abuse of Power, Misfeasance in Public Office and Negligence" .

Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law .

9 (3). September 2002.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2020 . Retrieved 2 October 2008 .

^ Foster, R. F. (2001).

The Oxford History of Ireland . Oxford University Press. p. 217.

ISBN 978-0-19-280202-6 .

^ Mansergh, Nicholas; Mansergh, Diana (1997).

Nationalism and Independence: Selected Irish Papers . Cork University Press. p. 170.

ISBN 978-1-85918-106-5 .

^ Feeney, Brian (2002).

Sinn Féin: A Hundred Turbulent Years . O'Brien Press. p. 192.

ISBN 9780862787707 .

OCLC 48932356 .

^ Feeney (2002) , p. 139.

^ Feeney (2002) , pp. 195–196.

^ The Irish Election of 1918 (Report). Northern Ireland Elections . Retrieved 31 August 2022 .

^ "Northern Ireland Parliamentary Election Results 1921–29: Counties" .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2012 . Retrieved 21 October 2012 .

^ a b Hanley, Brian (2013).

" 'I ran away'? The I.R.A. and 1969: the evolution of a myth" .

Irish Historical Studies .

38 (152): 671– 687.

doi : 10.1017/S0021121400001887 .

ISSN 0021-1214 .

JSTOR 43654521 .

^ "The Hunger Strike of 1981 – A Chronology of Main Events" .

CAIN .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2007 . Retrieved 25 October 2023 .

^ Sweeney, George (1993). "Irish Hunger Strikes and the Cult of Self-Sacrifice".

Journal of Contemporary History .

28 (3): 421– 422.

doi : 10.1177/002200949302800302 .

JSTOR 260640 .

S2CID 153564309 .

^ McKittrick, David; McVea, David (2012).

Making Sense of the Troubles: a History of the Northern Ireland Conflict (3rd ed.). London, England: Penguin. p. 208.

ISBN 978-0-241-96265-7 .

^ "The Hume-Adams Talks - The Downing Street Declaration, 1993 - GCSE History Revision – CCEA" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 9 July 2022 .

^ a b McGlinchey 2019 , p. 2.

^ a b Hearty, Kevin (2015).

"The Malleability of Memory and Irish Republican Memory Entrepreneurship: A Case Study of the 'Loughgall Martyrs' " .

Ethnopolitics .

16 (2): 126– 144.

doi : 10.1080/17449057.2015.1041291 .

ISSN 1744-9057 .

^ a b c d Hoey, Paddy (2019).

"Dissident and dissenting republicanism: From the Good Friday/Belfast Agreement to Brexit" .

Capital & Class .

43 (1): 73– 87.

doi : 10.1177/0309816818818088 .

ISSN 0309-8168 .

^ "IRA arms decommissioned" .

The Guardian . 26 September 2005 . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

^ Sapone, Montgomery (1 May 2000).

"Ceasefire: The Impact of Republican Political Culture on the Ceasefire Process in Northern Ireland" .

Peace and Conflict Studies .

7 (1): 24– 51.

ISSN 1082-7307 .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

; Hearty, Kevin (2018).

Critical Engagement: Irish Republicanism, Memory Politics and Policing . Oxford University Press. p. 30.

ISBN 978-1-78694-828-1 .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 November 2020 .

^ a b Berger, Ronit (2016).

The Dynamics of Conflict: Transforming Northern Ireland (PhD thesis). Syracuse University. pp. 26, 35.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ Murtagh, Peter.

"The 'true' republicans: 'Nothing since 1919 is legitimate' " .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 8 November 2020 . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

^ a b Barton, Brian; Roche, Patrick J. (2009).

The Northern Ireland Question: The Peace Process and the Belfast Agreement . Springer. p. 166.

ISBN 978-0-230-59480-7 .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 November 2020 .

^ Livingstone, Stephen (2001). "The Judiciary and Legal Profession in Transition". In Harvey, Colin J. (ed.).

Human Rights, Equality and Democratic Renewal in Northern Ireland . Oxford: Hart. p. 134.

ISBN 978-1-84113-119-1 .

^ a b Jarman, Neil (2007). "Vigilantism, Transition and Legitimacy: Informal Policing in Northern Ireland". In Pratten, David; Sen, Atreyee (eds.).

Global Vigilantes: Perspectives on Justice and Violence . London: Hurst.

ISBN 978-1-85065-837-5 .

, from an online reprint paginated 1–22.

^ Grant, P. (2001).

Rhetoric and Violence in Northern Ireland, 1968–98: Hardened to Death . Springer. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-230-59695-5 .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 November 2020 .

; O'Doherty, Malachi (1998).

"The Trouble with Guns" .

The Trouble with Guns: Republican Strategy and the Provisional IRA . Blackstaff Press.

ISBN 978-0-85640-605-8 .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2020 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 .

^ Aveyard, Stuart C. (2023).

"The Northern Ireland Conflict and Colonial Resonances" .

The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History .

51 (6): 1143– 1169.

doi : 10.1080/03086534.2023.2168331 .

ISSN 0308-6534 .

^ Stephen John Small, ed. (1998).

Republicanism, Patriotism and Radicalism: Political Thought in Ireland, 1776–98 . University of Oxford.

^ David Dickson; Dáire Keogh; Kevin Whelan, eds. (1993).

The United Irishmen: Republicanism, Radicalism, and Rebellion .

Lilliput Press . p. 125.

ISBN 9780946640959 .

^ a b McGlinchey 2019 , pp. 45–46.

^ Mulholland, Marc (2021).

"How Revolutionary Was the "Irish Revolution"?" .

Éire-Ireland .

56 (1): 139– 175.

doi : 10.1353/eir.2021.0005 .

ISSN 1550-5162 .

^ Berman, David; Lalor, Stephen; Torode, Brian (Summer 1983). "The Theology of the IRA".

Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review .

72 (286): 137– 139.

JSTOR 30090509 .

^ Hughes 2016 , pp. 156, 158.

^ Berman, David; Lalor, Stephen; Torode, Brian (Summer 1983). "The Theology of the IRA".

Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review .

72 (286): 139– 141.

JSTOR 30090509 .

^ Berman, David; Lalor, Stephen; Torode, Brian (Summer 1983). "The Theology of the IRA".

Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review .

72 (286): 140– 141.

JSTOR 30090509 .

^ Berman, David; Lalor, Stephen; Torode, Brian (Summer 1983). "The Theology of the IRA".

Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review .

72 (286): 139.

JSTOR 30090509 .

^ Sutton, Malcolm, ed. (1994).

Bear in Mind These Dead: Index of Deaths from the Conflict in Ireland, 1969–93 . Beyond the Pale Publications.

ISBN 9780951422946 accessed via "CAIN: Sutton Index of Deaths - extracts from Sutton's book" . Conflict Archive on the Internet.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 30 November 2019 .

^ "CAIN: Sutton Index of Deaths – extracts from Sutton's book" .

cain.ulster.ac.uk . Retrieved 21 January 2024 .

^ a b Grayson, Richard S. (6 August 2010).

"The Place of the First World War in Contemporary Irish Republicanism in Northern Ireland" .

Irish Political Studies .

25 (3): 325– 345.

doi : 10.1080/07907184.2010.497635 .

ISSN 0790-7184 .

^ Buyse, Antoine; Hamilton, Michael, eds. (2011).

Transitional Jurisprudence and the ECHR: Justice, Politics and Rights . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 55.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511758515 .

ISBN 978-1-107-00301-9 .

^ Maillot, Agnès (2003).

New Sinn Féin: Irish Republicanism in the Twenty-First Century . Taylor & Francis. pp.

169– 170.

^ McAuley, Braniff & Spencer 2023 , p. 102.

^ McDowell, Sara (2007).

"Armalite, the ballot box and memorialization: Sinn Féin and the state in post-conflict Northern Ireland" .

The Round Table .

96 (393): 725– 738.

doi : 10.1080/00358530701635306 .

ISSN 0035-8533 .

^ McEvoy, Kieran; Conway, Heather (2004).

"The Dead, the Law, and the Politics of the Past" .

Journal of Law and Society .

31 (4): 539– 562.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6478.2004.00302.x .

ISSN 0263-323X .

JSTOR 1410654 .

^ McAuley, Braniff & Spencer 2023 , p. 103.

^ a b John Horgan, Divided We Stand: The Strategy and Psychology of Ireland's Dissident Terrorists Archived 9 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine , 2012, p. 164 ^ Jonathan Tonge (2006), Northern Ireland, Polity, pp. 132–133 ^ "Northern Ireland's political parties" .

BBC News . 13 April 1999 . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ Ó Duibhir, Séan (25 November 2020).

"A guide to the many groups who've used the Sinn Féin name" .

RTÉ . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ Melaugh, Martin (5 March 2025).

"Abstracts on Organisations - 'W' " .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2025 . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ a b Hussey, Gemma (1993).

Ireland Today: Anatomy of a Changing State . Town House. pp.

172– 173, 194.

ISBN 978-0948524660 .

^ Dunbar, Ciarán (1 December 2023).

"The other IRA: The story of the Officials and the Workers' Party" .

Belfast Telegraph . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ English, Richard (2003). "Chapter 4: The Politics of Violence 1972-6".

Armed Struggle: The History of the IRA .

Oxford University Press . pp. 177ff.

ISBN 9780195177534 .

^ Hanley, Brian; Millar, Scott (2009).

The Lost Revolution: The Story of the Official IRA and the Workers' Party .

Penguin Ireland .

ISBN 978-1844881208 .

^ Wilson, Brian (9 March 2010).

"Tomás Mac Giolla obituary" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ McParland, Conor (7 March 2025).

"Two Workers' Parties after 'Republican Clubs' re-brand" .

Belfast Media Group . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ Madden, Andrew (27 April 2021).

"Workers' Party hit by fresh split in organisation" .

Belfast Telegraph . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ a b "The Workers' Party Ard Fheis 27th September 2014" (PDF) .

The Workers' Party . 27 September 2014. pp.

6– 7, 15– 16.

^ a b McClean, Ciaran (Autumn 2003). "Northern Ireland and the Democratic Left Party, 1989-1999".

New Hibernia Review .

7 (3): 26.

doi : 10.1353/nhr.2003.0064 .

JSTOR 20646412 .

^ a b Brian, Brian (June 2016).

"Mac Giolla, Tomás" .

Dictionary of Irish Biography .

Royal Irish Academy .

doi : 10.3318/dib.009847.v1 .

^ a b c Downing, John (19 September 2020).

"John Downing: Martin is at serious risk of becoming the last ever Fianna Fáil Taoiseach" .

Irish Independent .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ O'Loughlin, Michael (11 February 2020).

"Republicanism still a potent link between Fianna Fáil and Sinn Féin" .

Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ John Horgan, Divided We Stand: The Strategy and Psychology of Ireland's Dissident Terrorists Archived 9 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine , 2012, p. 161 ^ "éirígí Becomes a Political Party – Indymedia Ireland" . Indymedia.ie. 13 May 2007.

Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 17 June 2010 .

^ "Twentieth Report of the Independent Monitoring Commission" (PDF) . October 2008.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 17 April 2012 .

^ Reinisch, Dieter (15 November 2019).

"Opinion: I went to the Saoradh party conference to see where radical republicanism is going" .

TheJournal.ie .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 20 February 2021 .

^ John Horgan, Divided We Stand: The Strategy and Psychology of Ireland's Dissident Terrorists Archived 9 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine , 2012, p. 162 ^ "Irish Nationalist & Irish Republican political groups" .

The Troubles in Northern Ireland: A complete history of the conflict . Archived from the original on 18 August 2011 . Retrieved 17 April 2011 .

^ Young, Connla (17 April 2017).

"Óglaigh na hÉireann may be preparing to end its paramilitary campaign" .

Irish News . Retrieved 16 May 2022 .

^ Mooney, John (16 June 2019).

"New IRA set to ramp up terror as OnH defectors swell ranks after death" .

The Times . Retrieved 16 May 2022 .

^ Alan Kinsella (3 February 2021).

"Aontacht Éireann – Episode 33" (Podcast). 'The Others' The Alan Kinsella Podcast.

Archived from the original on 3 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

Sources [ edit ] Hughes, Brian (2016).

Defying the IRA? Intimidation, Coercion, and Communities During the Irish Revolution .

Liverpool University Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1ps31k0 .

ISBN 978-1-78138-297-4 .

JSTOR j.ctt1ps31k0 .

Janes, Dominic; Houen, Alex, eds. (2014).

Martyrdom and Terrorism: Pre-Modern to Contemporary Perspectives . Oxford University Press.

Leeson, D. M. (2011).

The Black and Tans: British Police and Auxiliaries in the Irish War of Independence, 1920–1921 .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780191730597 .

McAuley, James W; Braniff, Máire; Spencer, Graham, eds. (2023).

Troubles of the Past? History, Identity and Collective Memory in Northern Ireland . Manchester University Press. p. 102.

McGlinchey, Marisa (2019).

Unfinished Business . Manchester University Press.

doi : 10.7765/9781526116215 .

ISBN 978-1-5261-1621-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Aoife Ui Phaolain (2014). "Language Revival and conflicting identities in Irish independence".

Irish Studies Review .

22 (1).

Coogan, Tim Pat (1978).

The Troubles . Dublin.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) English, Richard (1998).

Irish Freedom . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Elliott, Marianne .

Robert Emmet: The Making of a Legend . Dublin.

Fitzpatrick, David (2012).

Terror in Ireland 1916–23 . Dublin.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Geoghegan, Patrick (2002).

Robert Emmet: A Life . London: Gill and Macmillan.

ISBN 0-7171-3387-7 .

Gough, H.; Dickson, D.

Ireland and the French Revolution .

Robert Kee (1971).

Ireland: A History . Dublin.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Lawlor, Philip (2011).

The outrages, 1920–1: IRA and the Ulster Specials in the Border Campaign . Cork: Mercier Press.

Lee, Joseph (1986).

The Modernisation of Irish Society . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) McCardle, Dorothy (1971).

The Irish Republic . Dublin.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) McIntyre, A. (2008).

Good Friday; the death of Irish Republicanism . New York.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Smyth, Jim.

The Men of No Property: Irish Radicals and Popular Politics in the Late Eighteenth Century . Dublin.

A. T. Q. Stewart .

A Deeper Silence: The Hidden Origins of the United Irish Movement . Dublin.

Whelehan, Niall (2012).

The Dynamiters: Irish Nationalism and Political Violence in the wider world . Cambridge.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) v t e Armed Republican groups in Ireland Earlier organisations Society of United Irishmen Young Ireland Irish Republican Brotherhood Fenian Brotherhood Clan na Gael Easter Rising Fianna Éireann Irish Citizen Army Irish Volunteers Cumann na mBan Irish War of Independence Irish Republican Army (Army of the Irish Republic ) Irish Civil War Anti-treaty Irish Republican Army The Troubles Irish Revolutionary Forces Saor Éire Provisional IRA Official IRA Irish National Liberation Army South Armagh Republican Action Force Irish People's Liberation Organisation Continuity IRA Dissident Campaign Real IRA Óglaigh na hÉireann (Continuity IRA splinter group) Irish Republican Liberation Army Óglaigh na hÉireann (Real IRA splinter group) New IRA Arm na Poblachta Irish Republican Movement v t e Young Ireland General Repeal Association The Nation Irish nationalism Irish republicanism Irish Confederation Great Hunger Revolutions of 1848 A Nation Once Again Irish tricolour Young Ireland rebellion Penal transportation Van Diemen's Land Irish Republican Brotherhood Personalities Joseph Blake Joseph Brenan Robert Cane Thomas Davis John Blake Dillon Michael Doheny Charles Gavan Duffy Philip Gray John Kenyon James Fintan Lalor Maurice Leyne Thomas D'Arcy McGee Terence MacManus John Martin Thomas Francis Meagher John Mitchel William Smith O'Brien Kevin Izod O'Doherty Patrick O'Donoghue Richard O'Gorman John O'Leary John O'Mahony Thomas Devin Reilly John Savage Patrick James Smyth James Stephens Jane Wilde British laws Prevention of Crime (Ireland) Act 1848 Treason Felony Act 1848 Ireland portal Category WikiProject v t e Irish Republican Brotherhood General Young Ireland Fenianism Irish republicanism Physical force Irish republicanism Irish in the American Civil War Manchester Martyrs Cuba Five New Departure Irish Race Conventions Obstructionism Fenian Ram Hindu–German Conspiracy Declaration of Independence Irish Republic Sinn Féin Anglo-Irish Treaty Irish Civil War Irish Free State Actions Fenian Rising ( Clerkenwell explosion and Fenian raids ) Catalpa rescue Land War Fenian dynamite campaign Easter Rising Irish War of Independence Army Mutiny Presidents James Stephens Thomas J. Kelly J. F. X. O'Brien Charles Kickham John O'Connor Power John O'Leary Neal O'Boyle John Mulholland Seamus Deakin Denis McCullough Thomas Ashe Seán McGarry Harry Boland Patrick Moylett Michael Collins Richard Mulcahy Prominent members 19th century Thomas Francis Bourke Ricard O'Sullivan Burke Edward O'Meagher Condon John Daly Michael Davitt Timothy Deasy John Devoy Michael Doheny Thomas Clarke Luby John O'Mahony Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa Pat Nally William R. Roberts 20th century Éamonn Ceannt Tom Clarke Bulmer Hobson Seán Mac Diarmada Diarmuid Lynch Patrick Pearse Joseph Plunkett Informants Thomas Miller Beach Francis Frederick Millen Associates Clan na Gael Cumann na mBan Emmet Monument Association Fenian Brotherhood Fianna Éireann Friends of Irish Freedom Irish Republican Army Irish Freedom (newspaper) The Irish People (newspaper) United Irishmen of America Derivatives Irish National Invincibles ( Phoenix Park killings ) v t e The Troubles Participants State security forces United Kingdom British Army ( Ulster Defence Regiment Force Research Unit ) Royal Ulster Constabulary ( Ulster Special Constabulary ) Ireland Defence Forces Garda Síochána Irish republican paramilitaries Provisional IRA Official IRA INLA Irish People's Liberation Organisation Continuity IRA Real IRA Republican Action Force Saor Éire Irish Revolutionary Brigade Vigilantes Direct Action Against Drugs Ulster loyalist paramilitaries Ulster Volunteer Force Ulster Defence Association Red Hand Commando Ulster Resistance Loyalist Volunteer Force Ulster Protestant Volunteers Ulster Third Force Ulster Volunteer Service Corps Down Orange Welfare Protestant Action Force Woodvale Defence Association Vigilantes Ulster Protestant Action Ulster Service Corps Orange Volunteers Major events 1967–1972 Northern Ireland civil rights movement 1969 NI riots 1970 Falls Curfew 1971 Operation Demetrius Ballymurphy massacre McGurk's Bar bombing Balmoral showroom bombing 1972 Bloody Sunday Abercorn Restaurant bombing Donegall Street bombing Beginning of direct rule Bloody Friday Operation Motorman Old Bailey bombing Sunningdale Agreement 1974 M62 coach bombing Ulster Workers' Council strike Dublin & Monaghan bombings Guildford pub bombings Birmingham pub bombings 1975 Miami Showband killings Bayardo Bar attack Tullyvallen massacre Balcombe Street siege 1976 Reavey and O'Dowd killings Kingsmill massacre 1978 La Mon restaurant bombing Jonesborough Gazelle downing 1979 Warrenpoint ambush 1981 Republican hunger strike 1982 Droppin Well bombing 1983 Maze Prison escape 1984 Brighton hotel bombing 1985 Newry mortar attack Anglo-Irish Agreement 1987 Loughgall ambush Remembrance Day bombing 1988 Start of peace process Operation Flavius Milltown Cemetery attack Corporals killings IRA attacks in the Netherlands Aughanduff Lynx shootdown Ballygawley bus bombing 1989 Deal barracks bombing Attack on Derryard checkpoint 1990–1997 South Armagh sniper campaign 1990 Augher Lynx shootdown Proxy bombings 1991 Downing Street mortar attack Cappagh killings 1992 Teebane bombing Sinn Féin Headquarters shooting Sean Graham bookmakers' shooting 1993 Warrington bombings Bishopsgate bombing Shankill Road bombing Greysteel massacre Downing Street Declaration 1994 Crossmaglen Lynx downing Loughinisland massacre Ceasefires of the Provisional IRA, UVF, UDA and RHC 1996 Docklands bombing Manchester bombing 1997 NI riots Second IRA ceasefire 1998 Good Friday Agreement Omagh bombing Political parties Irish republican parties Sinn Féin Official Sinn Féin Republican Sinn Féin Irish Republican Socialist Party Communist Party of Ireland Irish Independence Party Republican Socialist Collective Unity Ulster loyalist parties Ulster Unionist Party Democratic Unionist Party Progressive Unionist Party Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party UK Unionist Party Ulster Democratic Party Other parties Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Social Democratic and Labour Party Segregation ( peace lines ) Irish republicanism Irish nationalism Unionism Ulster loyalism United Ireland Free Derry Films Flags Murals Parades Punishment attacks Finances Special Category Status Shoot-to-kill policy HM Prison Maze Five techniques Category v t e Celts and modern Celts Celtic nations · Celtic studies · Celtic tribes · Celtic languages Peoples Ancient Celtic ethnic groups ( names ) Aedui Aigosages Allobroges Allotriges Ambarri Anartes Arecomici Armorica Astures Arverni Atuatuci Attacotti Atrebates Aulerci Aulerci Cenomani Cenomani Autrigones Bituriges Bituriges Vivisci Belgae Bellovaci Berones Boii Brigantii Britons Caledonians Caleti Cantabri Carni Cantii Carnutes Caristii Carpetani Catubrini Celegeri Cenomani Celtiberians Celtici Cotini Coriosolites Dumnonii Eburones Eburovices Eravisci Haedui Helvetii Gaels Gaesatae Gallaeci Gauls Galatians Helvetii Insubres Latobici Latobrigi Lemovices Lexovii Leuci Ligures Lingones Lusitanians Lepontii Menapii Morini Namnetes Nervii Noricum Orobii Osismii Parisi Parisii Petrocorii Picts Pictones Rauraci Redones Regni Remi Salluvii Santones Sequani Senones Scordisci Scoti Silures Sordones Tectosages Teurisci Tolistobogii Treveri Trinovantes Triboci Tricasses Trocmi Tulingi Turoni Ulidia Varciani Varisci Viromandui Veneti Veliocasses Vennones Vindelici Vocontii Volcae Modern Celtic ethnic groups Bretons Cornish Welsh Gaels Irish Manx Scots Celtic diaspora Cornish diaspora Irish diaspora Scottish diaspora Welsh diaspora Related ethnic groups Anglo-Celtic Breton Americans Cornish Americans English people French people Irish Americans Irish Canadians Scotch-Irish Americans Scottish Americans Scottish Canadians Scots-Irish people Spanish people Studies Places Alesia Avaricum Gergovia Hallstatt Hochdorf La Tène Vix Grave Gaelic Ireland Hill of Tara Newgrange Rathcroghan Dálriata Alba Fortriu Cumbria Brigantia Iron Age Britain Roman Britain Sub-Roman Britain Stonehenge Dumnonia Hen Ogledd Gaul Roman Gaul Britonia Armorica Domnonée Brittany Gallaecia Numantia Gallia Aquitania Gallia Belgica Gallia Celtica Cisalpine Gaul Transalpine Gaul Balkans Transylvania Galatia Ancient religion Proto-Celtic religion Celtic polytheism Celtic deities Celtic Animism Celtic mythology Celtic Christianity Celtic Rites Celtic stone idolss * Druids Monasticism Romano-Celtic temple Practices Mythology Irish Scottish Welsh British Breton Cornish Society Bard Brehon Celtic calendar Celtic festivals Celtic women Celticisation Chief of the Name Derbfine Druid Clan chief Irish Clans Scottish clans ( List ) Gaelicisation Gaelic astrology Fáinne Fili Law Tanistry Seanchaí Sept Túath Vates Warfare ( Gaelic ) Coinage Modern Celts Celtic Revival Celtic nations Pan-Celticism Celtic Congress Celtic League Celtic union Music Rock Neo-Christianity Neopaganism Celtic Wicca Neo-Druidism Nations Celtic League definition Brittany ( Breizh ) Cornwall ( Kernow ) Ireland ( Éire ) Isle of Man ( Mannin ) Scotland ( Alba ) Wales ( Cymru ) Other claimants Asturias Cantabria Cumbria Devon Galicia Norte Portugal Nova Scotia Province of León Y Wladfa England Culture Literature Arthurian Legend Bardic Poetry Breton literature Cornish literature Irish literature Manx literature Scottish literature Welsh-language literature Welsh literature in English Early Irish literature Irish annals Gaelic literature Scottish Gaelic literature National cultures Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Art Bell shrines Brooches Dragonesque Carnyx Celtic cross Knotwork High crosses Insular art Interlace Leaf-crowns Mazes Pictish stones Torcs Triple spiral Clothing Celtic Dress Highland dress Gaelic clothing Tartan Traditional Welsh costume Welsh hat Regional cultures Gaelic culture Highland culture Music Ancient Celtic music Breton Folk music Gaelic music Irish folk music Scottish folk music Welsh folk music Sean-nós singing Carnyx National music scenes Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Festivals Calendar Samhain / Calan Gaeaf Imbolc / Gŵyl Fair Beltane / Calan Mai Lughnasadh / Calan Awst Festival Interceltique de Lorient Pan Celtic Festival Hebridean Celtic Festival Celtic Connections Celtic Media Festival Eisteddfod Sport Bando Bataireacht Camogie Cammag Cnapan Cornish hurling Cornish wrestling Curling Gaelic football ( Ladies' ) Gaelic handball Gouren Rounders Highland games Hurling Road bowls Shinty Welsh handball Politics Nationalism Breton nationalism history reunification Cornish nationalism status Irish nationalism Isle of Man Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles Scottish nationalism national identity Welsh nationalism national identity Autonomy Cornish devolution Scottish devolution Welsh devolution Independence Breton independence Scottish independence Welsh independence United Ireland and Irish republicanism Pan-Celticism Celtic League Celtic Congress Celtic Revival Celtic society Celtic unity Columba Project Languages Brittonic Breton Cornish Welsh Goidelic Irish Manx Scottish Gaelic Mixed Shelta Bungi Creole Beurla Reagaird Ancient Celtic languages Extinct Proto-Celtic Proto-Brittonic Proto-Goidelic Celtiberian Gaulish Galatian Gallaecian Lepontic Noric Cumbric Pictish Hispano-Celtic Cisalpine Gaulish Scottish Gaelic dialects Arran Gaelic Deeside Gaelic Galwegian Gaelic Law and Warfare Law Early Irish law Cyfraith Hywel (Medieval Welsh law) Early Scots law Warfare Gaelic warfare Ceathairne Ceithearn Fianna Gaesatae Gallóglaigh Hobelar Redshanks Trimarcisia Lists Tribes Deities Celtic words in English – in Spanish – in Galician Gaulish words in French Celtic place names in Galicia – in Italy – in Portugal Celts portal v t e Nationalism in the United Kingdom British British national identity Nationalism Republicanism Loyalism Far-right Fascism Unionism Federalism Organisations Britain First Britannica Party British Democratic Party British National Party Candour Democratic Unionist Party Homeland Party Liberty GB National Front Patriotic Alternative Traditional Unionist Voice UK Independence Party Does not include organisations focused on Unionism which do not mention British nationalism in their official makeup.

Cornish Devolution Nationalism Organisations Mebyon Kernow English English national identity Nationalism Independence Devolution North of England Unionism Organisations English Democrats Irish Nationalism Protestant Republicanism Unification Unionism Catholic Organisations Aontú Éirígí Irish Republican Socialist Party Republican Sinn Féin Saoradh Sinn Féin Social Democratic and Labour Party Scottish Scottish national identity Independence Devolution Nationalism Republicanism Unionism Organisations Alba Party Scottish National Party Siol nan Gaidheal Does not include organisations supportive of Unionism or Scottish independence without mentioning nationalism in their official makeup.

Ulster Nationalism Loyalism Partitionism Two nations theory Organisations Ulster Third Way Welsh Welsh national identity Independence Devolution Nationalism Republicanism Unionism Organisations Gwlad Plaid Cymru Propel Does not include organisations supportive of Unionism or Welsh independence without mentioning nationalism in their official makeup.

v t e Republicanism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard v t e Ireland topics Republic of Ireland topics Northern Ireland topics History Timeline Prehistory Protohistory Early history Gaelic Ireland / Lordship of Ireland 800–1169 1169–1536 Kingdom of Ireland 1536–1691 1691–1800 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 1801–1923 Irish Republic Southern Ireland (1921–1922) Northern Ireland (1921–present) United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland since 1922 Irish Free State (1922–1937) Ireland (since 1922) Events Battles of Tara / Glenmama / Clontarf Norman invasion Bruce campaign Black Death Tudor conquest Desmond Rebellions Spanish Armada Tyrone's Rebellion Flight of the Earls Plantation of Ulster 1641 Rebellion / Confederate War Cromwellian conquest / Settlement of 1652 Williamite War Penal Laws First Great Famine 1798 Rebellion Act of Union (1800) 1803 Rebellion Tithe War Second Great Famine Land War Fenian Rising Dublin lock-out Home Rule crisis Easter Rising War of Independence Anglo-Irish Treaty Civil War The Emergency IRA Northern Campaign IRA Border Campaign The Troubles Peace process Economy of the Republic of Ireland Celtic Tiger Post-2008 Irish economic downturn Post-2008 Irish banking crisis Other topics List of conflicts in Ireland List of Irish tribes List of Irish kingdoms List of High Kings Gaelic clothing and fashion List of World Heritage Sites in the Republic of Ireland Geography Natural Climate Climate change Coastline Extreme points Fauna Islands Loughs Mountains Rivers list List of national parks of the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland Human Architecture Notable buildings Tallest buildings and structures Cities Counties Demographics of the Republic of Ireland / of Northern Ireland Ports Provinces ROI–UK border Towns Tourism in the Republic of Ireland Tourist attractions Transport Politics Ideologies Nationalism Republicanism Ulster loyalism Unionism Republic of Ireland Constitution Economy Education Foreign relations Government local Law LGBT rights Oireachtas parliament Dáil Éireann (lower house) Seanad Éireann (upper house) President Taxation Northern Ireland Assembly D'Hondt method Economy Education Government local LGBT rights Peace process Culture Cuisine Food List of dishes Barmbrack Bacon and cabbage Boxty Champ Coddle Colcannon Drisheen Irish fry Skirts and kidneys Soda bread Spice Bag Stew Three-in-One Drinks Coffee Cream Guinness Mist Poitín Tea Whiskey Dance Jig Sean-nós Set dancing Stepdance Festivals Imbolc Saint Patrick's Day Bealtaine The Twelfth Lúnasa Rose of Tralee Samhain / Halloween Wren Day Languages Hiberno-English Irish Shelta Ulster Scots Literature Annals Fiction Gaeilge Poetry Theatre Triads Music Ballads Céilí Folk music session Instruments Rock music Traditional singing Mythology Cycles Mythological Fenian Ulster Kings Aos Sí Echtrai Immrama Tuatha Dé Danann Firbolg Fomorians Legendary creatures People Irish people List of Irish people Irish diaspora Anglo-Irish Gaels Gaelic Ireland Hiberno-Normans Travellers Ulster Scots v t e Immigration to the Republic of Ireland Groups Americans Brazilians Chinese Filipinos Lithuanians Nigerians South Asians Poles Romani Turks Related topics Demographics of the Republic of Ireland Department of Justice, Home Affairs and Migration Stamp 4 Sport Association football in the Republic of Ireland Association football in Northern Ireland Camogie Gaelic football Gaelic handball Hurling Martial arts Road bowling Rounders Rugby union Symbols Brighid's Cross Cláirseach County coats of arms Flags Northern Ireland flags issue Irish Wolfhound National coat of arms Red Hand Shamrock Other Calendar Castles Cinema Heritage Sites Historic houses Homelessness Mass media (Republic) Monastic Names Place names / outside Ireland Prostitution (Republic) / in Northern Ireland Public holidays in the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland Public houses Squatting Ireland portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐z4v2g
Cached time: 20250817043858
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.239 seconds
Real time usage: 2.548 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 22249/1000000
Revision size: 99160/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 701835/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 23985/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 481315/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.230/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19278308/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1898.585      1 -total
 32.26%  612.490      3 Template:Reflist
 13.45%  255.437     39 Template:Cite_book
 13.34%  253.309      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.48%  199.060     35 Template:Navbox
  9.87%  187.372     20 Template:Cite_journal
  7.56%  143.607      1 Template:Europe_topic
  7.44%  141.198      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
  7.31%  138.737      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
  6.61%  125.571     20 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:772738:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043858 and revision id 1305851651. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Irish_republicanism&oldid=1305851651 " Categories : Irish republicanism Anti-imperialism in Europe Irish nationalism Politics of Ireland Politics of the Republic of Ireland Radicalism (historical) Republicanism by country Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2023 Use Hiberno-English from March 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from August 2022 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles containing Breton-language text Articles containing Cornish-language text Articles containing Manx-language text Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 12:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Irish republicanism 24 languages Add topic

