Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Orientalism 2 Theory 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Imagined geographies 4 languages العربية فارسی Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e The concept of imagined geographies (or imaginative geographies ) originated from Edward Said , particularly his work on critique on Orientalism . Imagined geographies refers to the perception of a space created through certain imagery, texts, and/or discourses . For Said, imagined does not mean to be false or made-up, but rather is used synonymous with perceived . Despite often being constructed on a national level, imagined geographies also occur domestically in nations and locally within regions, cities, etc.

Imagined geographies can be seen as a form of social constructionism on par with Benedict Anderson 's concept of imagined communities . Edward Said's notion of Orientalism is tied to the tumultuous dynamics of contemporary history.

Orientalism is often referred to as the West's patronizing perceptions and depictions of the East, but more specifically towards Islamic and Confucian states.

Orientalism has also been labeled as the cornerstone of postcolonial studies .

This theory has also been used to critique several geographies created; both historically and contemporarily—an example is Maria Todorova 's work Imagining the Balkans .

Samuel P. Huntington 's Clash of Civilizations has also been criticized as showing a whole set of imagined geographies.

[ by whom?

] Halford Mackinder 's theories have also been argued by scholars to be an imagined geography that emphasised the importance of Europe over non-European countries, and asserted the view of the geographical "expert" with the " God's eye view ".

[ 1 ] Orientalism [ edit ] Main article: Orientalism (book) In his book Orientalism , Edward Said argued that Western culture had produced a view of the " Orient " based on a particular imagination, popularized through academic Oriental studies , travel writing , anthropology and a colonial view of the Orient. This imagination included painting the orient as feminine- however, Said's view on the gendered nature has been criticized by other scholars due to a limited exploration of the construct.

[ 2 ] At a 1993 lecture located at York University, Toronto, Canada, Said stressed the role culture plays in Orientalism-based imperialism and colonialism.

[ 3 ] By differentiating and elevating a national culture over another a validating process of "othering" is undertaken.

[ 4 ] This process underlies imagined geographies such as orientalism as it creates a set of preconceived notions for self-serving purposes.

[ 5 ] In constructing itself as superior, the imperial force or colonizing agent is able to justify its actions as somehow necessary or beneficial to the "other".

[ 3 ] Despite the broad scope and effect of orientalism as an imagined geography, it and the underlying process of "othering" are discursive and thereby normalized within dominant, Western societies.

[ 6 ] It is in this sense that Orientalism may be reinforced in cultural texts such as art, film, literature, music, etc. where one-dimensional and often backwards constructions prevail.

[ 7 ] A prime source of cinematic examples is the documentary-film Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People .

[ 8 ] The film demonstrates the process of orientalism centric "othering" within Western films from the silent era to modern classics such as Disney's Aladdin .

[ 8 ] Inferior, backwards, and culturally stagnate constructions of Oriental "others" become normalized in the minds of Western consumers of cultural texts; reinforcing racist or insensitive beliefs and assumptions.

[ 9 ] In Orientalism , Said says that Orientalism is an imagined geography because a) Europeans created one culture for the entirety of the 'Orient', and b) the 'Orient' was defined by text and not by the 'Orient'.

Theory [ edit ] Said was heavily influenced by French philosopher Michel Foucault , and those who have developed the theory of imagined geographies have linked these together. Foucault states that power and knowledge are always intertwined. Said then developed an idea of a relationship between power and descriptions. Imagined geographies are thus seen as a tool of power , of a means of controlling and subordinating areas. Power is seen as being in the hands of those who have the right to objectify those that they are imagining.

Imagined geographies were mostly based on myth and legend, often depicting monstrous "others".

Edward Said elaborates that: “Europe is powerful and articulate; Asia is defeated and distant." [ 10 ] Further writers to have been heavily influenced by the concept of imagined geographies including Derek Gregory and Gearóid Ó Tuathail . Gregory argues that the War on Terror shows a continuation of the same imagined geographies that Said uncovered. He claims that the Islamic world is portrayed as uncivilized; it is labeled as backward and failing. This justifies, in the view of those imagining, the military intervention that has been seen in Afghanistan and Iraq .

Edward Said mentions that when Islam appeared in Europe in the Middle Ages, the response was conservative and defensive. Ó' Tuathail has argued that geopolitical knowledges are forms of imagined geography. Using the example of Halford Mackinder 's heartland theory , he has shown how the presentation of Eastern Europe / Western Russia as a key geopolitical region after the First World War influenced actions such as the recreation of Poland and the Polish Corridor in the 1918 Treaty of Versailles .

See also [ edit ] Geography portal Lila Abu-Lughod Imagined communities India (Herodotus) Padaei References [ edit ] ^ Morgan, John (2000). "To which space do I belong? Imagining citizenship in one curriculum subject".

The Curriculum Journal .

11 : 55– 68.

doi : 10.1080/095851700361393 .

S2CID 143549456 .

^ Sharp, Joanne P. "Geographies of Postcolonialism: Ch. 1, Imagining the World." London: SAGE Publications Ltd, 2009. p. 27 ^ a b Edward Said. "Culture and Imperialism" (Lecture): York University, Toronto, February 10, 1993.

^ Alison Mountz, Key Concepts in Political Geography, Ch. 28 "The Other". 328-329.

^ Alison Mountz, Key Concepts in Political Geography, Ch. 28 "The Other"; Edward Said. "Culture and Imperialism" (Lecture): York University, Toronto, February 10, 1993.

^ Joanne P. Sharp. Geographies of Postcolonialism: Ch.1 "Imagining the World". 19-20.

^ Derek Gregory The Colonial Present. Ch. 1. 8-10.

^ a b Sut Jhally. Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People.

^ Derek Gregory The Colonial Present. Ch. 1. 10-11.

^ Said, Edward.  “Imaginative Geography and Its Representations: Orientalizing the Oriental.”  Orientalism.  New York: Vintage, 1979.

Further reading [ edit ] Huntington, Samuel , 1991, Clash of Civilizations Gregory, Derek, 2004, The Colonial Present , Blackwell Marx, Karl, [1853] "The British Rule In India" in Macfie, A. L. (ed.), 2000, Orientalism: A Reader , Edinburgh University Press Ó' Tuathail, Gearoid, 1996, Critical Geopolitics: The Writing of Global Space , Routledge Said, Edward, [1978]1995, Orientalism , Penguin Books Mohnike, Thomas, 2007, Imaginierte Geographien , Ergon-Verlag Said, Edward. [1979] “Imaginative Geography and Its Representations: Orientalizing the Oriental.”  Orientalism.  New York: Vintage, Sharp, Joanne P. [2009]. "Geographies of Postcolonialism." Sage Publications: London.

Links to related articles v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Imagined_geographies&oldid=1259440060 " Categories : Human geography Postcolonialism Social constructionism Hidden categories: Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2012 This page was last edited on 25 November 2024, at 04:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Imagined geographies 4 languages Add topic

