Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Abstracting and indexing 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents philoSOPHIA 2 languages Ελληνικά Latina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the philosophy journal published by Springer, see Philosophia (journal) .

philoSOPHIA Discipline Feminist philosophy , continental philosophy Language English Edited by Alyson Cole , Kyoo Lee Publication details History 2011–present Publisher SUNY Press Frequency Biannual Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Philosophia (Albany, N.Y.) Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 2155-0891 (print) 2155-0905 (web) LCCN 2010204468 OCLC no.

889293608 Links Journal homepage Online access at Project MUSE philoSOPHIA: A Journal of Transcontinental Feminism is an international, interdisciplinary, biannual peer-reviewed academic journal covering feminist theory and continental philosophy .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Published by SUNY Press , the journal was established by philoSOPHIA: the Society for Continental Feminism, which was founded in 2008.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The editors-in-chief are Alyson Cole and Kyoo Lee.

[ 6 ] Established in 2008 as philoSOPHIA: A Journal of Continental Feminism , it was "transcontinentalized" in 2018 to broaden its scope and inclusivity.

[ 7 ] The new subtitle indicates the journal's focus on feminist thought that transcends cultural and philosophical boundaries, emphasizing a commitment to global feminist dialogue rather than a single regional or cultural perspective.

History [ edit ] The journal is the product of philoSOPHIA: the Society for Continental Feminism, which was founded in Tennessee in 2008—initially as the French Feminism Circle—by Kelly Oliver ( Vanderbilt University ) and Stacy Keltner ( Kennesaw State University ). The journal was established in 2011, after the society's third annual conference. The founding co-editors were Elaine Miller and Emily Zakin ( Miami University ).

[ 8 ] According to its founding editors, the society and journal were named after Sophia , the feminine aspect of God who fell from grace because of her love of knowledge.

[ 9 ] The name serves to illustrate that women who love philosophy are not necessarily in love with the patriarchy .

[ 10 ] Since issue 9.1 (2019), the journal's cover image has been replaced, substituting the previous one with a photo collage by the artist Lorna Simpson , called Unanswerable .

Abstracting and indexing [ edit ] The journal is abstracted and indexed in: [ 11 ] [ 12 ] EBSCO databases Emerging Sources Citation Index Modern Language Association Database PhilPapers ProQuest databases The Philosopher's Index See also [ edit ] List of philosophy journals List of women's studies journals References [ edit ] ^ "Philosophia" , Journal Guide .

^ "Where to Publish Feminist Philosophy" , Hypatia .

^ Alison Wylie (2013).

"Editors' pick: Hypatia " , TPM , third quarter, 111.

^ "philoSOPHIA – Biannual" , SUNY Press.

^ Miller, Elaine; Zakin, Emily (2011).

"Editors' Introduction" .

PhiloSOPHIA .

1 (1): 1– 8.

^ "philoSOPHIA - Biannual" .

www.sunypress.edu .

^ "philoSOPHIA: A Journal of transContinental Feminism" .

philoSOPHIA Feminist Society . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ Miller & Zakin (2011) , p. 1 ^ Miller & Zakin (2011) , p. 2 ^ Miller & Zakin (2011) , p. 6 ^ "philoSOPHIA: Indexing / Abstracting coverage" . Philosophy Documentation Center . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ "PhiloSOPHIA" .

MIAR: Information Matrix for the Analysis of Journals .

University of Barcelona . Retrieved 2018-06-21 .

External links [ edit ] Official website PhiloSOPHIA: Society for Continental Feminism v t e Philosophy journals General American Philosophical Quarterly Analysis Australasian Journal of Philosophy Canadian Journal of Philosophy Erkenntnis European Journal of Philosophy Journal of the American Philosophical Association The Journal of Philosophy Mind The Monist Noûs Pacific Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Review Philosophical Studies Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Synthese Thought Moral , social , and political philosophy Ethics Journal of Moral Philosophy Journal of Social Ontology Journal of Social Philosophy International Journal of Applied Philosophy Philosophy & Public Affairs Res Publica The Journal of Ethics Philosophy of mind Journal of Consciousness Studies Mind & Language Logic Journal of Philosophical Logic Journal of Symbolic Logic Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy Philosophy of science British Journal for the Philosophy of Science Aesthetics British Journal of Aesthetics Rhetoric Philosophy & Rhetoric History of philosophy Ancient Philosophy Apeiron Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie British Journal for the History of Philosophy Dionysius Epoché History of Philosophy Quarterly Isis Journal of the History of Ideas Journal of the History of Philosophy Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy Phronesis Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval Feminist philosophy Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Public philosophy Philosophy Now The Philosophers' Magazine Think Philosophers Augustinian Studies Berkeley Studies Deleuze Studies Derrida Today Hegel-Studien Hegel Bulletin Heidegger Studies Hume Studies International Journal of Baudrillard Studies The Journal of Nietzsche Studies Kantian Review Kierkegaard Studies Yearbook The Leibniz Review New Nietzsche Studies New Vico Studies Sartre Studies International Categories and lists Category:Philosophy journals List of ethics journals List of philosophy journals Related The Philosopher's Index Philosophy Documentation Center PhilPapers Philosophy Research Index v t e Feminist philosophy Major works Early François Poullain de la Barre De l’Égalité des deux sexes , 1673 Mary Astell A Serious Proposal to the Ladies , 1694 Mary Wollstonecraft A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , 1792 Sarah Moore Grimké Letters on the Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women , 1837 Flora Tristan The Emancipation of Working Class Women , 1843 Elizabeth Cady Stanton Declaration of Sentiments , 1848 Harriet Taylor Mill The Enfranchisement of Women , 1851 John Stuart Mill The Subjection of Women , 1869 Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State , 1884 1940s–1960s Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex , 1949 Betty Friedan The Feminine Mystique , 1963 1970s Kate Millett Sexual Politics , 1970 Shulamith Firestone The Dialectic of Sex , 1970 Germaine Greer The Female Eunuch , 1970 Robin Morgan Sisterhood Is Powerful , 1970 Andrea Dworkin Woman Hating , 1974 Sandra Bartky "Toward a Phenomenology of Feminist Consciousness", 1974 Susan Brownmiller Against Our Will , 1975 Hélène Cixous "Le Rire de la Méduse", 1975 Mary Daly Gyn/Ecology , 1978 Dale Spender Man Made Language , 1978 Audre Lorde "The Master's Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master's House", 1979 1980s Monique Wittig "On ne naît pas femme", 1980 bell hooks Ain't I a Woman?

, 1981 Marilyn Frye The Politics of Reality , 1983 Sheila Jeffreys The Spinster and Her Enemies , 1985 Gerda Lerner The Creation of Patriarchy , 1986 Catharine MacKinnon Toward a Feminist Theory of the State , 1989 Kimberlé Crenshaw "Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex", 1989 1990s Judith Butler Gender Trouble , 1990 Patricia Hill Collins Black Feminist Thought , 1990 Naomi Wolf The Beauty Myth , 1990 Drucilla Cornell Beyond Accommodation , 1991 Val Plumwood Feminism and the Mastery of Nature , 1993 Christina Hoff Sommers Who Stole Feminism?

, 1994 Martha Nussbaum Sex and Social Justice , 1998 Other theorists Elizabeth Anderson Martha Albertson Fineman Nancy Fraser Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Sally Haslanger Luce Irigaray Anna Jónasdóttir Ideas Écriture féminine Feminism analytical aesthetics empiricism epistemology ethics existentialism justice ethics legal theory metaphysics method philosophy radical standpoint theory theory Gender equality performativity Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Matriarchy Patriarchy Women's studies Journals Hypatia transracialism controversy philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Categories Feminist philosophers Feminist theorists Portals : Feminism Philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=PhiloSOPHIA&oldid=1303037170 " Categories : Academic journals established in 2011 Biannual journals English-language journals Feminist journals Feminist philosophy Social philosophy journals SUNY Press academic journals Philosophy Documentation Center academic journals This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 19:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents philoSOPHIA 2 languages Add topic

