Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Residential examples Toggle Residential examples subsection 1.1 United States and Canada 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Real estate transaction 3 languages Монгол Suomi Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A real estate transaction is the process whereby rights in a unit of property (or designated real estate) are transferred between two or more parties, e.g. in the case of conveyance one party being the seller(s) and the other being the buyer(s). It can often be quite complicated due to the complexity of the property rights being transferred, the amount of money being exchanged, and government regulations. Conventions and requirements also vary considerably among different countries of the world and smaller legal entities ( jurisdictions ).

In more abstract terms, a real estate transaction, like other financial transactions , causes transaction costs . To identify and possibly reduce these transaction costs, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) addressed the issue [ 1 ] through a study commissioned by the European Commission, [ 2 ] and through a research action.

[ 3 ] The mentioned research action 'Modelling Real Property Transactions' investigated methods to describe selected transactions formally, to allow for comparisons across countries / jurisdictions . Descriptions were performed both using a more simple format, a Basic Use Case template, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and more advanced applications of the Unified Modelling Language .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Process models were compared through an ontology-based methodology, [ 8 ] and national property transaction costs were estimated for Finland and Denmark, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] based on the directions of the United Nations System of National Accounts .

[ 12 ] Real estate transactions: subdivision, conveyance, and mortgaging, as they are performed in the five Nordic countries are described in some detail.

[ 13 ] A translation into English is available for the Danish part.

[ 14 ] Residential examples [ edit ] United States and Canada [ edit ] The sale of a house in the United States or Canada might involve
some or all of the following steps: Hiring of a real estate broker the seller and handle the logistics of the advertising and sale, except for " for sale by owner " properties where the owner(s) may consult legal counsel or obtain copies of a real estate contract .

A buyer may enter the picture in a variety of ways: from seeing advertisements in the media, seeing signs outside a property, or contacting a real estate agent to see a property.

A buyer may engage the services of a real estate broker to represent her/him and handle the logistics of finding suitable properties, enabling him/her to become qualified to buy, and the showing of appropriate properties.

Advertisement of the price and property details with a Multiple Listing Service , newspaper or web classified listing, lawn sign , or poster in the real estate office.

Private showings or general open house for interested buyers or buyers' real estate agents.

Interested buyers may get pre-approval for a mortgage of a certain amount from a bank, if they cannot afford the full purchase price in the range they are exploring.

Preparation of a written offer to purchase.  If prepared by a real estate agent on behalf of the buyer, it is generally done on pre-printed and legally-approved forms provided by the real estate broker's office.  An agent representing the buyer will advise his/her client as to the value of including specific contingency clauses such as time to obtain a mortgage commitment or to arrange for inspections.

Upon acceptance of the sales contract, the buyer opens an escrow. An escrow commonly includes a signed agreement between the two parties plus an earnest money payment check which accompanies the offer, [ 15 ] and which is generally not deposited until all parties are in agreement. The escrow deposited then leads the seller to more property disclosures, inspections and conditions removal. This also leads to title search and further title reporting.

[ 16 ] Submission of offers by interested buyers. Multiple offers may result in bidding , with best offer (not necessarily the highest bid) being awarded the sale.  A single offer may often be below the initial asking price , resulting in negotiation between the buyer and seller over the final price, or possibly the rejection of the offer by the seller. When the seller refuses to negotiate with any buyer with a bid that is lower than the initial asking price, the situation is known as a holdout .

[ 17 ] After acceptance of a particular offer, a real estate contract is ratified by all parties.  It usually creates a short interim period (typically no more than 30 days, often much less) to allow the buyer to thoroughly inspect the property (often with the assistance of a professional home inspector).

Some states, such as New York, require that a seller provide a property condition disclosure statement to the buyer outlining in detail the full condition of the property.

Depending upon the jurisdiction and traditional practice, a title search is then ordered from a third party settlement or escrow company, pending final settlement.

An Appraisal , commissioned, as per custom, by the buyer or seller to determine the value of the building and land to satisfy the lender.

Depending upon how the contingency paragraphs are worded, if any defects are discovered during the inspection, the buyer may ask that they be repaired, ask that the sale price be lowered, or choose not to purchase the property.

The closing of the sale ends the escrow period and completes the transfer of ownership to the buyer. At this time, and all monies change hands and a number of closing costs are paid by the buyer or seller.

If a real estate broker is used in the transaction, closing is the time that payment is made to the brokers involved.

See also [ edit ] Listing contract References [ edit ] ^ "Improving Competition in Real Estate Transactions, 2007" . Oecd.org . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ "Conveyancing Services Market, 2007" .

Europa (web portal) . Archived from the original on 30 May 2013 . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Modelling Real Property Transactions, 2001–2005" . Cost.esf.org . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Alistair A.R. Cockburn: Basic use case template" . Alistair.cockburn.us. Archived from the original on 13 September 2008 . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ Default.

"WG Law and Modelling: UseCase descriptions of Subdivision Procedures, 2002" . Costg9.plan.aau.dk . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ "Ferlan, Sumrada and Mattsson: Modelling property transactions, pp. 27 – 79 in: Real Property Transactions. Procedures, Transaction Costs and Models. Edited by: J. Zevenbergen, A. Frank and E. Stubkjær" . Iospress.nl . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ "Immobiliengutachten" (in German) . Retrieved 11 February 2025 .

^ "Hess and Vaskovich: Ontology Engineering for Comparing Property Transactions, pp. 183 – 201, and Hess and Schlieder: Ontology-Based Development of Reference Processes, pp. 203- 219, both in: Real Property Transactions. Procedures, Transaction Costs and Models. Edited by: J. Zevenbergen, A. Frank and E. Stubkjær" . Iospress.nl . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ "Vitikainen: Transaction Costs Concerning Real Property – The Case of Finland, pp. 101 – 118 in: Real Property Transactions. Procedures, Transaction Costs and Models. Edited by: J. Zevenbergen, A. Frank and E. Stubkjær" . Iospress.nl . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ "Stubkjær: Accounting Costs of Transactions in Real Estate – The Case of Denmark. Nordic Journal of Surveying and Real Estate Research, 2:1 (2005) 11–36" . mts.fgi.fi. Archived from the original on 5 February 2009.

^ "Stubkjær, Lavrac and Gysting: Towards national real estate accounts: The case of Denmark and other European jurisdictions, pp. 119- 139 in: Real Property Transactions. Procedures, Transaction Costs and Models. Edited by: J. Zevenbergen, A. Frank and E. Stubkjær" . Iospress.nl . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ "UN System of National Accounts 1993" . mts.fgi.fi. Archived from the original on 13 August 2010.

^ "Ejendomsregistrering i de nordiske lande" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 June 2007 . Retrieved 17 February 2018 .

^ "Property formation in the Nordic countries – Denmark. National Survey and Cadastre (2008)" (PDF) .

^ "The Need for a Real Estate Escrow" (PDF) .

^ "Real Estate Buying and Selling Flowchart" .

^ Chung, Juliet (1 October 2010).

"The Holdouts" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 15 March 2014 .

v t e Real estate Property Tertiary sector By location Bangladesh Canada China Indonesia Italy Turkey Kenya Pakistan Panama Puerto Rico Russia Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Types Commercial property Commercial building Corporate Real Estate Extraterrestrial real estate International real estate Lease administration Niche real estate Garden real estate Healthcare real estate Vacation property Arable land Golf property Luxury real estate Off-plan property Private equity real estate Real estate owned Residential property Sectors Property management Real estate development Real estate investing Real estate flipping Relocation Law and regulation Adverse possession Chain of title Closing Concurrent estate Conditional sale Conveyancing Deed Eminent domain Encumbrance Foreclosure Just cause eviction Land law Land registration Leasehold estate Lease Property abstract Real estate transaction Real estate contract Real property Rent regulation Severance Torrens title Zoning Economics, financing and valuation Asset-based lending Capitalization rate Cash out refinancing Effective gross income Gross rent multiplier Hard money loan Highest and best use Home equity Home equity investments Home equity loan Home equity line of credit Investment rating for real estate Mortgage insurance Mortgage loan Negative equity Real estate derivative Real estate economics Real estate bubble Real estate valuation Remortgage Rental value Reverse mortgage Parties Appraiser Buyer agent Buyer broker Chartered Surveyor Exclusive buyer agent Land banking Landlord Moving company Property manager Real estate broker Real estate investment club Real estate investment trust Real property administrator Tenant Other Companies Eviction Filtering Gentrification Graduate real estate education Green belt Indices Industry trade groups Investment firms Land banking People Property cycle Real estate trends Undergraduate real estate programs Urban decay Urban planning List of housing markets by real estate prices Category Commons List of topics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Real_estate_transaction&oldid=1306200533 " Category : Real estate Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: unfit URL Use dmy dates from August 2021 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 13:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Real estate transaction 3 languages Add topic

