Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 2.1 Academic reviews 2.2 Popular press 3 References Toggle the table of contents Toward a Feminist Theory of the State Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1989 book by Catharine MacKinnon Toward a Feminist Theory of the State Cover of the first edition Author Catharine MacKinnon Language English Subject Feminist political theory Publisher Harvard University Press Publication date 1989 Publication place United States Media type Print (hardcover and paperback) Pages 330 ISBN 978-0-674-89645-1 OCLC 19589567 Toward a Feminist Theory of the State is a 1989 book about feminist political theory by the legal scholar Catharine MacKinnon .

Summary [ edit ] This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Toward a Feminist Theory of the State" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) MacKinnon argues that feminism had "no account of male power as an ordered yet deranged whole"; that is, a systematic account of the structural organization whereby male dominance is instantiated and enforced.  Although earlier writers, including Mary Wollstonecraft , Charlotte Perkins Gilman , and Simone de Beauvoir , had offered "a rich description of the variables and locales of sexism," they had not produced a general theory of structural exploitation based on sex-based hierarchy.

MacKinnon proposes Toward a Feminist Theory of the State [ 1 ] as an answer to this perceived problem.  MacKinnon takes Marxism as the theory's point of departure, arguing that unlike liberal theories, Marxism "confronts organized social dominance, analyzes it in dynamic rather than static terms, identifies social forces that systematically shape social imperatives, and seeks to explain social freedom both within and against history."  She elaborates: Marxism and feminism provide accounts of the way social arrangements of patterned and cumulative disparity can be internally rational and systematic yet unjust.  Both are theories of power, its social derivations and its maldistribution.  Both are theories of social inequality.  In unequal societies, gender and with it sexual desire and kinship structures, like value and with it acquisitiveness and the forms of property ownership, are considered presocial, part of the natural world, primordial or magical or aboriginal.  As Marxism exposes value as social creation, feminism exposes desire as socially relational, internally necessary to unequal social orders but historically contingent.

[ 2 ] MacKinnon rejects social reform that proceeds through pluralistic models of liberalism : "To proliferate 'feminisms' in the face of women's diversity is the latest attempt of liberal pluralism to evade the challenge women's reality poses to theory, simply because the theoretical forms those realities demand have yet to be created." According to MacKinnon, "Abortion opponents and proponents share a tacit assumption that women significantly control sex", that sexual intercourse is "coequally determined", without taking into account the overall context of non-consent, subordination, and violence within which intercourse commonly occurs. Rape, according to MacKinnon, "is adjudicated not according to the power or the force that a man yields, but according to indices of intimacy between the parties." [ citation needed ] Reception [ edit ] Academic reviews [ edit ] Emily Calhoun writes that many readers, including herself, "simply do not see domination rooted in sexuality as the central problem for women, especially to the exclusion or minimization of problems of equality, problems of the freedom to engage with others, [and] problems of individual growth. ... By rejecting persuasive methodologies simply because they have been used to secure the assent of women to the male experience and viewpoint, MacKinnon ultimately dooms her enterprise." [ 3 ] Jill Vickers accuses MacKinnon of failing to subject her theory to her own critique; that is, of not taking into account the plurality of contexts within which sexism occurs, thereby "globalizing and naturalizing the worst features of her own society." [ 4 ] Likewise, Zillah Eisenstein, editor of Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism (1978), writes that MacKinnon's "analysis of male power and the state appears overly determined and homogenous", ignoring that "liberal feminism has uncovered its own limitations via its own critiques of women of color, radical feminism, and so on." [ 5 ] Michael Meyer suggests that MacKinnon's critique of liberalism "indulges in overgeneralizations and clearly fails to address the diversity and complexity of liberal perspectives. She fails to engage with Ronald Dworkin's extensive, and well-known, discussion of this very issue." [ 6 ] Prominent queer theorist Judith Butler penned a harsh critique of MacKinnon's work, writing, "MacKinnon insists that feminism does not require prioritizing of oppressions, and that 'male domination' or ' patriarchy ' must be construed as the systemic and founding source of oppression for women. And though this may appear true for some economically advantaged white women, to universalize this presumption is to effect a set of erasures, to cover over or 'subordinate' women who 'are' sites of competing oppressions, and to legislate through a kind of theoretical imperialism feminist priorities that have produced resistances and factionalizations of various kinds." Hence, Butler logically concludes that MacKinnon is a "theological, imperializing Subject." [ 7 ] Similarly, Linda Nicholson rejects the homogenizing simplification of "women as a single entity", effectively erasing women who are not "white, Western, and middle-class." [ 8 ] Carrie Menkel-Meadow accuses MacKinnon of holding "tenaciously to an essentialist position", and of undertaking a "remarkably heterosexist analysis." [ 9 ] Kathryn Abrams echoes this critique, arguing that MacKinnon assimilates Native American women into a "cross-cultural constant" that is "solipsistic and even manipulative." In addition, Abrams calls MacKinnon's dominance theory "relentlessly removed from practical concerns." [ 10 ] Neil MacCormick detects " cultural imperialism " in MacKinnon's account of the law, wherein a "flat universality" of the United States occludes all other perspectives.

[ 11 ] Drucilla Cornell argues that MacKinnon's "reduction of feminine sexual difference to victimization ultimately cannot sustain a feminist theory of the state." According to Cornell, MacKinnon reduces "feminine sexuality to being a 'fuckee'", thereby reproducing the very "sexual shame" she had to intended to eliminate.

[ 12 ] Ruth Colker raises a similar concern, interpreting MacKinnon as "equating society with male domination." [ 13 ] Laura Robinson praises the book's "intriguing theoretical insights", while expressing concern that MacKinnon "simplifies all sex acts as rape".

[ 14 ] Judith Baer writes that Toward a Feminist Theory of the State "establishes MacKinnon as the preeminent figure within the scholarly subfield of feminist jurisprudence", although she takes issue with MacKinnon's assertion that the First Amendment protects pornography that "teaches men to degrade and dehumanize women ... Of course, it does not; constitutional doctrine puts obscene material outside the scope of freedom of expression and explicitly includes the preservation of individual morality among the state's legitimate concerns." [ 15 ] In Sex and Social Justice , philosopher Martha Nussbaum accepts MacKinnon's critique of abstract liberalism, assimilating the salience of history and context of group hierarchy and subordination, but concludes that this appeal is rooted in liberalism rather than a critique of it.  "Liberal philosophers," Nussbaum argues, "have rejected the purely formal notion of equality.  Liberals standardly grant that the equality of opportunity that individuals have a right to demand from their government has material prerequisites, and that these prerequisites may vary depending on one's situation in society." Nussbaum points out that John Rawls , among the most prominent liberal philosophers of the 20th-century, provides "ample resources" to consider contextual hierarchy.

[ 16 ] Popular press [ edit ] Reviews in the popular press were similarly mixed. Writing for The Nation , political scientist Wendy Brown lamented MacKinnon's "profoundly static world view and undemocratic, perhaps even anti-democratic, political sensibility." Brown called the work "flatly dated," developed at "the dawn of feminism's second wave ... framed by a political-intellectual context that no longer exists -- a male Marxist monopoly on radical social discourse." [ 17 ] Gloria Steinem , however, declared, [ when?

] "By exposing and correcting the patriarchal values underlying nationalism and justice, Catharine MacKinnon causes an earthquake in our thinking that rearranges every part of our intellectual landscape." [ 18 ] References [ edit ] ^ MacKinnon, Catharine A.

Toward a Feminist Theory of the State . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989.

^ Toward a Feminist Theory of the State .

Google Books ; retrieved 19 June 2014 ^ Calhoun, Emily M. "Re: Toward a Feminist Theory of the State." Frontier: A Journal of Women Studies 11.2 (1990): 120-21.

^ Vickers, Jill. "Re: Toward a Feminist Theory of the State", Canadian Journal of Political Science 23.1 (1990): 185-86.

^ Eisenstein, Zillah. "Re: Toward a Feminist Theory of the State", The American Political Science Review , 84.2 (1990): 635-637.

^ Meyer, Michael J. "Re: Toward a Feminist Theory of the State." Ethics 101.4 (1991): 881-883.

^ Butler, Judith. "Disorderly Woman".

Transitions 53.1 (1991): 86-95.

^ Nicholson, Linda. "A Radical's Odyssey", The Women's Review of Books 7.3 (1989): 11-12.

^ Menkel-Meadow, Carrie. "Re: Toward a Feminist Theory of the State", Signs 16.3 (1991): 603-06.

^ Abrams, Kathryn. "Re: Feminist Lawyering and Legal Method", Law & Social Inquiry , 16.2 (1991): 373-404.

^ MacCormick, Neil. "Re: Law, State, and Feminism: MacKinnon's Theses Considered", Law and Philosophy 10.4 (1991): 447-452.

^ Cornell, Drucilla. "Re: Sexual Difference, the Feminine, and Equivalency: A Critique of Catharine MacKinnon's Toward a Feminist Theory of the State", The Yale Law Journal 100.7 (1991): 2247-2275.

^ Colker, Ruth. "Re: Feminist Consciousness and the State: A Basis for Cautious Optimism", Columbia Law Review , 90.4 (1990): 1146-1170.

^ Robinson, Laura M. "Re: Toward a Feminist Theory of the State", The Canadian Journal of Sociology 18.1 (1993): 103-105.

^ Baer, Judith A.

"Re: Toward a Feminist Theory of the State", The Journal of Politics , 52.3 (1990): 1010-13.

^ Nussbaum, Martha C.

Sex & Social Justice.

New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. pp. 55-80.

^ Brown, Wendy. "Consciousness Razing", January 8, 1990.

^ Gloria Steinem quotation , University of Oklahoma; accessed September 16, 2015.

Archived June 6, 2010, at the Wayback Machine v t e Radical feminism People Wim Hora Adema Chude Pam Allen Ti-Grace Atkinson Kathleen Barry Rosalyn Baxandall Linda Bellos Julie Bindel Jenny Brown Judith Brown Susan Brownmiller Phyllis Chesler D. A. Clarke Nikki Craft Kimberlé Crenshaw Mary Daly Christine Delphy Gail Dines Andrea Dworkin Melissa Farley Shulamith Firestone Marilyn French Marilyn Frye Germaine Greer Carol Hanisch Merle Hoffman bell hooks Sheila Jeffreys Robert Jensen Lierre Keith Anne Koedt Marjorie Kramer Holly Lawford-Smith Audre Lorde Catharine A. MacKinnon Sheila Michaels Kate Millett Robin Morgan Meghan Murphy Irene Peslikis Janice Raymond Rosetta Reitz Adrienne Rich Florence Rush Kathie Sarachild Alix Kates Shulman Valerie Solanas Gloria Steinem John Stoltenberg Michele Wallace Marilyn Salzman Webb Ellen Willis Harriet Wistrich Monique Wittig Laura X Groups Cell 16 Chicago Women's Liberation Union Coalition Against Trafficking in Women Deep Green Resistance Lesbian Organization of Toronto Michigan Womyn's Music Festival Mountain Moving Coffeehouse New York Radical Feminists New York Radical Women Redstockings Stop Porn Culture The Feminists The Furies Collective WOMAD Women Against Pornography Women's Liberation Center Women's Liberation Front (WoLF) Issues 4 NOs Child sexual abuse False consciousness Feminism Lesbian Second wave Feminist separatism Feminist views on transgender topics Gender role Male privilege Patriarchy Political lesbianism Pornography Feminist views on pornography Postgenderism Prostitution Feminist views Reproductive rights Sexism Misogyny Internalized sexism Social construction of gender Violence against women Media Books The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution ( 1970) Sexual Politics (1970) Sisterhood Is Powerful (1970) " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm " (1970) The Female Eunuch (1970) Lesbian Nation (1973) Woman Hating (1974) Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (1974) Pornography: Men Possessing Women (1981) Ain't I a Woman?

(1981) Against Sadomasochism (1982) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) Sisterhood Is Global (1984) Intercourse (1987) Feminism Unmodified (1987) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) The Straight Mind and Other Essays (1992) Only Words (1993) Scapegoat: The Jews, Israel, and Women's Liberation (2000) Sisterhood Is Forever (2003) The Industrial Vagina (2008) Other Off Our Backs (1970–2008) SCUM Manifesto (1967) She's Beautiful When She's Angry (2014) Other Consciousness raising Herstory Miss America protest (1968) Radical lesbianism Womyn's land Feminism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Toward_a_Feminist_Theory_of_the_State&oldid=1267020823 " Categories : 1989 non-fiction books Books about Marxism Books by Catharine MacKinnon English-language non-fiction books Harvard University Press books Radical feminist books Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2022 All articles lacking reliable references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2016 This page was last edited on 3 January 2025, at 07:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Toward a Feminist Theory of the State Add languages Add topic

