Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Marketing 3 Prices 4 Usual structure 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Hardcover 27 languages العربية বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Simple English Српски / srpski ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book bound with a rigid protective cover For the film, see Hardcover (film) .

A typical hardcover book (1899), showing the wear signs of a cloth A hardcover , hard cover , or hardback (also known as hardbound , and sometimes as casebound [ 1 ] ) book is one bound with rigid protective covers (typically of binder's board or heavy paperboard covered with buckram or other cloth , heavy paper , or occasionally leather ).

[ 1 ] It has a flexible, sewn spine which allows the book to lie flat on a surface when opened.

[ 1 ] Modern hardcovers may have the pages glued onto the spine in much the same way as paperbacks.

[ 1 ] Following the ISBN sequence numbers, books of this type may be identified by the abbreviation Hbk .

Overview [ edit ] Hardcover books are often printed on acid-free paper , and they are much more durable than paperbacks , which have flexible, easily damaged paper covers.  Hardcover books are marginally more costly to manufacture.  Hardcovers are frequently protected by artistic dust jackets , but a "jacketless" alternative has increased in popularity: these "paper-over-board" or "jacketless" hardcover bindings forgo the dust jacket in favor of printing the cover design directly onto the board binding.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Marketing [ edit ] If brisk sales are anticipated, a hardcover edition of a book is typically released first, followed by a "trade" paperback edition (same format as hardcover) the next year. Some publishers publish paperback originals if slow hardback sales are anticipated. For very popular books these sales cycles may be extended, and followed by a mass market paperback edition typeset in a more compact size and printed on thinner, less hardy paper. This is intended to, in part, prolong the life of the immediate buying boom that occurs for some best sellers: After the attention to the book has subsided, a lower-cost version in the paperback, is released to sell further copies. In the past the release of a paperback edition was one year after the hardback, but by the early 21st century paperbacks were released six months after the hardback by some publishers.

[ 4 ] It is very unusual for a book that was first published in paperback to be followed by a hardback. One example is the novel The Judgment of Paris by Gore Vidal , which had its revised edition of 1961 first published in paperback, and later in hardcover.

[ 5 ] Prices [ edit ] Hardcover books are usually sold at higher prices than comparable paperbacks. Books for the general public are usually printed in hardback only for authors who are expected to be successful, or as a precursor to the paperback to predict sale levels; however, many academic books are often only published in hardcover editions.

Usual structure [ edit ] Hardcovers usually consist of a page block, two boards, and a cloth or heavy paper covering.

[ 1 ] The pages are sewn together and glued onto a flexible spine between the boards, and it too is covered by the cloth.

[ 1 ] A paper wrapper, or dust jacket, is usually put over the binding, folding over each horizontal end of the boards. Dust jackets serve to protect the underlying cover from wear. On the folded part, or flap, over the front cover is generally a blurb , or a summary of the book. The back flap is where the biography of the author can be found. Reviews are often placed on the back of the jacket. Many modern bestselling hardcover books use a partial cloth cover, with a cloth-covered board on the spine only, and only boards covering the rest of the book.

Gallery [ edit ] Old hardcover books at the Merton College library Dust jacket on a hardcover book A King James Bible bound in blue faux-leather cloth Hardbound book with half leather binding (spine and corners) and marbled boards Contemporary hardcover, with partial cloth cover, on the spine only, and boards for the rest See also [ edit ] Book size Softcover References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Pearson, David (2013).

"Chapter 19: Bookbinding" . In Suarez, S.J., Michael F.; Woudhuysen, H. R.

(eds.).

The Book: A Global History (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

245– 257.

ISBN 9780191668746 . Retrieved June 18, 2024 .

(At p. 247.) ^ Post, Chad W. (2009-06-22).

"In Praise of Paper-Over-Board - Publishing Perspectives" .

Publishing Perspectives . Retrieved 2013-05-07 .

^ Neyfakh, Leon (2009-08-24).

"The New Thing: Books Without Jackets" .

Observer . Retrieved 2013-05-07 .

^ Bosman, Julie (26 July 2011).

"E-Books Accelerate Paperback Publishers' Release Dates" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 14 May 2011 .

^ "The Early Fiction of Gore Vidal: 1946-1956" . Archived from the original on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2017-05-14 .

v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal v t e Book publishing process Copy preparation Submission Literary agent Publisher's reader Contract negotiation intellectual property rights royalty rates, format, etc.

Editing Literary editor Commissioning editor Developmental editor Authors' editor Book editor Copy editing Prepress Design Indexing Typesetting Proof-reading List of proofreader's marks Book production Printing Folding Binding Trimming Imprint Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hardcover&oldid=1304328311 " Categories : Book formats Book covers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 10:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hardcover 27 languages Add topic

