Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Evolution of concept 2 Literary offshoots 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Sublunary sphere 12 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Čeština Español فارسی Italiano Norsk bokmål Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Region in the geocentric cosmos below the Moon This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Simplified outline of the sublunary sphere.

In Aristotelian physics and Greek astronomy , the sublunary sphere is the region of the geocentric cosmos below the Moon , consisting of the four classical elements : earth , water , air , and fire .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The sublunary sphere was the realm of changing nature. Beginning with the Moon, up to the limits of the universe, everything (to classical astronomy) was permanent, regular and unchanging—the region of aether where the planets and stars are located. Only in the sublunary sphere did the powers of physics hold sway.

[ 3 ] Evolution of concept [ edit ] The seven heavens and the sublunar spheres, from an engraving of Albertus Magnus ' Philosophia naturalis .

Plato and Aristotle helped to formulate the original theory of a sublunary sphere in antiquity, [ 4 ] [ missing long citation ] the idea usually going hand in hand with geocentrism and the concept of a spherical Earth .

Avicenna carried forward into the Middle Ages the Aristotelian idea of generation and corruption being limited to the sublunary sphere.

[ 5 ] Medieval scholastics like Thomas Aquinas , who charted the division between celestial and sublunary spheres in his work Summa Theologica , also drew on Cicero and Lucan for an awareness of the great frontier between Nature and Sky, sublunary and aetheric spheres.

[ 6 ] The result for medieval/Renaissance mentalities was a pervasive awareness of the existence, at the Moon, of what C. S. Lewis called "this 'great divide' ... from aether to air, from 'heaven' to 'nature', from the realm of gods (or angels) to that of daemons, from the realm of necessity to that of contingence, from the incorruptible to the corruptible".

[ citation needed ] However, the theories of Copernicus began to challenge the sublunary/aether distinction. In their wake, Tycho Brahe 's observations of a new star (nova) and of comets in the supposedly unchanging heavens further undermined the Aristotelian view.

[ 7 ] Thomas Kuhn saw scientists' new ability to see change in the 'incorruptible' heavens as a classic example of the new possibilities opened up by a paradigm shift.

[ 8 ] Literary offshoots [ edit ] Dante envisaged Mt Purgatory as being so high that it reached above the sublunary sphere, so that "These slopes are free from every natural change".

[ 9 ] Samuel Johnson praised Shakespeare's plays as "exhibiting the real state of sublunary nature, which partakes of good and evil, joy and sorrow, intermingled".

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Celestial spheres Firmament Sphere of fire Unmoved mover References [ edit ] ^ Aristotle, Ethics (1974) p. 357–58 ^ Stephen Toulmin, Night Sky at Rhodes (1963) p. 38 and p. 78 ^ C. C. Gillespie, The Edge of Objectivity (1960) p. 14 ^ Gillespie, pp. 13–15 ^ J. J. E. Garcia, Individuation in Scholasticism (1994) p. 41 ^ W. Hooper, C. S. Lewis (1996) pp. 529–531 ^ R. Curley, Scientists and Inventors of the Renaissance (2012) pp. 6–8 ^ Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1970) pp. 116–17 ^ Dante, Purgatory (1971), p. 235 ^ Samuel Johnson, Selected Writings , Penguin, p. 266 Further reading [ edit ] J. Barnes, Aristotle (1982) M. A. Orr, Dante and the Medieval Astronomers (1956) Thomas Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution (1957) External links [ edit ] The Geocentric or Ptolemaic Notion of the Universe v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sublunary_sphere&oldid=1268605031 " Categories : Ancient Greek astronomy Obsolete theories in physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with incomplete citations from January 2025 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 This page was last edited on 10 January 2025, at 16:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sublunary sphere 12 languages Add topic

