Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods Toggle Methods subsection 1.1 Nature reserves 1.2 National parks 1.3 Wildlife sanctuaries 1.4 Biodiversity hotspots 1.5 Gene sanctuary 2 Benefits 3 Reserves 4 Agriculture 5 In India 6 In China 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents In-situ conservation 11 languages বাংলা Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Magyar 日本語 Polski Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from In situ conservation ) Conservation process This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "In-situ conservation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In-situ conservation is the on-site conservation or the conservation of genetic resources in natural populations of plant or animal species, such as forest genetic resources in natural populations of tree species.

[ 1 ] This process protects the inhabitants and ensures the sustainability of the environment and ecosystem.

Its converse is ex situ conservation , where threatened species are moved to another location. These can include places like seed libraries, gene banks and more where they are protected through human intervention.

[ 2 ] Methods [ edit ] Nature reserves [ edit ] Waterton Biosphere Reserve in Canada Nature reserves (or biosphere reserves) cover very large areas, often more than 5,000 km 2 (1,900 sq mi). They are used to protect species for a long time. There are three different classifications for these reserves: Strict Natural Areas Managed Natural Areas Wilderness Areas Strict natural areas are creates to protect the state of nature in a given region. It is not made for the purpose of protecting any species within its limits. managed natural areas alternatively are made specifically for the purpose of protecting a certain species or community that is at the point it may be at risk being in a strict natural area. This is a more controlled environment that is created to be the most optimal habitat for the species concerned to thrive. Finally, a wilderness area serves a dual purpose of providing a protection for the natural region as well as providing recreational opportunities for patrons (excluding motorized transport).

[ 3 ] National parks [ edit ] A national park is an area dedicated for the conservation of wildlife along with its environment. A national park is an area which is used to conserve scenery, natural and historical objects. It is usually a small reserve covering an area of about 100 to 500 km 2 (40 to 200 sq mi). Within biosphere reserves, one or more national parks may also exist.

Wildlife sanctuaries [ edit ] Wildlife sanctuaries can provide a higher quality of life for animals who are moved there. These animals are placed in specialized habitats that allows for more species-specific behaviors to take place. Wildlife sanctuaries are often used for animals that have been in zoos, circuses, laboratories and more for a long time, and then live the rest of their lives with greater autonomy in these habitats.

[ 4 ] Biodiversity hotspots [ edit ] Biodiversity hotspots across the world Several international organizations focus their conservation work on areas designated as biodiversity hotspots .

According to Conservation International , to qualify as a biodiversity hotspot a region must meet two strict criteria: it must contain at least 1,500 species of vascular plants (∆ 0.5% of the world's total) as endemics, it has to have lost at least 70% of its original habitat.

Biodiversity hotspots make up 1.4% of the earth's land area, yet they contain more than half of our planets species.

[ 5 ] Gene sanctuary [ edit ] A gene sanctuary is an area where plants are conserved. It includes both biosphere reserves as well as national parks.  Biosphere reserves are developed to be both a place for biodiversity conservation as well as sustainable development.  The concept was first developed in the 1970s and include a core, buffer and transition zones.  These zones act together to harmonize the conservation and development aspects of the biosphere.

[ 6 ] Since 2004, and 30 years following the invention of the biosphere reserve concept, there have been about 459 conservation areas developed in 97 countries.

[ 7 ] Benefits [ edit ] One benefit of in situ conservation is that it maintains recovering populations in the environment where they have developed their distinctive properties. Another benefit is that this strategy helps ensure the ongoing processes of evolution and adaptation within their environments. As a last resort, ex situ conservation may be used on some or all of the population, when in situ conservation is too difficult, or impossible. The species gets adjusted to the natural disasters like drought, floods, forest fires and this method is very cheap and convenient.

Reserves [ edit ] Wildlife and livestock conservation involves the protection of wildlife habitats. Sufficiently large reserves must be maintained to enable the target species to exist in large numbers. The population size must be sufficient to enable the necessary genetic diversity to survive, so that it has a good chance of continuing to adapt and evolve over time. This reserve size can be calculated for target species by examining the population density in naturally occurring situations. The reserves must then be protected from intrusion or destruction by man, and against other catastrophes.

Agriculture [ edit ] In agriculture , in situ conservation techniques are an effective way to improve, maintain, and use traditional or native varieties of agricultural crops. Such methodologies link the positive output of scientific research with farmers' experience and field work.

First, the accessions of a variety stored at a germplasm bank and those of the same variety multiplied by farmers are jointly tested in the producers field and in the laboratory, under different situations and stresses. Thus, the scientific knowledge about the production characteristics of the native varieties is enhanced. Later, the best tested accessions are crossed, mixed, and multiplied under replicable situations. At last, these improved accessions are supplied to the producers. Thus, farmers are enabled to crop improved selections of their own varieties, instead of being lured to substitute their own varieties with commercial ones or to abandon their crop. This technique of conservation of agricultural biodiversity is more successful in marginal areas, where commercial varieties are not expedient, due to climate and soil fertility constraints, or where the taste and cooking characteristics of traditional varieties compensate for their lower yields.

[ 8 ] In India [ edit ] About 4% of the total geographical area of India is used for in situ conservation.

There are 18 biosphere reserves in India , including Nanda Devi in Uttarakhand, Nokrek in Meghalaya, Manas National Park in Assam and Sundarban in West Bengal.

There are 106 national parks in India , including The Kaziranga National Park which conserves The one-horned rhino , Periyar National Park conserving the tiger and elephant, and Ranthambore National Park conserving the tiger.

There are 551 wildlife sanctuaries in India .

Biodiversity hotspots include the Himalayas , the Western Ghats , the Indo-Burma region [ 9 ] and the Sundaland .

India has set up its first gene sanctuary in the Garo Hills of Meghalaya for wild relatives of citrus. Efforts are also being made to set up gene sanctuaries for banana, sugarcane, rice and mango.

Community reserves were established as a type of protected area in India in the Wildlife Protection Amendment Act 2002, to provide legal support to community or privately owned reserves which cannot be designated as national park or wildlife sanctuary.

Sacred groves are tracts of forest set aside where all the trees and wildlife within are venerated and given total protection.

In China [ edit ] China has up to [ clarification needed ] 2538 nature reserves covering 15% of the country.

The majority of in situ conservation areas are concentrated in the regions of Tibet , Qinghai , and Xinjiang . These provinces, all in western China, account for about 56% of the country's nature reserves.

Eastern and southern China contain 90% of the country's population, and there are few nature reserves in these areas. In these regions, nature reserves actively compete with human development projects to support a growing demand for infrastructure. One consequence of this competing development has been the movement of the South China tiger out of its natural habitat.

In eastern and southern China, many undeveloped natural landscapes are fragmented; however, nature reserves may provide crucial refuge for key species and ecosystem services.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Arid Forest Research Institute Biodiversity Food plot – the practice of planting crops specifically to support wildlife Genetic erosion Habitat corridor Habitat fragmentation Refuge (ecology) Reintroduction Regional Red List Restoration ecology Wildlife corridor References [ edit ] ^ Negi, Sharad Singh (1 January 1993).

Biodiversity and Its Conservation in India . Indus Publishing. p. 40.

ISBN 9788185182889 .

^ Curry, Helen Anne (December 2019).

"Gene Banks, Seed Libraries, and Vegetable Sanctuaries: The Cultivation and Conservation of Heritage Vegetables in Britain, 1970–1985" .

Culture, Agriculture, Food and Environment .

41 (2): 87– 96.

doi : 10.1111/cuag.12239 .

ISSN 2153-9553 .

PMC 6999659 .

PMID 32051769 .

^ Dasmann, R.F (1973).

"Classification and use of protected natural and cultural areas" (PDF) .

^ Doyle, Catherine (1 January 2017).

"Captive Wildlife Sanctuaries: Definition, Ethical Considerations and Public Perception" .

Animal Studies Journal .

6 (2): 55– 85.

ISSN 2201-3008 .

^ Trew, Brittany T.; Maclean, Ilya M. D. (April 2021). McGill, Brian (ed.).

"Vulnerability of global biodiversity hotspots to climate change" .

Global Ecology and Biogeography .

30 (4): 768– 783.

doi : 10.1111/geb.13272 .

hdl : 10871/124936 .

ISSN 1466-822X .

^ Van Cuong, Chu; Dart, Peter; Hockings, Marc (1 March 2017).

"Biosphere reserves: Attributes for success" .

Journal of Environmental Management .

188 : 9– 17.

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.11.069 .

ISSN 0301-4797 .

PMID 27918925 .

^ Francis, George (1 January 2004).

"Biosphere Reserves in Canada: Ideals and some experience" .

Environments: A Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies .

32 (3): 2.

^ G. Avila, L. Guzmán, M. Céspedes 2004.

Estrategias para la conservación in situ de razas de maíz boliviano . SINALERC, Mar del Plata ^ WILDLIFE INSTITUTE OF INDIA DEHRADUN ^ Wu, Ruidong; Zhang, Shuang; Yu, Douglas W; Zhao, Peng; Li, Xinhai; Wang, Longzhu; Yu, Qian; Ma, Jian; Chen, Ai; Long, Yongcheng (September 2011).

"Effectiveness of China's nature reserves in representing ecological diversity" .

Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment .

9 (7): 383– 389.

doi : 10.1890/100093 .

ISSN 1540-9295 .

Further reading [ edit ] Scheldeman, X.; van Zonneveld, M. (2010).

Training Manual on Spatial Analysis of Plant Diversity and Distribution . Bioversity International. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011.

External links [ edit ] In-Situ Conservation, The Convention on Biological Diversity Ex-Situ Conservation, The Convention on Biological Diversity IUCN/SSC Re-introduction Specialist Group IUCN Red List of Threatened Species The Convention on Biological Diversity In situ conservation Guidelines: In vivo conservation of animal genetic resources, Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category v t e Zoos , aquariums , and aviaries Types of zoos Animal sanctuary Animal theme park Aquarium Aviary Bear pit Butterfly house Dolphinarium Herpetarium Insectarium Nature center Marine mammal park Menagerie Oceanarium Penguinarium Pheasantry Petting zoo Reptile centre Safari park Virtual zoo Vivarium Zoo Conservation Biodiversity Captive breeding Conservation biology Endangered species Ex situ conservation In situ conservation Species reintroduction Lists Zoos Aquariums largest Animal sanctuaries Butterfly houses Dolphinariums Conservation topics Former zoos and aquariums Nature centers Zoo associations WAZA members Related Animal rights Animal cruelty Animals in captivity Animal training Behavioral enrichment Frozen zoo Immersion exhibit Nocturnal house Wildlife conservation Zookeeper Zoo emergency response team Zoo key Zoological society Zoology Animals portal Category: Zoos Category: Aquariums Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=In-situ_conservation&oldid=1295815012 " Categories : Conservation biology Ecological restoration Environmental design Environmental conservation Hidden categories: Use Indian English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2019 Articles needing additional references from November 2017 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2024 This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 01:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents In-situ conservation 11 languages Add topic

