Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Setting 2 Characters 3 Critical reception and influence 4 References Toggle the table of contents Bridge trilogy 4 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Three novels (1993–1999) by William Gibson The Bridge trilogy is a series of novels by William Gibson , his second after the successful Sprawl trilogy . The trilogy comprises the novels Virtual Light (1993), Idoru (1996) and All Tomorrow's Parties (1999). A short story, " Skinner's Room ", was originally composed for Visionary San Francisco , a 1990 museum exhibition exploring the future of San Francisco.

Setting [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The titular Bridge , pre-quake The first book of the Bridge trilogy is set in an imaginary 2006, with the subsequent books set a few years later.

[ 1 ] The books deal with the race to control the beginnings of cyberspace technology and are set on the United States ' West coast in a post- earthquake California (divided into the separate states of NoCal and SoCal), as well as a post- earthquake Tokyo , Japan , that had been rebuilt using nanotechnology .

[ citation needed ] The trilogy derives its name from the San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge , because in the trilogy it was abandoned in an earthquake and has become a massive shantytown and site of improvised shelter.

[ citation needed ] The bridge is a pivotal location in Virtual Light and All Tomorrow's Parties .

[ citation needed ] Characters in each novel interact in a cyberspace construct of Kowloon Walled City , which is initially described as an inverted kill file .

[ citation needed ] The walled city shares a number of features with the bridge itself, including an emphasis on self-governance and efficiency in user-construction.

[ citation needed ] Characters [ edit ] The novels of the Bridge trilogy loosely share a common cast of characters. Former police officer Berry Rydell and bicycle courier Chevette Washington occupy central roles in the first and third novels. Researcher Colin Laney, who has a mysterious ability to identify patterns in vast tracts of information, appears in Idoru and All Tomorrow's Parties . Other recurring characters include Rei Toei, an AI pop star, and Shinya Yamazaki, an existential sociologist.

Critical reception and influence [ edit ] Canadian Poet Douglas Barbour said of the trilogy that it "has all the stylistic verve of his earlier work, but it asks some tougher questions, explores character more deeply, and savagely interrogates our star-obsessed society." [ 2 ] Virtual Light , the first novel in the series, was nominated for both the Hugo and Locus Awards in 1994.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Book Expo America Luncheon Talk, William Gibson's blog, May 31, 2010 Archived June 4, 2010, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Seed, David (2005).

A Companion to Science Fiction . Blackwell Publishing Professional. p. 314.

ISBN 1-4051-1218-2 .

^ "1994 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End . Retrieved 2009-07-17 .

v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bridge_trilogy&oldid=1276366688 " Categories : Bridge trilogy Cyberpunk novels Novels by William Gibson Novels set in the San Francisco Bay Area Science fiction book series Science fiction novel trilogies Works set in Kowloon Walled City Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 12:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bridge trilogy 4 languages Add topic

