Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 19th century 1.2 20th century 2 References Toggle the table of contents Goldwin Smith Hall Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°26′57″N 76°29′0″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44917°N 76.48333°W ﻿ / 42.44917; -76.48333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic Building in New York, U.S.

Goldwin Smith Hall Cornell University Goldwin Smith Hall at Cornell University in November, 2005 General information Type Academic Building Architectural style Neoclassical Location Ithaca, New York , U.S.

Address 232 Feeney Wy, Ithaca, NY 14850 Coordinates 42°26′57″N 76°29′0″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44917°N 76.48333°W ﻿ / 42.44917; -76.48333 Opened 1906 Cost $368,989 Owner Cornell University Design and construction Architect(s) Carrere and Hastings Website https://registrar.cornell.edu/taxonomy/term/596 Goldwin Smith Hall is an academic building located at the center of the eastern side of the Arts Quad on the campus of Cornell University .

History [ edit ] 19th century [ edit ] The north wing of present-day Goldwin Smith Hall was originally constructed in 1893.

[ 1 ] Designed by Charles F. Osborne, it housed he College of Agriculture Dairy Science Building.

[ 1 ] This wing was preserved and incorporated into the final design of the building.

[ 1 ] 20th century [ edit ] Goldwin Smith Hall was dedicated on June 19, 1906, to its namesake Goldwin Smith , who placed the cornerstone for the building himself in 1904.

[ 2 ] At the time Goldwin Smith Hall was the largest building on campus and was the first home to the College of Arts and Sciences .

[ 2 ] The building was completed at a construction cost of $368,989 at the time by architects Carrere and Hastings, funded by the trustees of the university.

[ 1 ] Goldwin Smith (center) and Andrew Dickson White (center right) at the opening of Goldwin Smith Hall, 1906.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Cornell University: Goldwin Smith Hall" . MIT Libraries . Retrieved February 8, 2025 .

^ a b "New Building Dedicated" (PDF) .

Cornell Alumni News . Vol. VIII, no. 37. June 1906. p. 443 . Retrieved February 8, 2025 .

v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Goldwin_Smith_Hall&oldid=1276770127 " Categories : Cornell University buildings Buildings and structures completed in the 20th century University and college academic buildings in the United States Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 20 February 2025, at 17:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Goldwin Smith Hall Add languages Add topic

