Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Foundation 1.2 Collegiate Status 2 Buildings and grounds Toggle Buildings and grounds subsection 2.1 Norfolk Building 2.2 Chapel 2.3 Expansion 2.4 Okinaga Tower 2.5 Courts and other buildings 3 Gallery 4 Academic profile 5 Student life 6 Controversy Toggle Controversy subsection 6.1 Noah Carl appointment 7 People associated with the college Toggle People associated with the college subsection 7.1 Alumni 7.2 Fellows 7.3 Honorary Fellows 7.4 List of Masters of St Edmund's College 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents St Edmund's College, Cambridge 10 languages Cymraeg Deutsch Français Italiano Latina Русский Simple English Suomi اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′46″N 0°06′33″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2127°N 0.1093°E ﻿ / 52.2127; 0.1093 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia College of the University of Cambridge St Edmund's College University of Cambridge College Chapel and Norfolk Building with Okinaga Tower in the background Arms of St Edmund's College Arms: Arms of Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk (quarterly of four: Howard, Brotherton , Warenne , FitzAlan ) with a canton of St Edmund of Abingdon (Or, a cross fleury gules between four Cornish choughs proper [ 1 ] ) all within a bordure argent Scarf colours: blue, with two equally-spaced narrow stripes of Cambridge blue edged with white Location Mount Pleasant, Cambridge ( map ) Full name The Master, Fellows and Scholars of St Edmund’s College in the University of Cambridge Latin name Collegium Sancti Edmundi Abbreviation ED [ 2 ] Motto Per Revelationem et Rationem ( Latin ) Founders Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk Baron Anatole von Hügel Established 1896 Named after Edmund of Abingdon Previous names St Edmund's House Age restriction 21 and older Sister college Green Templeton College, Oxford Master Chris Young Undergraduates 188 (2022–23) Postgraduates 528 (2022–23) Endowment £ 18.1m (2019) [ 3 ] Visitor Vincent Nichols , Archbishop of Westminster Website www .st-edmunds .cam .ac .uk CR www .cr .st-edmunds .cam .ac .uk Map Location in Central Cambridge Show map of Central Cambridge Location in Cambridge Show map of Cambridge St Edmund's College is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge in England. Founded in 1896, it is the second-oldest of the three Cambridge colleges oriented to mature students, which accept only students reading for postgraduate degrees or for undergraduate degrees if aged 21 years or older.

Named after St Edmund of Abingdon (1175–1240), who was the first known Oxford Master of Arts and Archbishop of Canterbury from 1234 to 1240, the college has Catholic roots. Its founders were Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk , and Baron Anatole von Hügel (1854–1928), the first Catholic to take a Cambridge degree since the deposition of King James II in 1688.

[ 4 ] The Visitor is the Archbishop of Westminster (at present Cardinal Vincent Nichols ).

[ 5 ] The college is located on Mount Pleasant, northwest of the centre of Cambridge , near Lucy Cavendish College , Murray Edwards College and Fitzwilliam College . Its campus consists of a garden setting on the edge of what was Roman Cambridge, with housing for more than 350 students.

Members of St Edmund's include cosmologist and Big Bang theorist Georges Lemaître , Norman St John-Stevas , Archbishop Eamon Martin , of Armagh , Bishop John Petit of Menevia , and Olympic medalists Simon Schürch (Gold), Thorsten Streppelhoff (Silver), Marc Weber (Silver), Stuart Welch (Silver) and Simon Amor (Silver). St Edmund's was the residential hall of the university's first Catholic students in 200 years – most of whom were studying for the priesthood – after the lifting of the papal prohibition on attendance at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge in 1895 at the urging of a delegation to Pope Leo XIII led by Baron von Hügel.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Foundation [ edit ] St Edmund's House was founded in 1896 by Henry Fitzalan-Howard, the 15th Duke of Norfolk , and Baron Anatole von Hügel as an institution providing board and lodging for Roman Catholic students at the University of Cambridge.

After Catholic Emancipation , in particular after the Universities Tests Act 1871 , students who were Roman Catholics were admitted as members of Oxford and Cambridge universities. However, the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith decreed that it would be next to impossible for the ancient English universities to be frequented without mortal sin, stressing the dangers of an increasing atmosphere of liberalism and scepticism.

[ 7 ] This decision was met with public outcry from the wealthy laity, who wished for their sons to attend Oxbridge colleges.

[ 8 ] After a petition led by Anatole von Hügel, this ban was lifted in 1895 by Pope Leo XIII with the condition that a chaplain be appointed, a library with Catholic books be founded, and public lectures on philosophy, history and religion be established.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] As a result, the Universities Catholic Education Board (later Oxford and Cambridge Catholic Education Board ) was founded and Edmund Nolan was appointed Chaplain. The Duke of Norfolk purchased property in Cambridge and the Cambridge University Catholic Chaplaincy was established at St Edmund's House in November 1886.

[ 9 ] In its early days the college functioned predominantly as a lodging house, or hall of residence , for students who were matriculated at other colleges. Most of the students, at that time, were ordained Catholic priests who were reading various subjects offered by the University. The college was established in the buildings of Ayerst Hostel, which had been set up for non-collegiate students by the Anglican priest William Ayerst in 1884.

[ 6 ] In 1896 Ayerst Hostel closed due to lack of funds, and the property was transferred to the Catholic Church.

[ 11 ] The founding master of St Edmund's House was Edmund Nolan, then vice-rector of St Edmund's College, Ware .

[ 6 ] Collegiate Status [ edit ] Attempts to have St Edmund's House become a constituent college of the University of Cambridge were undertaken at various junctures, but were met in pre-ecumenical days by continuing opposition from the predominantly Protestant membership of the university’s governing Regent House . Among motives cited were that the college was not self-governing and its assets were held in trust by an external body, namely, the Catholic Church.

[ 12 ] The chapel was consecrated in 1916 by Cardinal Francis Bourne, Archbishop of Westminster .

[ 13 ] A new dining hall was constructed in 1939 and the membership of the college increased steadily as it became a recognised House of Residence of the university, without college status.

In response to growing postgraduate student numbers in the early 1960s, the Regent House of the university established several Colleges primarily for postgraduate students, and St Edmund's House became one of the graduate Colleges in the University (the others being Wolfson College , Hughes Hall , Clare Hall and Darwin College ). This spurred further progress regarding St Edmund's status within the University, and in 1965, the College was permitted to matriculate its own students and new fellows were elected. In 1975 St Edmund's acquired the status of an "Approved Foundation", and after the transfer of the College assets from the Catholic Church to the autonomous governing body comprising the Masters and Fellows of the College in 1986, the College changed its name from "St Edmund's House" to "St Edmund's College". It received university approval for full collegiate status in 1996, and this was confirmed by the grant of its royal charter in 1998.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The college now accepts students of all faiths and none.

Buildings and grounds [ edit ] Aerial view of the college Norfolk Building [ edit ] The Norfolk Building is the oldest building on site, dating back to 1896 as the former Ayerst Hostel; it provided accommodation for Edmund Nolan, the first Master of St Edmund's, along with the first four students of the college.

[ 16 ] Known for its clean Gothic Revival style, the building underwent a three-phase extension scheme designed by Roderick Gradidge in 1989, and now houses amenities including the Combination Room, Dining Hall, Kitchens and a Porter's office.

[ 17 ] Chapel [ edit ] College Chapel The chapel is a Grade II listed building designed by the architect Benedict Williamson CSSP and was consecrated by Cardinal Francis Bourne , Archbishop of Westminster in 1916.

[ 13 ] Notable for its simplicity and Gothic Revival architecture , the chapel is a Catholic foundation, although it is open to members of other Christian denominations.

[ 18 ] In 2003, a stained-glass window depicting the ministry of Saint Boniface of Crediton (c. 675 - 754 AD), the apostle to Germany , was donated by Stephen Frowen and blessed by Cardinal Cormac Murphy-O'Connor , Archbishop of Westminster .

[ 18 ] A bronze sculpture of the college patron, St Edmund of Abingdon , is located at the front of the chapel, his left-hand holding a Bible . The statue is the work of Rodney Munday, an alumnus of St Edmund Hall, Oxford , and was commissioned by the College in 2007.

[ 18 ] The Chapel Schola and Choir perform in concerts in collaboration with St Edmund Hall, Oxford and St Edmund's College, Ware in commemoration of their Patron Saint.

Expansion [ edit ] St Edmund's continues to expand and develop its buildings. In 2000, a new residential building housing 50 students was opened, named after Richard Laws, one of the former Masters. In 2006, two new residential buildings, including rooms for 70 students as well as apartments for couples, were opened; these were named after the former Master of the College, Sir Brian Heap, and the former Vice-Master, Geoffrey Cook.

In 2016, major plans were announced for the development of two new courts and several buildings. It was planned that brick buildings would form the perimeter of two new courts and a new multi-million pound student centre will frame the west side of the College. The expansion plans received planning consent from Cambridge City Council in June 2017, but building work never started.

[ 19 ] [ circular reference ] Okinaga Tower [ edit ] Created in 1993 by the bequest of the Teikyo Foundation, the Okinaga Tower is the college's tallest structure. Designed by architect Roderick Gradidge in 1989 it houses the Master's Lodge, as well as a suite with views of the city and was opened by Betty Boothroyd , Speaker of the House of Commons .

[ 17 ] Courts and other buildings [ edit ] The Brian Heap, Richard Laws, Geoffrey Cook and the Luizo buildings were constructed to accommodate growing student numbers in the 2000s, with most buildings providing are student dormitories.

In 2019 the college constructed Mount Pleasant Halls, occupying the site of a substantial office block formerly on the site and giving St Edmund College a frontage to the main thoroughfare of Huntington Road.

The College Sporting Grounds is located west of the Richard Laws Building, and offers a full-sized football pitch for college sports and other outdoor activities.

White Cottage with Mount Pleasant Halls in the background The College Orchard is south of the Sporting Grounds, and consists of a small lawn with 5 apple trees, outdoor seating, and a barbecue pit for students.

White Cottage is a modest 18th-century brick farmhouse which pre-dates the college buildings on the site and is painted white, situated adjacent to Mount Pleasant Halls against which it appears an incongruous survival. White Cottage was the first home of the Von Hugel Institute , a Catholic Institute for Critical Enquiry working in the fields of Christianity and society. The Institute was founded in 1987 to preserve the Roman Catholic legacy of the College when control of the College itself was ceded to its autonomous Governing Body in 1985 in order to achieve university collegiate status.

[ 20 ] Bene't House is a detached Edwardian house, south-east of the Norfolk Old Wing. Named after St Benedict of Nursia (c.480 - 547 AD), it was controversially converted from student accommodation into a residence for the master using donated funds originally intended for the enhancement of the student experience.

[ 21 ] Gallery [ edit ] Mount Pleasant Halls front facade Mount Pleasant Halls Court Main gate Sporting grounds and Brian Heap Building Richard Laws Building Geoffrey Cook Building College orchards Maisonettes, now used as offices Norfolk Extension Bene't House Academic profile [ edit ] The full spectrum of academic subjects is represented in the college. The fellowship of the college represents many academic disciplines, spread across arts, humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, medicine, and veterinary medicine.

The college has one research institute attached to it: the Von Hügel Institute founded in 1987 to carry out research on Catholic Social Teaching . Describing itself as a 'Catholic Institute for Critical Enquiry' it works in the fields of Christianity and society, and seeks to preserve the Roman Catholic legacy of St Edmund's College when control of the College itself was ceded to its autonomous Governing Body in 1985 in order to achieve university collegiate status.

[ 20 ] The Von Hügel Institute is therefore a link to the Roman Catholic origins of the college.

The overall examination results of the college's comparatively few undergraduates tend to be in the middle among the Cambridge colleges, with St Edmund's ranking 21st on the Tompkins table in 2018.

[ 22 ] Dining Hall Student life [ edit ] The college is younger than some of the more traditional colleges of the university. Despite this St Edmund's maintains many ancient Cambridge traditions including formal hall, albeit with modifications. Fellows at most Cambridge and Oxford colleges dine at a "high table" (separately from the students); however, St Edmund's has no such division, with undergraduates, postgraduates and fellows sitting together at dinners.

[ 23 ] Unlike most mature and modern colleges, St Edmund's still requires students to wear their academic gowns during formal halls, ceremonies, and college occasions. St Edmund's retains several other dining traditions unusual for modern colleges, including a requirement to ask the master to leave the hall to use the bathroom, a banning of technological devices and newspapers, and a strict requirement to only speak English .

[ 24 ] The St Edmund's undergraduate gown, like that of the other colleges admitting only mature undergraduates, is a short black clerical style gown, lacking a slit in the forearm and gathered above the elbow by a blue cord and button.

[ 25 ] The college has a long sporting tradition, including the St Edmund's College Boat Club , the St Edmund's College Hockey Club (SECHC) and the St Edmund's College Cricket Club (SECCC). SECHC (merged with St Catherine's College Hockey Club) won 2024 Cuppers and SECCC reached the 2023 Cuppers finals. In recent years members have competed in varsity teams representing Cambridge against Oxford University in a wide variety of sports, most notably, at The Boat Race , The Varsity Match , [ 26 ] the University Match (hockey) and The University Match (cricket) .

[ 27 ] Punts are available to students in the spring and summer months.

On 15 September 2017, a team of four rowers from the college broke the World record for the 'Longest Continual Row' in the male 20–29 small team category by over an hour.

[ 28 ] The following year, on 13 April 2018, a team of ten rowers from the college went on to set the British and World record for "One Million Meters" on the indoor rowing machine in the male 20–29 large team category.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Controversy [ edit ] Noah Carl appointment [ edit ] St Edmund’s College faced backlash over its handling of Noah Carl's appointment, following revelations about his research promoting links between race, intelligence, and criminality. An investigation led to his dismissal, citing ethical and scholarly shortcomings. However, the college had failed to vet his background thoroughly and acted only under pressure from public protests.

[ 31 ] The college dismissed Carl as there "was a serious risk that Dr Carl’s appointment could lead, directly or indirectly, to the college being used as a platform to promote views that could incite racial or religious hatred, and bring the college into disrepute".

[ 32 ] While the college maintained it upheld academic standards, its approach to the recruitment and eventual dismissal drew criticism for lack of transparency and effective oversight.

[ 33 ] People associated with the college [ edit ] Further information: Category:Alumni of St Edmund's College, Cambridge ; Category:Fellows of St Edmund's College, Cambridge ; and Category:Masters of St Edmund's College, Cambridge Catherine Arnold OBE, former Master of St Edmund's College and former British Ambassador to Mongolia Chito Gascon , Chair of the Human Rights Commission of the Philippines Mary McAleese , former President of Ireland Eamon Martin , Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of All Ireland Martin Evans , biologist and recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Joaquín Almunia , former European Commissioner for Economy and European Commissioner for Competition Alumni [ edit ] Edward Acton , Vice-Chancellor of the University of East Anglia, historian and great-grandson of Lord Acton Joaquín Almunia , Spanish politician and member of the European Commission responsible for Economic and Monetary Affairs Simon Amor , rugby union coach, member of the England Sevens team at the 2002 Commonwealth Games Malcolm Baker , Robert G. Kirby Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School , former Olympic rower Johan Bäverbrant , Swedish diplomat Aidan Bellenger , historian and former Benedictine monk Alexander Bird , Bertrand Russell Professor of Philosophy at the University of Cambridge William T. Cavanaugh , director of the Center for World Catholicism and Intercultural Theology, and professor of Catholic studies at DePaul University James Chau , Journalist, television presenter, and United Nations goodwill ambassador Christian Cormack , rowing cox Captain Sir George Sampson Elliston , Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Blackburn from 1931 to 1945 Chito Gascon , Chair of the Human Rights Commission of the Philippines Alex Hughes , Archdeacon of Cambridge John M. Jumper , AI researcher and Nobel Prize winner in Chemistry in 2024 Hilary Lofting , Australian novelist, travel writer, journalist and editor. Eldest brother of Hugh Lofting (author of The Story of Doctor Dolittle ).

Louise Lombard , actress [ 34 ] Greg Loveridge , former cricketer who played for New Zealand in 1996 Eamon Martin , Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of All Ireland Rodrigo Rosenberg Marzano , Guatemalan attorney and human rights activist Alexander Masters , author, screenwriter, and worker with the homeless. Masters was portrayed by Benedict Cumberbatch in Stuart: A Life Backwards .

Anna Mendelssohn , writer, poet, and political activist Robert Noel , Officer of Arms (herald) at the College of Arms Chris Oti , former rugby union player Richard Phelps (rower) , rower who competed in the 1992 Summer Olympics Norman St John-Stevas, Baron St John of Fawsley , legal scholar, former master of Emmanuel College , and Leader of the House of Commons under Margaret Thatcher was a resident at St Edmund's House for his undergraduate studies in late 1940s and early 1950s. During his time he was the president of the Union Society Christopher Stearn , former first-class cricketer Thorsten Streppelhoff , Olympic Silver medalist and German M8+ rower at the 1996 Atlanta and 1992 Barcelona Games Tony Underwood , rugby union international David Wallace , scholar of medieval literature , Judith Rodin Professor of English at the University of Pennsylvania Patrick Walsh , Irish prelate of the Roman Catholic Church and from 1991 until 2008 he was the 31st bishop of Down & Connor Luke Walton , American Olympic rower Marc Weber , Olympic Silver medalist and German M8+ rower at the 1996 Summer Olympics Stuart Welch , Olympic Silver medalist and Australian M8+ rower at the 2000 Summer Olympics Fellows [ edit ] Denis Alexander , Emeritus Fellow of St Edmund’s College and an Emeritus Director of the Faraday Institute for Science and Religion , Cambridge Allen Brent , scholar of early Christian history and literature Sir Martin Evans , Laureate of the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Andy Harter , computer scientist Sir Brian Heap , biologist who was the master of the college from 1996 until 2004. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1989 and held the post vice-president and foreign secretary from 1996 to 2001 Richard Edwin Hills , emeritus professor of Radio Astronomy at the University of Cambridge Kevin T. Kelly , Roman Catholic priest and moral theologian Edward Kessler , Founder President of The Woolf Institute and a leading thinker in interfaith relations, primarily Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations Nicholas Lash , Roman Catholic theologian Georges Lemaître , cosmologist and Big Bang theorist, was a visiting academic at the college in 1923–24, while collaborating with Sir Arthur Eddington Helen Mason , theoretical physicist Josef W. Meri , American historian of Interfaith Relations in the Middle East in the College of Islamic Studies, Hamad Bin Khalifa University Simon Mitton , astronomer and author. Elected member of the Council of the Royal Astronomical Society .

Mark Ranby , former New Zealand rugby union player Chris Rapley , scientist Somak Raychaudhury , Indian astrophysicist C. J. Ryan , priest and scholar of Italian studies Brian Stanley , historian Bob White , Professor of Geophysics in the Earth Sciences department at Cambridge University (since 1989) Honorary Fellows [ edit ] Bruce Alberts , American biochemist and the Chancellor’s Leadership Chair in Biochemistry and Biophysics for Science and Education at the University of California, San Francisco Anne, Princess Royal , daughter of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh Betty Boothroyd , Member of Parliament (MP) from 1973 to 2000, Speaker of the House of Commons Alec Broers, Baron Broers , electrical engineer Colin Bundy , South African historian, former principal of Green Templeton College, Oxford and former director of SOAS University of London Derek Burke , academic who served as Vice-Chancellor of the University of East Anglia Francis Campbell , former UK Ambassador to the Holy See Janet Neel Cohen, Baroness Cohen of Pimlico , lawyer and crime fiction writer Edward Fitzalan-Howard, 18th Duke of Norfolk , peer who holds the hereditary office of Earl Marshal Alan Hopes , Roman Catholic prelate Denise Lievesley , formerly Chief Executive of the Information Centre for Health and Social Care , Director of Statistics at UNESCO Mary McAleese , former President of Ireland and patron of the Von Hugel Institute Bridget Ogilvie , Australian and British scientist Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh , husband of Queen Elizabeth II Sir Tom Phillips , diplomat who served as Commandant of the Royal College of Defence Studies from 2014 to 2018 Anthony Russell , Anglican bishop Amartya Sen , laureate of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Economics Peter Smith , Metropolitan Archbishop of Southwark (London) Crispin Tickell , diplomat, environmentalist, and academic List of Masters of St Edmund's College [ edit ] St Edmund's House 1897–1904: William Ormond Sutcliffe 1904–1909: Edmund Nolan 1909–1918: Thomas Leighton Williams 1918–1921: Joseph Louis Whitfield 1921–1929: John Francis McNulty 1929–1934: Cuthbert Leonard Waring 1934–1946: John Edward Petit 1946–1964: Raymond Corboy 1964–1976: Garrett Daniel Sweeney 1976–1985: John Coventry 1985–1996: Richard Laws St Edmund's College 1996–2004: Brian Heap 2004–2014: Paul Luzio 2014–2019: Matthew Bullock 2019–2024: Catherine Arnold 2024–present: Chris Young See also [ edit ] Listed buildings in Cambridge (west) References [ edit ] ^ Shown here erroneously as French martlets gules ^ University of Cambridge (6 March 2019).

"Notice by the Editor" .

Cambridge University Reporter .

149 (Special No 5): 1 . Retrieved 20 March 2019 .

^ "Accounts for the year ended 30 June 2019" (PDF) . St Edmund's College, Cambridge . Retrieved 22 February 2020 .

^ lr387@cam.ac.uk (15 January 2014).

"Baron Anatole von Hügel – Von Hügel Institute" .

www.vhi.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 31 March 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "St Edmund's College - University of Cambridge" .

www.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 31 March 2019 .

^ a b c lr387@cam.ac.uk (15 January 2014).

"Baron Anatole von Hügel – Von Hügel Institute" .

www.vhi.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 2 April 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Evenett, H.O.

Catholics and the Universities, 1850–1950 .

^ The Letters and Diaries of John Henry Newman . Vol. 23.

Oxford University Press . 1973.

^ a b Couve de Murville, M.N.L.; Jenkins, Philip (1983).

Catholic Cambridge .

Catholic Truth Society .

ISBN 0-85183-494-9 .

^ Evenett, H.O. (1946), "The Cambridge Prelude to 1895", The Dublin Review (437) ^ E Leedham-Green 1996 A concise history of the University of Cambridge . Cambridge University Press: 171-2.

^ Leader, Damian R. (April 1998). "A concise history of the University of Cambridge. By Elisabeth Leedham-Green. Pp. xiv+274 incl. endpapers, 45 plates and 5 figs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. £27.95 (cloth), £9.95 (paper). 0 521 43370 3; 0 521 43978 7".

The Journal of Ecclesiastical History .

49 (2): 329– 380.

doi : 10.1017/s0022046997435832 .

ISSN 0022-0469 .

^ a b "St Edmund's College - University of Cambridge" .

www.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 2 April 2019 .

^ "Development" .

www.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 1 February 2020 .

^ "St Edmund's College Cambridge - Royal Charter - 1998" (PDF) .

www.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 1 February 2020 .

^ "St Edmund's College - Origins" .

www.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ a b "St Edmund's College - Modern Day" .

www.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ a b c "St Edmund's College - Chapel" .

www.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ St Edmund's College, Cambridge ^ a b lr387@cam.ac.uk (15 January 2014).

"History – Von Hügel Institute" .

www.vhi.st-edmunds.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jones, Hugh.

"Eddie's spent £106k turning student accom into master's rooms" .

Varsity Online .

^ "Tompkins Table 2013: The Results" . Cambridge.tab.co.uk. Archived from the original on 4 June 2015 . Retrieved 2 March 2015 .

^ "Blue Book - Notes for Members" (PDF) .

^ "Blue Book - Notes for Members" (PDF) .

^ "Cambridge University Heraldic and Genealogical Society Gown Guide" .

^ "Instagram" .

^ "Hari Kukreja -" .

^ "St Edmund's College rowers break world record" .

^ "St Edmund's College - University of Cambridge" .

^ "World 100,000 Meters" .

^ Bradbury, Rosie; Cook, Joe.

"Controversial research fellow Noah Carl dismissed by St Edmund's" .

Varsity Online .

^ Adams, Richard (1 May 2019).

"Cambridge college sacks researcher over links with far right" .

The Guardian .

^ Bradbury, Rosie; Cook, Joe.

"Controversial research fellow Noah Carl dismissed by St Edmund's" .

Varsity Online .

^ Article in St Edmunds College Website Further reading [ edit ] Lubenow, W. C.

(2008). "Roman Catholicism in the University of Cambridge: St Edmund's House in 1898".

Journal of Ecclesiastical History .

59 (4): 697– 713.

doi : 10.1017/S0022046907002254 .

McClelland, V. Alan (1997). "St. Edmund's College, Ware and St. Edmund's College, Cambridge; Historical Connections and Early Tribulations".

British Catholic History .

23 (3): 470– 83.

doi : 10.1017/S0034193200005811 .

S2CID 163723108 .

Sweeney, Garret (1980).

St Edmund's House, Cambridge: The First Eighty Years: A History . Cambridge: St Edmund's House.

ISBN 978-0-95-071770-8 .

Walsh, Michael (1996).

St Edmund's College, Cambridge, 1896–1996: A Commemorative History . Cambridge: St Edmund's College.

ISBN 978-0-95-071771-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to St Edmund's College, Cambridge .

College website v t e St Edmund's College, Cambridge St Edmund's College arms Founders Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk and Anatole von Hügel Master Chris Young Boat Club Faraday Institute for Science and Religion Huntingdon Road Von Hügel Institute Categories St Edmund's College Alumni Fellows Masters St Edmund's College arms v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States 52°12′46″N 0°06′33″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2127°N 0.1093°E ﻿ / 52.2127; 0.1093 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=St_Edmund%27s_College,_Cambridge&oldid=1305990757 " Categories : St Edmund's College, Cambridge Colleges of the University of Cambridge 1896 establishments in England Universities and colleges established in 1896 Grade II listed buildings in Cambridge Grade II listed educational buildings Catholic Church in Cambridge Catholic universities and colleges in England Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2020 Use British English from February 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2017 Commons category link from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 08:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents St Edmund's College, Cambridge 10 languages Add topic

