Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 Axioms and models Toggle Axioms and models subsection 2.1 Example 3 Axiomatic method Toggle Axiomatic method subsection 3.1 History 3.2 Example: The Peano axiomatization of natural numbers 3.3 Axiomatization and proof 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Axiomatic system 21 languages Afrikaans Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Deutsch Español Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Română Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Axiomatic theory ) Mathematical term; concerning axioms used to derive theorems This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs attention from an expert in Mathematics . The specific problem is: Few citations despite the degree of detail.

WikiProject Mathematics may be able to help recruit an expert.

( January 2025 ) In mathematics and logic , an axiomatic system is a set of formal statements (i.e.

axioms ) used to logically derive other statements such as lemmas or theorems . A proof within an axiom system is a sequence of deductive steps that establishes a new statement as a consequence of the axioms. An axiom system is called complete with respect to a property if every formula with the property can be derived using the axioms. The more general term theory is at times used to refer to an axiomatic system and all its derived theorems.

In its pure form, an axiom system is effectively a syntactic construct and does not by itself refer to (or depend on) a formal structure , although axioms are often defined for that purpose. The more modern field of model theory refers to mathematical structures. The relationship between an axiom systems and the models that correspond to it is often a major issue of interest.

Properties [ edit ] Four important properties of an axiom system are consistency, relative consistency, completeness and independence. An axiomatic system is said to be consistent if it lacks contradiction . That is, it is impossible to derive both a statement and its negation from the system's axioms.

[ 1 ] Consistency is a key requirement for most axiomatic systems, as the presence of contradiction would allow any statement to be proven ( principle of explosion ).
Relative consistency comes into play when we can not prove the consistency of an axiom system. However, in some cases we can show that an axiom system A is consistent if another
axiom set B is consistent.

[ 1 ] In an axiomatic system, an axiom is called independent if it cannot be proven or disproven from other axioms in the system. A system is called independent if each of its underlying axioms is independent.

[ 1 ] Unlike consistency, in many cases independence is not a necessary requirement for a functioning axiomatic system — though it is usually sought after to minimize the number of axioms in the system.

An axiomatic system is called complete if for every statement, either itself or its negation is derivable from the system's axioms, i.e. every statement can be proven true or false by using the axioms.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] However, note that in some cases it may be undecidable if a statement can be proven or not.

Axioms and models [ edit ] A model for an axiomatic system is a formal structure , which assigns meaning for the undefined terms presented in the system, in a manner that is correct with the relations defined in the system. If an axiom system has a model, the axioms are said to have been satisfied .

[ 3 ] The existence of a model which satisfies an axiom system, proves the consistency of the system.

[ 4 ] Models can also be used to show the independence of an axiom in the system. By constructing a model for a subsystem (without a specific axiom) shows that the omitted axiom is independent if its correctness does not necessarily follow from the subsystem.

[ 3 ] Two models are said to be isomorphic if a one-to-one correspondence can be found between their elements, in a manner that preserves their relationship.

[ 5 ] An axiomatic system for which every model is isomorphic to another is called categorical or categorial. However, this term should not be confused with the topic of category theory . The property of categoriality (categoricity) ensures the completeness of a system, however the converse is not true: Completeness does not ensure the categoriality (categoricity) of a system, since two models can differ in properties that cannot be expressed by the semantics of the system.

Example [ edit ] As an example, observe the following axiomatic system, based on first-order logic with additional the following countably infinitely many axioms added (these can be easily formalized as an axiom schema ): ∃ ∃ x 1 : ∃ ∃ x 2 : ¬ ¬ ( x 1 = x 2 ) {\displaystyle \exists x_{1}:\exists x_{2}:\lnot (x_{1}=x_{2})} (informally, there exist two different items).

∃ ∃ x 1 : ∃ ∃ x 2 : ∃ ∃ x 3 : ¬ ¬ ( x 1 = x 2 ) ∧ ∧ ¬ ¬ ( x 1 = x 3 ) ∧ ∧ ¬ ¬ ( x 2 = x 3 ) {\displaystyle \exists x_{1}:\exists x_{2}:\exists x_{3}:\lnot (x_{1}=x_{2})\land \lnot (x_{1}=x_{3})\land \lnot (x_{2}=x_{3})} (informally, there exist three different items).

.

.

.

{\displaystyle ...} Informally, this infinite set of axioms states that there are infinitely many different items. However, the concept of an infinite set cannot be defined within the system — let alone the cardinality of such a set.

The system has at least two different models – one is the natural numbers (isomorphic to any other countably infinite set), and another is the real numbers (isomorphic to any other set with the cardinality of the continuum ). In fact, it has an infinite number of models, one for each cardinality of an infinite set. However, the property distinguishing these models is their cardinality — a property which cannot be defined within the system. Thus the system is not categorial. However it can be shown to be complete, for example by using the Łoś–Vaught test .

Axiomatic method [ edit ] Stating definitions and propositions in a way such that each new term can be formally eliminated by the priorly introduced terms requires primitive notions (axioms) to avoid infinite regress . This way of doing mathematics is called the axiomatic method .

[ 6 ] In the book Principia Mathematica , Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell attempted to show that all mathematical theory could be reduced to some collection of axioms. More generally, the reduction of a body of propositions to a particular collection of axioms underlies the mathematician's research program. This was very prominent in the mathematics of the twentieth century.

The Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory , a result of the axiomatic method applied to set theory, allowed the "proper" formulation of set-theory problems and helped avoid the paradoxes of naïve set theory . One such problem was the continuum hypothesis . Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, with the historically controversial axiom of choice included, is commonly abbreviated ZFC , where "C" stands for "choice". Many authors use ZF to refer to the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice excluded.

[ 7 ] Today ZFC is the standard form of axiomatic set theory and as such is the most common foundation of mathematics .

History [ edit ] Further information: History of mathematics Mathematical methods developed to some degree of sophistication in ancient Egypt, Babylon, India, and China, apparently without employing the axiomatic method.

Euclid of Alexandria authored the earliest extant axiomatic presentation of Euclidean geometry and number theory . His idea begins with five undeniable geometric assumptions called axioms . Then, using these axioms, he established the truth of other propositions by proofs , hence the axiomatic method.

[ 8 ] Many axiomatic systems were developed in the nineteenth century, including non-Euclidean geometry , the foundations of real analysis , Cantor 's set theory , Frege 's work on foundations, and Hilbert 's 'new' use of axiomatic method as a research tool. For example, group theory was first put on an axiomatic basis towards the end of that century. Once the axioms were clarified (that inverse elements should be required, for example), the subject could proceed autonomously, without reference to the transformation group origins of those studies.

Example: The Peano axiomatization of natural numbers [ edit ] Main article: Peano axioms The mathematical system of natural numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ... is based on an axiomatic system first devised by the mathematician Giuseppe Peano in 1889. He chose the axioms, in the language of a single unary function symbol S (short for " successor "), for the set of natural numbers to be: There is a natural number 0.

Every natural number a has a successor, denoted by Sa .

There is no natural number whose successor is 0.

Distinct natural numbers have distinct successors: if a ≠ b , then Sa ≠ Sb .

If a property is possessed by 0 and also by the successor of every natural number it is possessed by, then it is possessed by all natural numbers (" Induction axiom ").

Axiomatization and proof [ edit ] In mathematics , axiomatization is the process of taking a body of knowledge and working backwards towards its axioms. It is the formulation of a system of statements (i.e.

axioms ) that relate a number of primitive terms — in order that a consistent body of propositions may be derived deductively from these statements. Thereafter, the proof of any proposition should be, in principle, traceable back to these axioms.

If the formal system is not complete not every proof can be traced back to the axioms of the system it belongs. For example, a number-theoretic statement might be expressible in the language of arithmetic (i.e. the language of the Peano axioms) and a proof might be given that appeals to topology or complex analysis . It might not be immediately clear whether another proof can be found that derives itself solely from the Peano axioms.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Mathematics portal Wikiquote has quotations related to Axiomatic system .

Axiom schema – Short notation for a set of statements that are taken to be true Formal system – Mathematical model for deduction or proof systems Gödel's incompleteness theorems – Limitative results in mathematical logic Hilbert-style deduction system – System of formal deduction in logic Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets History of logic List of logic systems Logicism – Programme in the philosophy of mathematics Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory – Standard system of axiomatic set theory, an axiomatic system for set theory and today's most common foundation for mathematics.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d A. G. Howson A Handbook of Terms Used in Algebra and Analysis, Cambridge UP, ISBN 0521084342 1972 pp 6 ^ Weisstein, Eric W.

"Complete Axiomatic Theory" .

mathworld.wolfram.com . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

^ a b C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler "Model Theory" Elsevier 1990, pp 1-7 ^ C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler "Model Theory" Elsevier 1990, pp 1-7, Theorem 1.2.11 ^ Hodges , Wilfrid; Scanlon, Thomas (2018), "First-order Model Theory" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2019-10-31 ^ " Set Theory and its Philosophy, a Critical Introduction S.6; Michael Potter, Oxford, 2004 ^ Weisstein, Eric W.

"Zermelo-Fraenkel Axioms" .

mathworld.wolfram.com . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

^ Lehman, Eric; Meyer, Albert R; Leighton, F Tom.

Mathematics for Computer Science (PDF) . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Axiomatic method" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press , 2001 [1994] Eric W. Weisstein, Axiomatic System , From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource.

Mathworld.wolfram.com & Answers.com v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9ngs9
Cached time: 20250814225835
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.458 seconds
Real time usage: 0.648 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2601/1000000
Revision size: 12566/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85758/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1903/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34254/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.298/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22657875/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  515.229      1 -total
 26.45%  136.285      8 Template:Annotated_link
 20.26%  104.406      1 Template:Reflist
 17.38%   89.522      4 Template:Navbox
 15.74%   81.087      1 Template:Mathematical_logic
 15.37%   79.182      2 Template:Cite_web
 11.85%   61.061      1 Template:Short_description
  8.74%   45.017      1 Template:More_footnotes
  8.18%   42.127      2 Template:Ambox
  6.15%   31.696      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:188401:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225835 and revision id 1305791802. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Axiomatic_system&oldid=1305791802 " Categories : Mathematical axioms Formal systems Methods of proof Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing expert attention from January 2025 All articles needing expert attention Mathematics articles needing expert attention Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 03:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Axiomatic system 21 languages Add topic

