Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Method Toggle Method subsection 1.1 Identify Key Terms 1.2 Create Clusters from Associated Elements 1.3 Examine and Compare Clusters 2 Example 3 References Toggle the table of contents Cluster criticism 2 languages فارسی Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Cluster Criticism otherwise known as Cluster Analysis is a method utilized in rhetorical criticism . This form of analysis was made famous by Kenneth Burke in which a critic attempts to unearth the hidden motive behind a text by focusing on the structural relations and associative meanings between certain main ideas, concepts, subjects or actions presented in a text. For example, what actions does a hero repeatedly take that showcase their valor [ 1 ] Method [ edit ] There are three steps in performing a cluster criticism: identifying key terms, creating clusters from associated elements, and examining and comparing clusters.

[ 2 ] Identify Key Terms [ edit ] First, key terms are identified.  These are generally the ideas, subjects, topics, or arguments that work discusses.  They usually (but not always) occur more often than any other element in the work; they can also be identified in a work's introduction.

Create Clusters from Associated Elements [ edit ] Next, the critic identifies surrounding elements in the text that refer to or are associated with each of the key terms.  Each collection of associated elements which refer to the same key term is called a cluster.

Examine and Compare Clusters [ edit ] In the final step of the criticism, the critic examines how each specific cluster represents its referring key term.  This process typically includes directly contrasting one cluster with another.  By doing this, a critic can determine how a text privileges one key term over others.

This stage of cluster criticism can incorporate other methods in rhetorical criticism .  For example, if different types of metaphors are found in different clusters, a critic can perform multiple metaphoric criticisms in order to show how each key term characterizes a particular position or entity.

Example [ edit ] The following is an excerpt from a speech titled "Americanism" given by Warren G. Harding in 1920 regarding aid to European nations devastated by World War I.  Terms bolded are those a critic might associate with the key term "Old World stabilization" and terms underlined are those a critic might associate with the key term "stabilize America." It's time to idealize , but it's very practical to make sure our own house is in perfect order before we attempt the miracle of Old World stabilization . Call it the selfishness of nationality if you will. I think it's an inspiration to patriotic devotion to safeguard America first , to stabilize America first, to prosper America first , to think of America first , to exalt America first , to live for and revere America first . Let the internationalist dream and the Bolshevist destroy .

In this example, the critic would examine the cluster of words and phrases around the key term "Old world stabilization" in order to find certain patterns.  Terms like idealize, miracle, dream, and attempt depict reconstruction through aid as an unproven strategy; internationalist and Bolshevist characterize supporters of aid as foreign and Communist; and the ending word 'destroy' implies a disastrous consequence for the proposal.  In all, a critic can assume that these clusters work together to present aid for European reconstruction as an irresponsible and un-American plan.

In stark contrast, the terms in the cluster around "stabilize America" construct a rejection of the proposal as the only responsible and American choice.  Terms like make sure, think, practical, order, safeguard, live, and prosper construct a refusal of European reconstruction as safe and sensible.  The words inspiration, exalt, and revere function with the phrases "patriotic devotion" and "selfishness of nationality" to characterize a refusal of aid as a positive, patriotic act.  Finally, the repeated phrase "America first" dichotomizes the issue into a choice between placing America or Europe first, with no middle ground.

The conclusion of this cluster criticism would therefore be that Harding advances his argument by constructing European aid as an irresponsible and un-American policy and a rejection of aid as a responsible, pro-American policy as well as framing the issue as an irreconcilable choice between the interests of America and Europe.

References [ edit ] ^ Jasinski, James (2001).

Sourcebook on Rhetoric Key Concepts in Contemporary Rhetorical Studies (1st ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. p. 371.

ISBN 9780761905042 .

^ Foss, Sonja K. (1996). "Cluster Criticism".

Rhetorical Criticism: Exploration and Practice . Waveland Pr Inc. pp.

367–70 .

ISBN 1-57766-318-7 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cluster_criticism&oldid=1261505450 " Category : Rhetoric This page was last edited on 6 December 2024, at 13:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cluster criticism 2 languages Add topic

