Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Mystical vs. philosophical knowledge 3 Problem of knowledge 4 Intellectual environment 5 The mystical philosophy of language 6 Works 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources Toggle the table of contents Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Persian mystical or Sufi philosopher (1207-1274) Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi صدر الدین قونوی Born 1207 Malatya Died 1274 (1274-00-00) (aged 66–67) Konya , Sultanate of Rum Philosophical work Era Islamic Golden Age Region Islamic philosophy School Sufi philosophy Main interests Epistemology mysticism Sufi metaphysics Part of a series on Islam Sufism Ideas Abdal Al-Insān al-Kāmil Baqaa Dervish Dhawq Fakir Fana Hal Haqiqa Ihsan Irfan Ishq Karamat Kashf Lataif Manzil Ma'rifa Maqam Murid Murshid Nafs Nūr Qalandar Qayyum Qutb Silsila Sufi cosmology Sufi metaphysics Sufi philosophy Sufi poetry Sufi psychology Salik Tazkiah Wali Yaqeen Practices Anasheed Dhikr Haḍra Muraqabah Qawwali Sama Whirling Ziyarat Sufi orders Alians Ba 'Alawi Bektashi Qadiri Chishti Naqshbandi Shadhili Suhrawardi Rifaʽi Khalwati Rahmani Badawi Burhani Tijani Darqawi Idrisi Senusi Bayrami Jelveti Maizbhandari Malamati Mouridi Sülaymaniyya Salihiyya Azeemia Kubrawi Mevlevi Shattari Uwaisi Hurufi Ni'matullāhī Nuqtavi Qalandari Safavi Zahabiya Akbari Galibi Haqqani Anjuman Inayati Issawiyya Jerrahi Madari Mahdavi Noorbakshi Zahedi Zikri List of sufis Notable early Notable modern Singers Topics in Sufism Tawhid Sharia Tariqa Haqiqa Ma'rifa Art History Sufi music Persecution Ziyarat Islam portal v t e Ṣadr al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq ibn Muḥammad ibn Yūnus Qūnawī [alternatively, Qūnavī, Qūnyawī], ( Persian : صدر الدین قونوی ; 1207–1274), was a Persian [ 1 ] [ 2 ] philosopher, and one of the most influential thinkers in mystical or Sufi philosophy. He played a pivotal role in the study of knowledge—or epistemology, which in his context referred specifically to the theoretical elaboration of mystical/intellectual insight. He combined a highly original mystic-thinker, Muḥyī al-Dīn Ibn 'Arabī [ 3 ] (1165-1240 CE/560-638 AH), whose arcane teachings Qūnavī codified and helped incorporate into the burgeoning pre-Ottoman intellectual tradition, on the one hand, with the logical/philosophical innovations of Ibn Sīnā (Lat., Avicenna ), on the other.

[ 4 ] Though relatively unfamiliar to Westerners, the spiritual and systematic character of Qūnawī's approach to reasoning, in the broadest sense of the term, has found fertile soil in modern-day Turkey, North Africa and Iran not to mention India, China, the Balkans and elsewhere over the centuries.

Biography [ edit ] Little is known about Qūnawī's personal life. As a young boy, Ṣadr al-Dīn was adopted by Ibn 'Arabī, [ 5 ] whose pupil he was. Of Persian descent, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] he nevertheless lived and taught in the city of Konya (modern-day Turkey where he is known as Sadreddin Konevî).

Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi's tomb is in Konya where he settled and built his reputation There he drew very close to Mawlāna Jalāl-e Dīn Rūmī and participated in his spiritual circle. A master of ḥadīth, people came to Konya from distant lands just to study under him. But while he was reputed for his profound understanding of the Quran and Ḥadīth , he knew the ancient Peripatetic philosophy intimately, no doubt thanks chiefly to Ibn Sīnā, who commented extensively on the works of Aristotle. However, Qūnawī himself may have studied an Arabic translation of Aristotle's "Metaphysics," being one of a handful of truly insightful, post-Avicennan critics of Aristotle, even if he was not a full-fledged commentator in the spirit of Ibn Rushd .

Inscription in Turkish praises him as a scholar, teacher and Sheikh.

Qūnawī's overall influence appears more strategic than wide. Moreover, some of his students found fame. He instructed Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi , who went on to author a commentary, now well-known, on Suhrawardi 's Ḥikmat al-Ishrāq . Another student of Qūnawī's, the Sufi poet Fakhr-al-Din Iraqi , was instrumental in introducing Ibn 'Arabī into the Persian language.

[ 6 ] Mystical vs. philosophical knowledge [ edit ] After visiting the grave of Ibn 'Arabī a spell after his teacher and father-in-law had died, Qūnavī described a mystical experience he had about his teacher, Ibn 'Arabī, thus: I walked one summery day through an empty stretch in the Taurus. An easterly wind was stirring the blossoms. I gazed at them and reflected upon God's power, might and majesty (exalted be He). The love of the Merciful [God] filled me with such ardent passion that I labored to part with created things. Then, the spirit of Shaykh Ibn 'Arabī was personified to me in the most splendid form, as if he were a pure light. He called out [to me], “O ye who are perplexed, behold me! If God sublime and transcendent hath shown Himself to me in a flash of manifestation from the noble elevation of the essence, absent hast thou been from me therein by a mere glance of an eye.” I agreed at once and, as if he had been standing there [bodily] before my eyes, the Shaykh al-Akbar [i.e., Ibn Arabī] greeted me with the salutations of reunion after a parting and embraced me affectionately, saying: “Praise be to God who the veil hath lifted and who bringeth those dear unto each other into reunion. No goal, effort or salvation hath been disaffirmed".

[ 7 ] His recollection of this dream seems to indicate not just continuing deference to his teacher, but also what he saw as the practical end of reason. Though a different intellectual breed than his deceased mentor, Qūnavī too was a practising mystic, not just a thinker and teacher. In other words, he was a mystic who excelled in formal sciences like ḥadīth studies, Qurānic exegesis (tafsīr), dialectical theology (kalām), jurisprudence (fiqh), and philosophical sciences; and he corresponded with contemporaries like Nāsīr al-Dīn Ṭūsī, whose mathematical and astronomical discoveries have become integral to the science we know today.

Qūnavī's significance arises from his firm place in Islam's "post-Avicennan" (or, more precisely, post-Falsafah) period, of which Latin European Scholastics (themselves struggling with the problematics posed by Avicenna) were likely oblivious. And yet, the intellectual current to which he belonged provided the context for, among other developments, the development of systematic reason and the elaborate philosophical tradition that emerged in Iran, including the prodigal Sadr al-Din Shirazi , also called Mulla Sadra .

[ 4 ] Although Qūnavī was single-mindedly devoted to the same general philosophical framework as Ibn 'Arabī's, 'Abd al-Raḥmān Jāmī [ 8 ] assured us that, despite the pupil's frustrated attempts to follow in his spiritual footsteps,[34] without a proper study of Qūnavī's works the true intention of Ibn 'Arabī regarding the so-called doctrine of Waḥdat al-Wujūd (a doctrine progeny has ascribed to Ibn 'Arabī) could not be discerned in any manner conforming to both reason and religious law (Jāmī 556). His relationship with the aging teacher notwithstanding, Qūnavī had to stake out his own personal connection to higher knowledge. At times, it seems, he distanced himself from Ibn 'Arabī altogether due to the emphasis on personal witness above the interpretation of others’ experience regardless of their social or spiritual station.

Al-Munāwī (b. 1265) quoted him as saying that his teacher had striven to lead him to a level where God manifested Himself through flashes of manifestation to all seekers, but that he failed (NJK 222). Mystics describe a manifestation of this kind as a “flash,” because the “direct witnessing of the essence” resembles the light, speed, and evanescence of any ordinary flash or lightning.

[ 9 ] Al-Qāshānī likened the “flash” to “the illumination appearing to a person that beckons and summons to the Presence of Proximity to the Lord for a journey within God.” [ 10 ] Ibn 'Arabī referred to the deep tranquility felt by the saintly “friends of God,” the awliyā’, who take their repose in it. Because tranquility did not always occur to them, they could only take furtive glances at the manifestation, as if in a flash (Hakim 660–61).

Paradoxically, then, his relationship with Ibn 'Arabī provided Qūnavī with a sound justification for seeking a separate path to spiritual enlightenment, on the one hand, and for developing the proper terms with which to express overarching truths, on the other, which truths paradoxically were accessible only through personal experience, not anyone else's.

[ 4 ] Problem of knowledge [ edit ] Qūnavī considered it his life's task to complete what Ibn Sīnā had begun with his Ishrāqī conception of knowledge . First, he shared with Ibn Sīnā and Ibn 'Arabī the goal of representing the intellectual/spiritual journey in communicable fashion. For any kind of knowledge or noetic discovery to be understood, it must be capable of being passed on to others (pupils, speculatively minded peers, etc.), rather than hoarded in the abstract ether of the mind, as it were. Whatever its technical complexities, it had to be didactically meaningful within a specific time and place, though without losing sight of the root object of knowledge.

[ 4 ] He worked out his principles in several treatises. Their most concise and substantial statement consists of a theoretical introduction to his magnum opus, "I'jāz al-bayān," the main body of which consists of a mystical exegesis of the "Sūrat al-Fātiḥah," the opening chapter of the Quran. In that introduction, Qūnavī plotted the transition from the demonstrative logic of Avicenna's “ theological science”, ' ilm ilāhī ), to a different kind of logic one might call an “exegetical grammar,” as more or less taught by Ibn 'Arabī.

To the followers of Ibn 'Arabī, “exegetical grammar” was vastly more suited to the paradoxical movements of the spirit, “dialogue” with God, and in a purely epistemological sense, the true “knowledge of the realities,” an expression that Qūnavī took to be chiefly of Avicennan inspiration. Anxious to preserve the transcendence of the Divine, but without expunging human activity or initiative, Qūnavī understood God's knowledge of Himself to be the root of all knowledge. On the surface, this formulation and the logical corollaries flowing from it appear to seal man's incapacity to discover the “realities of things” on his own (i.e., by his own inborn faculties).

[ 4 ] In a representative sense, human knowledge may be said to rest on the relation between two distinct, irreducible “realities”: subject and object. Given this subject-object distinction and the limitations of our own faculties, how could we ever know the “realities of things”? This theme permeates virtually all of Qūnavī's works. In his Introduction, he discussed several passages from Ibn Sīnā's posthumous "al-Ta'liqāt" (notebook). The only source he cared to mention for Ibn Sīnā's cogitations on the “realities,” the "Ta'liqāt" contained an unusually candid remark to the effect that man was incapable of knowing the realities of things. He took up this selfsame issue with Naṣīr al- Dīn Ṭūsī (d. 672/1274) in a fascinating philosophical correspondence, where "tashkīk" ("systematic ambiguity," a concept key to later philosophy) figures. In that debate, our thinker sought to demonstrate under what conditions man may know God, a goal he shared with both philosophers and mystics.

In a larger sense, Qūnavī was able to deepen the transformation of philosophical reason begun by his predecessors by virtue of a simple, incontrovertible fact: the mechanical logic of Peripatetic philosophy could not quite overcome the distinction between subject and object (the two most elementary “realities” in every act of knowing) except by correspondence, concomitance, etc.

[ 4 ] Central to his project, on the other hand, was divine self-revelation. On this matter, Ibn 'Arabī had applied notoriously convoluted reasoning, often by association and in fragmentary outbursts. But like him, Qūnavī viewed divine self-revelation or -manifestation as the unfolding of a “book” penned in the form of constructed speech.

In short, self-revelation is the reality that underlies all realities. To elaborate the principles of its unfolding, he made thorough use of the demonstrative logic championed by both the falsāsifah (Islam's Hellenized philosophers, like Ibn Sīnā) and many Islamic theologians. But the new synthesis he was so keen to elucidate for "theological science," or 'ilm ilāhī, had to be properly anchored to a logos exhibiting the same characteristic concreteness as that familiar to him from divine speech, “God’s communications” to man (e.g., the "Qur’ān").

[ 4 ] He thus derived from traditional logic a mystical type of exegetical grammar, with its own “scale” or standard for theorization, one that bears his special imprint.

Intellectual environment [ edit ] Part of a series on Ibn 'Arabi Akbarism · Ibn 'Arabi Mosque Konya Manuscript Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi Society Mystical theories Ibn Arabi and theoretical mysticism Al-Insan al-Kamil (the Complete Human) Al-A'yan al-Thabita [ de ] (the Fixed Entities) Al-Maratib al-Sab'a [ ar ] (the Seven Grades) Related articles Wahdat-al-Wujud · Wahdat al-Shuhud [ ar ] Teachers Ibn 'Asakir (d. 571/1176) Abu Tahir al-Silafi (d. 576/1180) Ibn Bashkuwal (d. 578/1183) 'Abd al-Haqq al-Ishbili [ ar ] (d. 581/1185) Abu Zayd al-Suhayli (d. 581/1185) Abu Madyan (d. 594/1197) Ibn Rushd (Averroes) (d. 595/1198) Ibn al-Jawzi (d. 597/1201) Ibn Abi Jamra [ ar ] (d. 599/1202) Al-Qasim ibn 'Asakir [ ar ] (d. 600/1203) Jamal al-Din b. al-Harastani [ ar ] (d. 614/1217) Ibn Malik (d. 672/1274) Students Baha' al-Din Ghazi b.

al-'Adil I (d. 613/1216) Ibn al-Farid (d. 632/1235) Zakiy al-Din al-Birzali [ ar ] (d. 636/1239) Shams al-Din al-Khuwayyi [ ar ] (d. 637/1239) Ibn al-Dubaythi (d. 637/1239) Ibn al-Najjar (d. 643/1245) Diya' al-Din al-Maqdisi (d. 643/1245) Sa'd al-Din al-Hamawi (d. 650/1252) Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi (d. 672/1273) Baybars (d. 676/1277) Admirers and defenders Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606/1209) Shihab al-Din 'Umar al-Suhrawardi (d. 632/1234) Ibn al-Zamalkani [ ar ] (d. 651/1253) Al-Baydawi (d. 685/1286) Al-Qashani (d. 730/1329) Badr al-Dīn ibn Jamaʿah (d. 733/1333) Al-Safadi (d. 764/1363) Haydar Amuli (d. after 787/1385) Al-Sharif al-Jurjani (d. 816/1413) Siraj al-Din al-Makhzumi (d. 885/1480) 'Abd al-Rahman al-Jāmī (d. 898/1492) Jalal al-Din al-Dawani (d. 907/1501) Al-Suyuti (d. 911/1505) Zakariyya al-Ansari (d. 926/1520) Ibn Kamal Pasha (d. 940/1534) Al-Sha'rani (d. 973/1565) Ebussuud Efendi (d. 982/1574) Ibn Hajar al-Haytami (d. 974/1567) 'Abd al-Ra'uf al-Munawi (d. 1032/1622) Ahmad al-Maqqari (d. 1041/1631) Mulla Sadra (d. 1050/1640) Kâtip Çelebi (d. 1067/1657) Ibn al-'Imad al-Hanbali (d. 1089/1679) Niyazi Misri (d. 1105/1694) Isma'il Haqqi al-Brusawi (d. 1137/1725) 'Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi (d. 1143/1731) Mustafa al-Bakri [ ar ] (d. 1162/1749) Hamid al-'Imadi (d. 1171/1758) Murtada al-Zabidi (d. 1205/1791) Ibn 'Abidin (d. 1252/1836) Jamal al-Din al-Qasimi (d. 1332/1914) Badr al-Din al-Hasani [ ar ] (d. 1354/1935) Meher Ali Shah (d.1356/1937) Ashraf Ali Thanwi (d.1362/1943) Al-Kawthari (d. 1371/1951) Gibril Fouad Haddad · Nuh Ha Mim Keller Seyyed Hossein Nasr Critics and opponents Ibn Taymiyya (d. 728/1328) 'Ala' al-Dawla Simnani (d. 736/1336) Al-Taftazani (d. 793/1390) Ibn Khaldun (d. 808/1405) Wali al-Din al-'Iraqi [ ar ] (d. 826/1423) Taqi al-Din al-Fasi (d. 832/1429) 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari (d. 841/ 1437) Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani (d. 852/1449) Ibn Imam al-Kamiliyya [ ar ] (d. 874/1470) Burhan al-Din al-Biqa'i (d. 885/1480) Shams al-Din al-Sakhawi (d. 902/1497) Ibn Iyas (d. 930/1524) Mulla 'Ali al-Qari (d. 1014/1606) Ahmad Sirhindi (d. 1034/1624) Ex-critics 'Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam (d. 660/1262) Taqi al-Din al-Subki (d. 756/1355) Siraj al-Din al-Bulqini (d. 805/1405) Al-Shawkani (d. 1250/1834) Neutrals Al-Nawawi (d. 676/1277) Al-Dhahabi (d. 748/1347) Sharaf al-Din al-Munawi [ ar ] (d. 871/1466) Notable works Al-Futuhat al-Makkiyya · Fusus al-Hikam [ ar ] Tarjumān al-Ashwāq · Anqa' Mughrib Books about Ibn 'Arabi Tanbih al-Ghabi bi-Tabri'at Ibn 'Arabi Tanbih al-'Uqul 'ala Tanzih al-Sufiyya Category · Media Islam portal · Saints portal v t e In his official biographical account of Konya's intellectual elite, Aflākī portrayed a close-knit community of mystics and scholars of a surprisingly uninhibited spiritual mien in Konya. And yet, incessant migrations to Anatolia had given this frontier capital a distinctly cosmopolitan character, making it the envy of every seeker of knowledge—Muslim, Greek and Armenian—but also innumerable foes.

[ 11 ] This was about the time when Qūnavī's father, [ 12 ] Majd al-Dīn Isḥāq, began his career as a statesman and, reflecting mysticism's pervasiveness, acquired the status of a revered spiritual figure. On his return journey from a pilgrimage to the holy city of Mecca, Isḥāq was accompanied by Muḥyiddīn Ibn 'Arabī , with whom he struck a deep friendship. When Isḥāq died, his companion reportedly became Ṣadr al-Dīn's stepfather by marrying the widowed mother.

[ 13 ] Although we have no direct confirmation of this marriage from the writings of Ibn 'Arabî or Qūnawî we do know that Qūnawî became Ibn 'Arabî's close disciple and was given permission to teach all of his works [ 14 ] and Anatolia's medley spiritual and cultural character at last began to take firmer shape.

To all, language was as primordial as it was central to all spiritual and mental activity. We have only to consider the linguistic innovations of mystic-poets like Rūmī, who contributed to the secular development of a highbrow literary form of Persian. Qūnavī's peculiar bent for Arabic linguistics, on the other hand, placed him comfortably in the lap of Arabic high culture, even if his mystical "exegetical grammar" must not be collapsed with conventional Arabic grammar.

[ 4 ] In part, Arabic provided Qūnavī with uninterrupted links with the traditional centers of learning (Damascus, Aleppo, Cairo, etc.), where the religious sciences were taught almost exclusively in the Arabic language. Numerous schools and colleges had earlier been built by the Ayyūbids in Syria and Egypt, where Arabic was studied by people who congregated from all over the Islamic world.

In his landmark work, "al-Nafaāt al-ilāhīyah", Qūnavī noted how the matter of "al-kitābah al-ūlā al-ilāhīyah" (the primary divine writing, a key feature of his doctrine) came to him in an earlier version in the City of Damascus. Damascus, at the time, had fostered a broad intellectual fraternity that was felt across the traditional lines of jurisprudence , even if the religious sciences were more deep-rooted and variegated there than in Konya. Specialized fields like ḥadīth studies, where Qūnavī was an authority and a teacher, exhibited fewer rigid doctrinal standards of admission. One of the most prestigious centers, established earlier in the twelfth century, was the Dār al-Ḥadīth al-Ashrafīyah, whose the first shaykh was celebrated Shāfi'ī muḥaddith Ibn al-Ṣāliḥ al-Shahrazūrī (d. 643/1245). Unlike Ibn 'Arabī, who prayed as a Mālikī , Qūnavī was steeped in Shāfi'ī jurisprudence, whose practitioners were abundantly represented in the schools. But while spheres of influence were more or less evenly distributed in the higher echelons of academic scholarship in centers like the Ashrafīyah, some scholars exerted an intellectual influence disproportionate to their numbers—one prominent example being Abū Shāma , the official chronicler of Damascus who kept a close liaison with the Mālikī circles from the Maghreb and Ibn 'Arabī himself.

[ 15 ] The Mālikīs present a special case, because their small numbers in the schools belied their pervasive influence especially in the Quranic sciences. Their numerical preponderance in iqrā’ (Quran recital) and naḥw (grammar) [ 15 ] managed to sway the general interest even more toward Arabic philology. In view of his special relationship with Ibn 'Arabī, Qūnavī had easy access to their exegetical sources. Apart from themes characteristic of Ibn 'Arabī, however, there is little evidence of anything peculiarly Mālikī or Maghrebi in the works of Qūnavī, including in grammar.

[ 4 ] His affiliations remained close to the traditional eastern centers of learning, where the Mālikīs were underrepresented. That said, Damascus was not the only place to which Qūnavī paid regular visits. He also traveled to Aleppo and Cairo, where he had a faithful following.

More intriguing is how Qūnavī's spiritual bond with Rūmī, a scholar in his own right but the self-professed opponent of bookish scholars, developed to the point of mutual admiration—according to Aflākī—as Qūnavī continued to produce works rarely equaled in the “Arabic sciences” (Huart 281–82).

The mystical philosophy of language [ edit ] As the primary vehicle of human expression, language has the capacity to convey the most profound experiences available to human beings. For Qūnavī, its “devices of conveyance” (adawāt al-tawṣīl) disclosed “incorporeal and immaterial meanings,” which he explored at a certain remove from the original experience that presumably lay at the core. He may not have differed markedly from Rūmī in this respect, but he was not a “literary practitioner” (i.e., a poet) after the manner of Rūmī, nor was he even a grammarian by profession.

[ 4 ] The challenge was to take the demonstrative science of traditional philosophy toward an exegetical grammar that could act as a quintessential language of experience, where knowledge implied the obligation to instruct in the intricacies of spiritual peregrination, but without substituting this derived knowledge for direct personal experience. This model remained legitimate so long as the central fact and semantic unity of divine speech was maintained.

[ 4 ] What we find in the mystical reflections of Ibn 'Arabī and Qūnavī alike are encoded utterances embodying an asymmetrical division between two components of instructive knowledge. Philosophically, they consist of the mawḑū' (subject) and the maṭlūb (object of inquiry); in theological dialectics and religious sciences they are generally known as aṣl (root) and far' (branch). Thus, in Qūnavī's view the idea was not merely to posit the “root” but to know it and to determine the precise modalities of our knowledge of it. A simple, unreflective cognizance of pregiven religious fundamentals, in the manner advocated by the Salafi-minded Ibn Taymīyyah , was still knowledge; yet nothing could disentangle it from the mundane influences that normally impinge upon the human faculty of comprehension.

[ 4 ] The central question posed in the “theological science” envisioned by Ibn Sīnā was that of “existence.” In the form of a syllogism, the theological knowledge it imparted consisted of indemonstrable premises and a conclusion. Indemonstrables were given elements in any syllogism (“givens” were posited through the senses, imagination, intellect, etc.). As a science, this grand concept of theology assembled all the pregivens derived in the lower sciences that came under its own jurisdiction, because theological science was the very ground of all sciences.

[ 4 ] Furthermore, Ibn Sīnā saw existence as something that required more than just a natural awareness of things. In his "Nafaḥāt ilāhiyyah," Qūnavī admitted that in that banal sense one could argue the awareness of existence was simply posited by way of intuition as the “first cognizance,” for which there was no demonstrable proof or true definition and which has merely an indistinct unity. However, this was not the biggest issue, he insisted. The difficulty arose with the “second cognizance,” namely, knowledge of the “reality distinguishable in itself from other realities”—in other words, the uniqueness of the reality.

This constituted the locus of the classical philosophical dilemma that preoccupied Qūnavī. The goal of knowledge was “knowledge of the realities of things.” One may either deny this knowledge to man, on the grounds that his natural faculties were imperfect, or affirm it at the risk of according him absolute knowledge. Contrasted to the second cognizance stood the first, which consisted of the “awareness of existence” and the perception of its “thingness.” His demarcation between this indistinct thingness and singular reality corresponded to the theological division of “subject” (mawḍūc) and “object of inquiry” (maṭlūb)—what is given and what is sought by way of knowledge. The realities, in the plural, consisted of the branches, the manifold qualities of the divine essence, by which God manifests Himself.

[ 4 ] Behind this structural view or formulation remained the vexing question: Should what is sought in the quest for knowledge be considered nothing but the original knowing subject revealed? Because the shay’ (thing) is given as the subject, like mawjūd (existent), the “cause of its knowledge is the predominance of that precept by which there is unity with the [thing] known, whatever it may be.” [ 16 ] This “unity” between knower and known is what any claim to a knowledge of the reality ultimately had to rest upon; but it is a unity which indicated that we knew the reality in the manner in which it has revealed itself to the other reality, that of the knower, and is not a simple identity of two entities.

At any rate, it is the knower's radical otherness that renders any simple unity impossible. How then could we expect man, in his finitude and imperfection, to know not merely the “realities of things,” but God his Creator and the ultimate Reality? However, unity can be rendered viable, in a didactic sense, through the notion of the “consonance” between the two realities by way of their predominant attributes. This is possible only by virtue of “pre-existing knowledge.” Hence, in philosophy, the process of discovery moves procession-like from what is known to what is unknown. Every “theological science” from Aristotle's to Ibn Sīnā's to Qūnavī's—no matter how formal and however mellifluous or spiritually meager its utterances may be—accepted this rudimentary principle.

[ 4 ] To Qūnavī's credit, he took pains to describe the passage, or supersession, that occurred with the knowledge of the thing as a unique reality by way of a special “unity” through consonance. In other words, knowledge of it in the form of an object of inquiry or “branch.” There is more to this than meets the eye. Movement here is not a mechanical passage from one point to the other. The possibility of transmutation, at some given level of commonality between two distinct realities (the knower and the known), is opened up through their consonance, or munāsabah.

Works [ edit ] I'jāz al-bayān fī ta’wīl Umm al-Kitāb. Second Edition. Hyderabad, Deccan: Maṭbacat Majlis Dā’irat al-Ma'ārif al-'Uthmānīyah, 1368 AH/1949 CE (also titled "Tafsir al-Fatiha") A lengthy mystical exegesis of selected Quranic verses, and his most important work.

Kitāb al-fukūk (also titled "Fakk al-Khutum"). Introd., ed. Muḥammad Khwājavī. Tehran: Intishārāt Mawlā, 1371 AHS/1413 AH, pp. 177-316. This is a short seminal commentary on Ibn 'Arabī’s "Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam" Kitāb al-Mufawadat. Briefwechsel Zwischen Șadr ud- Dīn -ee Qūnawī (gest. 673/1274) und Naṣīr ud-dīn Ṭūsī (gest. 672/1274). PhD Thesis. Edited and commented by Gudrun Schubert His correspondence with Nasir al-Din al-Tusi , consisting of “al-Ajwibah”, “al-As’ilah,” and “al-Mufṣiḥah.” Kitāb al-nafaḥāt al-ilāhīyah (or Kitāb al-nafaḥāt al-rabbānīyah), ms. 1354. Paris: Bibliothèque Nationale.

Kitāb al-nuṣūṣ. Copied by Ibrāhīm al-Lārījānī, 1315. Lithographed, Tehran: Kitābkhānah Ḥāmidī, Jamādī al-Thānī 1395 AH/1354 AHS; fol. 274-300.

Miftāḥ al-ghayb al-jam' wa al-wujūd. (On margins of Miftāḥ al-uns fī sharḥ Miftāḥ ghayb al-jam' wa al-wujūd. Shams Muḥammad b. Ḥamzah b. Muḥammad al-'Uthmānī, or Ibn al-Fanārī al-Ḥanafī. Lithographed in Tehran, 1323 AH.

One of Quwnawi's key works. It has long been taught to students in Iran's madrassas who have mastered the most difficult philosophical texts.

Sharḥ al-arba'īn ḥadīthan. Edited and annotated by Dr. Ḥasan Kāmil Yılmaz. Istanbul:  Yıdızlar Matbaası, 1990. Published as Tasavvufî Hadîs Şerhleri ve Konevînin Kırk Hadîs Şerhi An unfinished work on the famous 40 sayings of the Prophet of Islam. Qunawi died before completing this work but he commented on twenty-nine ḥadiths. It provides important elucidations on the "imagination" and other concepts.

Sharḥ al-asmā’ al-ḥusnā (see “Introduction” for bibliographical information on manuscripts used) A concise explanation of the ninety-nine names of God and their effects at the human level.

See also [ edit ] Ibn Arabi Qutb al-Din Shirazi Nasir al-Din Tusi Mulla Shams ad-Din al-Fanari References [ edit ] ^ a b F. E. Peters, "The Monotheists", Published by Princeton University Press, 2005. pg 330: "Al-Qunawi was a Persian Sufi.." ^ a b pg xvii: "Qunawi, a Persian had a profoundly different intellectual makeup" ^ Chittick, William C. (1989).

The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn al-ʻArabi's Metaphysics of Imagination . New York: SUNY Press.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Shaker, Anthony F. (9 November 2012).

Thinking in the Language of Reality: Ṣadr al- Dīn Qūnavī (1207-74 CE) and the Mystical Philosophy of Reason . Lac-des-Iles: Xlibris Corporation (published 2012).

ISBN 9781479718030 .

Print on demand accessdate=19 Jan 2018 ^ W.C. Chittick, "Sadr al-Din Muhammad b. Ishak b. Muhammad b. Yunus al-Kunawi", Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by: P. Bearman , Th. Bianquis , C.E. Bosworth , E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2007. Brill Online.

^ Sayyed Hossein Nasr, "Three Muslim Sages." Harvard University Press, 1964, 118-119.

^ b. Ismā'īl al-Nabhānī, Yūsuf (1992). 'Aṭwah'awḍ, Ibrāhīm (ed.).

Jāmi' karamāt al-awliyā' . Vol. 1. Beirut: Dār al-Fikr. p. 222.

^ Mahdī Tawḥīdī Pūr (1928).

'Abd al-Raḥmān Jāmī. Nafaḥāt al-uns min ḥaḍarāt al-quds . Tehran: Kitābfurūshī Sa'dī.

^ Dr. Su'ād al-Ḥakīm (1981).

Al-Mu'jam al-ṣūfī . Beirut: Dandurah. pp.

660– 661.

^ Ibrāhīm Ja'far, Dr. Muḥammad Kamāl (1370).

Kamāl al-Dīn'Abd al-Razzāq al-Qāshānī Isṭilāḥāt al-ṣūfīyah (2 ed.). Intishārāt Bīdār. p. 36.

^ Aflākī, Cl. Huart (1918).

Les saints des derviches tourneurs. Récits traduits du persan et annotés I . Paris: Ernest Leroux.

^ Claude Addas (1989).

Ibn 'Arabī ou La quête du Soufre Rouge . Paris: Editions Gallimard.

^ Al-Qārī al-Baghdādī (1959).

Al-Durr al-thamīn fī manāqib Muḥyī al-Dīn Ibn 'Arabī . Beirut.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Chittick, William C. (2004).

"The Central Point - Qūnawî's Role in the School of Ibn 'Arabî" .

Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society .

35 . Retrieved 20 Jan 2018 .

^ a b Louis Pouzet (1988).

Damas au VIIe/XIIIe siècle. Vie et structures religieuses d'une métropole islamique . Beirut: Dar El-Machreq Sarl Editeurs. p. 179.

^ Ālūsī, Maḥmūd Shukrī; al-Hudá al-Ṣayyādī, Abŭ; ibn Ḥasan Wădĭ, Muḥammad (1888).

Kitāb al-asrār al-ilāhīyah: sharḥ al-qaṣīdah al-Rafāʻīyah / taʾlīf Maḥmūd Shukrī al-Ālūsī al-Baghdādī al-Ḥusaynī al-Rafāʻī (1 ed.). Jamālīyah Miṣr : al-Maṭbaʻah al-Khayrīyah.

Sources [ edit ] Feuillebois, Ève (2017).

"ʿIrāqī, Fakhr al-Dīn" . In Fleet, Kate; Krämer, Gudrun ; Matringe, Denis; Nawas, John; Rowson, Everett (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam (3rd ed.). Brill Online.

ISSN 1873-9830 .

Peacock, A. C. S.

(2019).

Islam, Literature and Society in Mongol Anatolia . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1108499361 .

v t e Sufism Sufi orders Qadiriyya ( 'Abd al-Qadir al-Gilani ) Chishtiyya ( Mu'in al-Din Chishti ) Naqshbandiyya ( Baha' al-Din Naqshband ) Suhrawardiyya ( Shihab al-Din 'Umar al-Suhrawardi ) Rifa'iyya ( Ahmad al-Rifa'i ) Badawiyya ( Ahmad al-Badawi ) Desuqiyya ( Ibrahim al-Desuqi ) Shadhiliyya ( Abu al-Hasan al-Shadhili ) Akbariyya ( Ibn Arabi ) Khalwatiyya ('Umar al-Khalwati) Rahmaniyya ( Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Rahman al-Azhari ) Bayramiyya ( Bayram Wali ) Ba 'Alawiyya ( Muhammad ibn 'Ali Ba 'Alawi ) Tijaniyya ( Ahmad al-Tijani ) Idrisiyya ( Ahmad ibn Idris al-Fasi ) Practices Dhikr Haḍra Zuhd Ziyarat Mawlid Muraqabah Taqwa Tazkiyah Tawassul Tabarruk Tawakkul Ideas Ihsan Wajd Kashf Karamat Nūr Dhawq Ishq Murid Salik Sufi studies Sufi poetry Sufi philosophy Sufi literature Al-Risala al-Qushayriyya Hilyat al-Awliya' Kashf al-Mahjub The Alchemy of Happiness The Revival of the Religious Sciences Al-Burda Dala'il al-Khayrat Fadha'il al-'Amal Notable Sufis 2nd AH/8th AD Al-Hasan al-Basri (d. 110 AH) Malik ibn Dinar (d. 128 AH) Ibrahim ibn Adham (d. 160 AH) Sufyan al-Thawri (d. 161 AH) Dawud al-Ta'i (d. 165 AH) 'Abd al-Wahid ibn Zaid (d. 177 AH) Rabi'a al-'Adawiyya (d. 180 AH) Ibn al-Mubarak (d. 181 AH) Al-Fudayl ibn 'Iyad (d. 188 AH) Shaqiq al-Balkhi (d. 194 AH) Ma'ruf al-Karkhi (d. 200 AH) 3rd AH/9th AD Al-Darani (d. 205 or 215 AH) Bishr al-Hafi (d. 227 AH) Al-Harith al-Muhasibi (d. 243 AH) Dhul-Nun al-Misri (d. 245 AH) Sari al-Saqati (d. 253 AH) Yahya ibn Mu'adh al-Razi (d. 258 AH) Abu Sa'id al-Kharraz (d. 277 or 286 AH) Sahl al-Tustari (d. 283 AH) Al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi (d. 295 or 320 AH) Abu al-Husain al-Nuri (d. 295 AH) 4th AH/10th AD Ruwaym (d. 303 AH) Abu Bakr al-Shibli (d. 334 AH) Abu Talib al-Makki (d. 386 AH) Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi (d. 380 AH) Sufi leaders Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi (d. 589 AH) Muzaffar al-Din Gökböri (d. 630 AH) Yusuf Abu al-Haggag (d. 642 AH) Muhammad al-Fateh (d. 886 AH) Aurangzeb (d. 1118 AH) Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (d. 1277 AH) Bahadur Shah Zafar (d. 1278 AH) Imam Shamil (d. 1287 AH) Emir Abdel-Kader (d. 1300 AH) Muhammad Ahmad (d. 1302/1885) Omar al-Mukhtar (d. 1350 AH) 'Izz al-Din al-Qassam (d. 1354 AH) Portal v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism ( al-Ash'ari ) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Said Nursî Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit ( Hanafiyah ) Malik ibn Anas ( Maliki ) Al-Shafi'i ( Shafi‘i ) Maturidism ( Al-Maturidi ) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Zakariyya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al- |Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al- Juzjanī al- Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram ( Karramiyya ) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad- Dimashqī an- Nabati al-Qībtī ( Murjī - Qadariyah ) Mu'tazila ( Wasil ibn 'Ata' ) Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Twelver Shi'ism Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali al-Sajjad Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Wilayat al-faqih Isma'ili Shi'ism Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Zaydi Shi'ism Abu'l-Jarud al-Hamdani Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd Al-Qasim al-Rassi Al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya Al-Mansur al-Qasim Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Sunni Islam Ahl al-Hadith ( Atharism ) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y ( Ilm al-Kalam ) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudiyya Batriyya Imamate Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima ( Arbitration ) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al- Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al- Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah ( Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah ) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al- Fārisī ad- Dimashqī Qalandariyya Barak Baba Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah ( Ma'bad al-Juhani ) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Galibi Order Muʿtazila ( Rationalism ) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad 's doctrine Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Tariqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Ahmad al-Rifa'i – Rifa`i Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence : Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Vatican Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zjj8q
Cached time: 20250817055710
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.750 seconds
Real time usage: 0.922 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5740/1000000
Revision size: 30185/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 325428/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5401/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 98339/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.460/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16392496/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  715.288      1 -total
 32.74%  234.181      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 20.00%  143.080      1 Template:Reflist
 17.72%  126.718     12 Template:Cite_book
 12.85%   91.944      2 Template:Lang
 10.39%   74.348     15 Template:Navbox
  9.82%   70.252      1 Template:Sufism
  9.53%   68.136      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.39%   67.146      1 Template:Ibn_Arabi
  8.58%   61.382      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23477491:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817055710 and revision id 1295153293. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sadr_al-Din_al-Qunawi&oldid=1295153293 " Categories : Medieval Islamic philosophers 1274 deaths Sufi writers Akbarian Sufis 13th-century Iranian philosophers 1207 births Supporters of Ibn Arabi Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi 12 languages Add topic

