Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Legacy 3 Views 4 English translations 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Alexander Radishchev 44 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русиньскый Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian author (1749–1802) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Alexander Radishchev" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Alexander Radishchev Earlier than 1790. By unknown author Born ( 1749-08-31 ) August 31, 1749 Moscow, Russia Died September 24, 1802 (1802-09-24) (aged 53) Saint Petersburg, Russia Occupation Writer Alexander Nikolayevich Radishchev ( Russian : Алекса́ндр Никола́евич Ради́щев ; 31 August [ O.S.

20 August] 1749 – 24 September [ O.S.

12 September] 1802) was a Russian author and social critic who was arrested and exiled under Catherine the Great . He brought the tradition of radicalism in Russian literature to prominence with his 1790 work Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow . His depiction of socio-economic conditions in Russia resulted in his exile to Siberia until 1797. He was the grandfather of painter Alexey Bogolyubov .

Biography [ edit ] Radishchev was born on an estate just outside Moscow , into a minor noble family of Tatar descent, tracing its roots back to defeated princes who entered into the service of Ivan the Terrible after the conquest of Kazan in 1552, [ 1 ] the Tsar offering them, in exchange of baptism , to work for him and being allotted lands of some twenty-two thousand acres, a number their descendants continued to add to by serving the Tsars over the generations.

[ 2 ] His father, Nicholas Afanasevich Radishchev, a prominent landowner in Moscow, had a reputation for treating his 3000-plus serfs humanely. Until he was 8 years old he lived on his father's estate with a nurse and tutor in Verkhni Oblyazovo [ 3 ] (then part of the Saratov Governorate , today in Penza Oblast ), one hundred miles west of the Volga river .

He then went to live with a relative in Moscow, where he was allowed to spend time at the newly established Moscow University .  In 1765 his family connections provided him with an opportunity to serve as a page in Catherine's court, which he regarded with suspicion for its "contempt for the Orthodox faith, and a desire to deliver the homeland into foreign (German) hands".

[ 4 ] Because of his exceptional academic promise, Radishchev was chosen as one of a dozen young students to be sent abroad to acquire Western learning . For several years he studied at the University of Leipzig .  His foreign education influenced his approach to Russian society, and upon his return he hoped to incorporate Enlightenment philosophies such as natural law and the social contract into Russian conditions.  Even as he served as a Titular Councillor , drafting legal protocols, in Catherine's civil service, he lauded revolutionaries like George Washington , praised the early stages of the French Revolution , and found himself enamored of the Russian Freemason, Nicholas Ivanovich Novikov , whose publication The Drone offered the first public critiques of the government, particularly with regards to serfdom .

[ 5 ] Novikov's sharp satire and indignation inspired Radishchev's most famous work – Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow – in which he emulates Novikov's harsh and passionate style.  He too was especially critical of serfdom and of the limits to personal freedom imposed by the autocracy.

[ 6 ] The Empress Catherine the Great read the work, viewed Radishchev's calls for reform as evidence of Jacobin -style radicalism, and ordered copies of the text confiscated and destroyed.  Out of the 650 copies originally printed, only 17 had survived by the time the work was reprinted in England fifty years later.

[ 7 ] In 1790 Radishchev was arrested and condemned to death.  He humbly begged  Catherine for forgiveness, publicly disowning his book, and his sentence was commuted to exile to the small Siberian town of Ilimsk .

En route the writer was treated like a common convict, shackled at the ankles and forced to endure the Russian cold to which he eventually succumbed.  His friend, Count Alexander Vorontsov , who held sway with Catherine, interceded and managed to secure Radishchev more humane accommodations, allowing him to return to Moscow to recover and restart his journey with dignity and comfort.

[ 8 ] Beginning in October 1790, Radishchev's two-year trip took him through Siberia, stopping in the towns of Yekaterinburg , Tobolsk , and Irkutsk before reaching Ilimsk in 1792. Along the way, he began writing a biography of Yermak , the Cossack conqueror of Siberia, and pursuing an interest in geology and nature. Settling in Ilimsk for five years with his second wife, Elizabeth Vasilievna Rubanovsky, and his two children, Radishchev, as the only educated man in the area, he became the local doctor and saved several lives.  He also wrote a long treatise, On Man, His Mortality, His Immortality , revered [ by whom?

] as one of the few great Russian philosophical works .

[ 9 ] In it he addresses man's belief in the afterlife, the corporality of the soul, the ultimate redemption of sinners and the faults of materialism .

[ citation needed ] After Catherine's death in 1796, her successor Tsar Paul recalled Radishchev from Siberia and confined him to his own estate. The writer again attempted to push for reforms in Russia's government. When Alexander I became Emperor in 1801, Radishchev was briefly employed to help revise Russian law, a realization of his lifelong dream. Unfortunately, his tenure in this administrative role proved short and unsuccessful. In 1802, a despondent Radishchev committed suicide by drinking poison, possibly after being rebuked in a friendly manner by Count Zavadovsky for expressing radical ideas. Count Zavadosky, in his reproof, spoke of another exile to Siberia.

[ 10 ] Legacy [ edit ] During the author's last years, his Moscow apartment became the center of several literary circles who extolled similar views and most outspokenly mourned his death.  The Russian autocracy, however, managed to prevent A Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow from being published until 1905, during which time it circulated through radical groups and was translated into several languages.

Alexander Pushkin , sympathetic to Radishchev's views and passion, undertook to write a sequel to his inflammatory book, which was unfortunately never finished and early on faced pressure from the censors.  Following the 1905 and 1917 revolutions, however, Radishchev was accepted into the radical canon and became widely read throughout Russia and Europe.  Despite the discrepancies between the author's ideal and the Soviet reality, authorities managed to paint him as "a materialist, an active fighter against autocratic tyranny, and a veritable forefather of Bolshevism." [ 11 ] Views [ edit ] Radishchev on a 1952 postage stamp As a true student of the Enlightenment, Radishchev held views that favored the freedom of the individual, Humanism, and patriotism.  These values are best summed up by “equality of all classes before the law, abolition of the Table of Ranks , trial by jury, religious toleration , freedom of the press , emancipation of manorial serfs, habeas corpus , and freedom of trade”.

[ 12 ] Upon his return from Leipzig in 1771, Radishchev saw with fresh eyes the stark contrast between life under liberal Western states like England and Switzerland and that under Russia's autocracy. Echoing the sentiments of Catherine herself, he advocated education for all classes, a system he had the fortune to witness in a school in Irkutsk.

[ 13 ] A more educated populace would provide the foundation for an eventual republican or parliamentary system.  Of all of Russia's social ills, Radishchev especially despised the inequality and prolongation of serfdom, rooted in a traditional social system that enforced a strict hierarchy and permitted abuses and exploitation.  Ironically, under Catherine's enlightened reign, serfdom was intensified and spread to newly conquered territories.

[ 14 ] While in Siberia, Radishchev's economic thought developed, not only in terms of decreasing dependence on serfdom but denouncing international trade. Though influenced by Adam Smith , Radishchev maintained protectionist views, condemning unnecessary international trade and proposing stronger domestic production. In the debate over Sino-Russian trade relations, he believed Russia's own resources were enough to support it.

[ 15 ] Criticizing the history of arbitrary rule in Russia, Radishchev called autocracy the system of governance "most contrary to human nature".

[ 16 ] Under this system, government was better positioned to breach its social contract with the governed, creating an unjust and oppressed society.  He extends this system to master-serf relations as well, noting that seeking unlimited power is a natural human vice. Radishchev does not sweepingly criticize all autocrats, but only tyrants, praising, in fact, Lycurgus , the philosopher king of Sparta who promoted equality and civil rights.

[ 17 ] Radishchev, however, did not believe in, or desire, bloody revolution and instead hoped for a reforming autocrat who would abolish serfdom and "maintain equality in society, protect the widow and the orphan and save the innocent from harm." [ 18 ] As a member of the ruling class, he did not seek to overturn autocracy but to persuade his countrymen and superiors to give up some of their vested power.  In no way an idealist, the writer acknowledged that "where there was more enlightenment, where there was more social life, there was more corruption, so inseparable are good and evil on the earth." [ 19 ] Radishchev's religious and philosophical views were incredibly liberal for his time. Denying the belief that sensory experience is primary, Radishchev, in On Man, His Mortality, His Immortality , speaks in favor of man's higher virtues as the main elements in complex human thought. He believed that man's hereditary faculties have as much influence on his development as the external environment. He also points out, however, that there are common, innate traits that bind all people, particularly the belief in a higher power. The belief in immortality remains particularly potent for him, both as a factor of faith and as a solace amidst the difficulties of life.

[ citation needed ] English translations [ edit ] A Journey From St. Petersburg to Moscow , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1958. Translated by Leo Wiener. Edited with an introduction and notes by Roderick Page Thaler.

A Journey From St. Petersburg to Moscow , Columbia University Press, 2020 (The Russian Library). Translated by Andrew Kahn and Irina Reyfman.

See also [ edit ] Decembrist revolt Ivan Pnin References [ edit ] ^ Alston, Patrick L. (January 1956).

Alexander N. Radischev: A Spokesman of the Russian Enlightenment (M.A. thesis). University of California, Berkeley. p. 30.

^ McConnell, Allen (6 December 2012) [Orig. published in print in 1964].

A Russian Philosophe, Alexander Radishchev (eBook ed.). Springer Dordrecht. p. 6.

ISBN 978-94-015-3375-1 .

^ Radishchev, Aleksandr Nikolaevich (1970).

Puteshestvie iz Peterburga v Moskvu Путешествие из Петербурга в Москву [ Journey from St. Petersburg to Moscow ]. Moscow: Detskaya Literatura. pp.

9– 10.

^ Lang, D.M.

(1977).

The First Russian Radical: Alexander Radishchev . Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 26.

ISBN 9780837196374 .

^ Lang 1977 , p. 63.

^ Radishchev, Alexandr Nikolaevich (1958).

A Journey From St. Petersburg to Moscow . Translated by Leo Wiener ; edited with an introduction by Roderick Page Thaler. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

^ Yarmolinsky, Avrahm (1959).

Road to Revolution: A Century of Russian Radicalism . New York: Macmillan. p. 5.

^ Lang 1977 , p. 204.

^ Lang 1977 , p. 217.

^ Riha, Thomas (15 February 2009) [Orig. published in 1969].

Readings in Russian Civilization . Vol. 2 (Rev. ed.). University of Chicago Press. p. 266.

ISBN 9780226718446 .

^ Lang 1977 , p. 276.

^ McConnell, Allen (March 1964). "The Empress and Her Protégé: Catherine II and Radischev".

The Journal of Modern History .

36 (1): 14– 27.

doi : 10.1086/239233 .

JSTOR 1874423 .

^ Lang 1977 , p. 211.

^ McConnell 1964 , p. 18.

^ Lang 1977 , p. 209.

^ Radishchev 1958 , p. 282.

^ McConnell, Allen (December 1958). "Radishchev's Political Thought".

American Slavic and East European Review .

17 (4): 439– 453.

doi : 10.2307/3001129 .

JSTOR 3001129 .

^ McConnell 1958 , p. 442.

^ McConnell 1958 , p. 451.

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Russia Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexander_Radishchev&oldid=1297879513 " Categories : Russian political writers Age of Enlightenment Leipzig University alumni 1749 births 1802 deaths 18th-century writers from the Russian Empire 18th-century male writers from the Russian Empire 19th-century writers from the Russian Empire 18th-century novelists from the Russian Empire Writers from Moscow People from the Russian Empire of Tatar descent Enlightenment philosophers Russian exiles in the Russian Empire Suicides in the Russian Empire 1800s suicides 18th-century journalists Prisoners of the Peter and Paul Fortress Hidden categories: CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Russian-language text Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 03:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexander Radishchev 44 languages Add topic

