Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rural housing in the United Kingdom 2 Rural housing in the United States 3 Rural housing in India 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle External links subsection 6.1 United Kingdom 6.2 United States Toggle the table of contents Rural housing 1 language کوردی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rural housing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( September 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rural area Economics Crafts India Development Delivery service Electrification Internet Health Housing Poverty Reservation Ghetto People Farmer Family farmers Farmworker Tenant Indigenous peoples Pastoralists Herder Peasant Smallholders Women in Agriculture Society Agrarian Country Diversity Flight Tourism Agricultural Types of communities Rurality By Country Canada China Laos United States History Agricultural Regional Rural American history Politics Agrarianism Agrarian socialism Nomadic conflict Peasant revolts Informal parliament Peasant movement Via Campesina United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants v t e Provision of housing in rural areas is considered inadequate in the United Kingdom and the United States. Programs funded by government are providing some rural housing in the United States and India.

Rural housing in the United Kingdom [ edit ] The lack of affordable housing is one of the most critical issues facing rural communities in the UK.

[ citation needed ] This results in people have to move away to find affordable housing, which means that families are separated by distance and are less able to support each other by providing childcare or to do shopping for elderly relatives. Moreover, local services such as schools and shops become increasingly difficult to maintain due to lack of demand, while rural enterprises cannot recruit sufficient workers who live locally. An integrated approach is needed [ citation needed ] to sustain rural communities.

Rural housing in the United States [ edit ] The lack of affordable housing in rural areas of the United States continues to be a critical issue and concern. Factors that can affect affordable rents and home ownership opportunities in Rural America include: lower income levels, urban sprawl pushing housing costs up, loss of high paying jobs and lack of access to credit.

Though the American Housing Survey (AHS) "Homeownership rates increased for virtually all racial and ethnic groups, income groups, regions, and rural and urban areas during the 1990s." However, according to the US Housing Market Conditions, 2nd quarter, 2007 report by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development , "Housing affordability worsened as sales prices of existing homes increased and mortgage interest rates increased. Housing market performance was weak in the second quarter of 2007, with generally falling production levels and weak existing home sales. The exceptions are the increase in new home sales and the slight increase in housing starts. Inventories of new and existing homes available for sale continue at very high levels, with enough houses available to last nearly 8 months. The home ownership rate declined to 68.2 percent in the second quarter of 2007." Programs that are addressing the needs of rural housing can be seen through the United States Department of Agriculture ’s Rural Housing Service . Other assistance is available through the Housing Assistance Council which is a non-profit organisation. In the United States, "the Housing Assistance Council (HAC) has been helping local organizations build affordable homes in rural America since 1971. HAC emphasizes local solutions, empowerment of the poor, reduced dependence, and self-help strategies. HAC assists in the development of both single- and multi-family homes and promotes home-ownership for working low-income rural families through a self-help, "sweat equity" construction method. The Housing Assistance Council offers services to public, non-profit, and private organisations throughout the rural United States. HAC also maintains a special focus on high-need groups and regions: Indian country, the Mississippi Delta, farmworkers, the Southwest border colonias, and Appalachia.” The United States Department of Agriculture researches and compiles data sources for rural areas of the United States, through the Economic Research Service , as seen in their article, "One in Four Nonmetro Households are Housing Stressed,” where it indicates that, "Of the Nation’s 2,000-plus nonmetropolitan (nonmetro) counties, 302 are defined as housing stressed." It also states, "The principal component of housing stress is high housing expenses relative to income...” The United States Department of Agriculture , National Agricultural Library ’s, Rural Information Center’s Housing page also provides additional resources for rural housing within the United States and works with rural communities and citizens to assist them in housing information needs.

Rural housing in India [ edit ] In India, rural housing is provided through Indira Awaas Yojana , a welfare program of the Government of India. It was first implemented in 1985 [ 1 ] and in the 2011 budget the program was funded in the amount of ₹ 89.96 billion (US$1.1 billion).

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Affordable housing American Housing Survey Rural community development Rural Housing Service References [ edit ] ^ "GUIDELINES for INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA-Introduction" . rural.nic.in. Archived from the original on 25 December 2010 . Retrieved 8 March 2011 .

^ Balchand, K. (28 February 2011).

"Pranab shifts focus to Bharat Nirman" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 8 March 2011 .

US Housing Market Conditions, 2nd Quarter, 2007 report by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research.

One in Four Nonmetro Households are Housing Stressed.

Amber Waves. November 2004. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

External links [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Affordable Rural housing , DEFRA Rural Housing Trust Rural Community Council of Essex United States [ edit ] Council for Affordable and Rural Housing Housing Assistance Council Rural housing resources , US Department of Agriculture Rural Housing Service , US Department of Agriculture US Department of Housing and Urban Development v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rural_housing&oldid=1299231045 " Categories : Housing Rural economics Rural community development Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2008 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2008 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use British English from September 2013 Use dmy dates from December 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2008 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 05:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rural housing 1 language Add topic

