Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Species studied 3 Animal cognition 4 Disorders of animal behavior 5 Human–animal relationships 6 Topics of study 7 Notable comparative psychologists 8 Related fields 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Comparative psychology 34 languages العربية অসমীয়া Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Македонски Bahasa Melayu 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Shqip සිංහල کوردی Српски / srpski தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article may be unbalanced towards certain viewpoints .

Please help improve it by adding information on neglected viewpoints. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( September 2024 ) Study of non-human animal behavior and mental processes Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Comparative psychology is the scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non- human animals [ clarification needed ] , especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history, adaptive significance, and development of behavior. The phrase comparative psychology may be employed in either a narrow or a broad meaning.

[ 1 ] In its narrow meaning, it refers to the study of the
similarities and differences in the psychology and behavior of different species. In a broader meaning, comparative psychology includes comparisons between different biological and socio-cultural groups, such as species , sexes , developmental stages, ages, and ethnicities . Research in this area addresses many different issues, uses many different methods and explores the behavior of many different species, from insects to primates .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Comparative psychology is sometimes assumed to emphasize cross-species comparisons, including those between humans and animals. However, some researchers feel that direct comparisons should not be the sole focus of comparative psychology and that intense focus on a single organism to understand its behavior is just as desirable; if not more so. Donald Dewsbury reviewed the works of several psychologists and their definitions and concluded that the object of comparative psychology is to establish principles of generality focusing on both proximate and ultimate causation .

[ 4 ] Using a comparative approach to behavior allows one to evaluate the target behavior from four different, complementary perspectives, developed by Niko Tinbergen.

[ 5 ] First, one may ask how pervasive the behavior is across species (i.e. how common is the behavior between animal species?). Second, one may ask how the behavior contributes to the lifetime reproductive success of the individuals demonstrating the behavior (i.e. does the behavior result in animals producing more offspring than animals not displaying the behavior)? Theories addressing the ultimate causes of behavior are based on the answers to these two questions.

Third, what mechanisms are involved in the behavior (i.e. what physiological, behavioral, and environmental components are necessary and sufficient for the generation of the behavior)? Fourth, a researcher may ask about the development of the behavior within an individual (i.e. what maturational, learning, social experiences must an individual undergo in order to demonstrate a behavior)? Theories addressing the proximate causes of behavior are based on answers to these two questions. For more details see Tinbergen's four questions .

History [ edit ] The 9th century scholar al-Jahiz wrote works on the social organization and communication methods of animals like ants.

[ 6 ] The 11th century Arabic writer Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) wrote the Treatise on the Influence of Melodies on the Souls of Animals , an early treatise dealing with the effects of music on animals . In the treatise, he demonstrates how a camel's pace could be hastened or slowed with the use of music , and shows other examples of how music can affect animal behavior , experimenting with horses, birds and reptiles. Through to the 19th century, a majority of scholars in the Western world continued to believe that music was a distinctly human phenomenon, but experiments since then have vindicated Ibn al-Haytham's view that music does indeed have an effect on animals.

[ 7 ] Charles Darwin was central in the development of comparative psychology; it is thought that psychology should be spoken in terms of "pre-" and "post-Darwin" because his contributions were so influential. Darwin's theory led to several hypotheses, one being that the factors that set humans apart, such as higher mental, moral and spiritual faculties, could be accounted for by evolutionary principles. In response to the vehement opposition to Darwinism was the "anecdotal movement" led by George Romanes who set out to demonstrate that animals possessed a "rudimentary human mind".

[ 4 ] Romanes is most famous for two major flaws in his work: his focus on anecdotal observations and entrenched anthropomorphism .

[ 2 ] Near the end of the 19th century, several scientists existed whose work was also very influential.

Douglas Alexander Spalding was called the "first experimental biologist", [ 4 ] and worked mostly with birds; studying instinct, imprinting, and visual and auditory development.

Jacques Loeb emphasized the importance of objectively studying behavior, Sir John Lubbock is credited with first using mazes and puzzle devices to study learning and Conwy Lloyd Morgan is thought to be "the first ethologist in the sense in which we presently use the word".

[ 4 ] Although the field initially attempted to include a variety of species, by the early 1950s it had come to focus primarily on white lab rats and pigeons , and the topic of study was restricted to learning, usually in mazes. This stunted state of affairs was pointed out by Frank Beach in 1950, [ 8 ] and although it was generally agreed with, no real change took place. He repeated the charges a decade later, again with no results.

Meanwhile, in Europe, the field of ethology was making strides in studying a multitude of animal species and a plethora of behaviors. There was friction between the two disciplines where there should have been cooperation, but comparative psychologists refused, for the most part, to broaden their horizons. This state of affairs ended with the triumph of ethology over comparative psychology, culminating in the Nobel Prize being awarded to ethologists, along with a flood of informative books and television programs on ethological studies that were widely seen and read in the United States.

[ 9 ] At present, comparative psychology in the United States is moribund.

[ 10 ] Throughout the long history of comparative psychology, repeated attempts have been made to enforce a more disciplined approach, in which similar studies are carried out on animals of different species, and the results interpreted in terms of their different phylogenetic or ecological backgrounds.

Behavioral ecology in the 1970s gave a more solid base of knowledge against which a true comparative psychology could develop. However, the broader use of the term "comparative psychology" is enshrined in the names of learned societies and academic journals, not to mention in the minds of psychologists of other specialisms, so the label of the field is not likely to disappear completely.

A persistent question which comparative psychologists have endeavored to stury is the relative intelligence of different species of animal. Indeed, some early efforts at a genuinely comparative psychology involved evaluating how well animals of different species could learn various tasks. However, these attempts floundered. In retrospect it can be seen that they were not sufficiently sophisticated, either in their analysis of the demands of different tasks, or in their choice of species to compare.

[ 2 ] However, the definition of "intelligence" in comparative psychology is deeply affected by anthropomorphism ; experiments focused on simple tasks, complex problems, reversal learning, learning sets, and delayed alternation were plagued with practical and theoretical problems.

[ 2 ] In the literature, "intelligence" is generally defined as whatever is closest to human performance, and neglects behaviors that humans are usually incapable of (e.g.

echolocation ).

[ 11 ] Specifically, comparative researchers encounter problems associated with individual differences, differences in motivation, differences in reinforcement, differences in sensory function, differences in motor capacities, and species-typical preparedness (i.e. some species have evolved to acquire some behaviors quicker than other behaviors).

[ 2 ] Species studied [ edit ] A wide variety of species have been studied by comparative psychologists. However, a small number have dominated the scene.

Ivan Pavlov 's early work used dogs; although they have been the subject of occasional studies, since then they have not figured prominently. Increasing interest in the study of abnormal animal behavior has led to a return to the study of most kinds of domestic animal.

Thorndike began his studies with cats, but American comparative psychologists quickly shifted to the more economical rat , which remained the almost invariable subject for the first half of the 20th century and continues to be used.

Skinner introduced the use of pigeons , and they continue to be important in some fields. There has always been interest in studying various species of primate ; important contributions to social and developmental psychology were made by Harry F. Harlow 's studies of maternal deprivation in rhesus monkeys . Cross-fostering studies have shown similarities between human infants and infant chimpanzees. Kellogg and Kellogg [ 12 ] (1933) aimed to look at heredity and environmental effects of young primates. They found that a cross-fostered chimpanzee named Gua was better at recognizing human smells and clothing and that the Kelloggs' infant (Donald) recognised humans better by their faces. The study ended nine months after it had begun, after the infant began to imitate the noises of Gua.

Nonhuman primates have also been used to show the development of language in comparison with human development. For example, Gardner (1967) successfully taught the female chimpanzee Washoe 350 words in American Sign Language . Washoe subsequently passed on some of this teaching to her adopted offspring, Loulis . A criticism of Washoe's acquisition of sign language focused on the extent to which she actually understood what she was signing. Her signs may have just been based on an association to get a reward, such as food or a toy. Other studies concluded that apes do not understand linguistic input, but may form an intended meaning of what is being communicated.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] All great apes have been reported to have the capacity of allospecific symbolic production.

Interest in primate studies has increased with the rise in studies of animal cognition. Other animals thought to be intelligent have also been increasingly studied. Examples include various species of corvid , parrots—especially the grey parrot —and dolphins . Alex (Avian Learning Experiment) is a well known case study (1976–2007) which was developed by Pepperberg, [ 16 ] who found that the African gray parrot Alex did not only mimic vocalisations but understood the concepts of same and different between objects. The study of non-human mammals has also included the study of dogs. Due to their domestic nature and personalities, dogs have lived closely with humans, and parallels in communication and cognitive behaviours have therefore been recognised and further researched. Joly-Mascheroni and colleagues (2008) demonstrated that dogs may be able to catch human yawns and suggested a level of empathy in dogs, a point that is strongly debated. Pilley and Reid [ 17 ] found that a Border Collie named Chaser was able to successfully identify and retrieve 1022 distinct objects/toys.

Animal cognition [ edit ] Main article: Animal cognition Researchers who study animal cognition are interested in understanding the mental processes that control complex behavior, and much of their work parallels that of cognitive psychologists working with humans. For example, there is extensive research with animals on attention, categorization, concept formation, memory, spatial cognition, and time estimation. Much research in these and other areas is related directly or indirectly to behaviors important to survival in natural settings, such as navigation, tool use, and numerical competence. Thus, comparative psychology and animal cognition are heavily overlapping research categories.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Disorders of animal behavior [ edit ] Further information: Animal psychopathology Veterinary surgeons recognize that the psychological state of a captive or domesticated animal must be taken into account if its behavior and health are to be understood and optimized.

[ 21 ] Common causes of disordered behavior in captive or pet animals are lack of stimulation, inappropriate stimulation, or overstimulation.

[ 22 ] These conditions can lead to disorders, unpredictable and unwanted behavior, and sometimes even physical symptoms and diseases.

[ 23 ] For example, rats who are exposed to loud music for a long period will ultimately develop unwanted behaviors that have been compared with human psychosis , like biting their owners.

[ citation needed ] The way dogs behave when understimulated is widely believed to depend on the breed as well as on the individual animal's character. For example, huskies have been known to ruin gardens and houses if they are not allowed enough activity.

[ 24 ] Dogs are also prone to psychological damage if they are subjected to violence. If they are treated very badly, they may become dangerous.

[ 25 ] The systematic study of disordered animal behavior draws on research in comparative psychology, including the early work on conditioning and instrumental learning, but also on ethological studies of natural behavior. However, at least in the case of familiar domestic animals, it also draws on the accumulated experience of those who have worked closely with the animals.

[ citation needed ] Human–animal relationships [ edit ] Main article: Anthrozoology The relationship between humans and animals has long been of interest to anthropologists as one pathway to an understanding the evolution of human behavior. Similarities between the behavior of humans and animals have sometimes been used in an attempt to understand the evolutionary significance of particular behaviors. Differences in the treatment of animals have been said to reflect a society's understanding of human nature and the place of humans and animals in the scheme of things.

Domestication has been of particular interest. For example, it has been argued that, as animals became domesticated, humans treated them as property and began to see them as inferior or fundamentally different from humans.

[ 26 ] Ingold [ 27 ] remarks that in all societies children have to learn to differentiate and separate themselves from others. In this process, strangers may be seen as "not people", and like animals. Ingold quoted Sigmund Freud: "Children show no trace of arrogance which urges adult civilized men to draw a hard-and-fast line between their own nature and that of all other animals. Children have no scruples over allowing animals to rank as their full equals." With maturity however, humans find it hard to accept that they themselves are animals, so they categorize, separating humans from animals, and animals into wild animals and tame animals, and tame animals into house pets and livestock. Such divisions can be seen as similar to categories of humans: who is part of a human community and someone who is not—that is, the outsider.

The New York Times ran an article that showed the psychological benefits of animals, [ 28 ] more specifically of children with their pets. It has been proven that having a pet does in fact improve kids' social skills. In the article, Dr. Sue Doescher, a psychologist involved in the study, stated, "It made the children more cooperative and sharing." It was also shown that these kids were more confident with themselves and able to be more empathic with other children.

Furthermore, in an edition of Social Science and Medicine it was stated, "A random survey of 339 residents from Perth, Western Australia were selected from three suburbs and interviewed by telephone. Pet ownership was found to be positively associated with some forms of social contact and interaction, and with perceptions of neighborhood friendliness. After adjustment for demographic variables, pet owners scored higher on social capital and civic engagement scales." [ 29 ] Results like these let us know that owning a pet provides opportunities for neighborly interaction, among many other chances for socialization among people.

Topics of study [ edit ] Individual behavior General descriptions Orientation (interaction with environment) Locomotion Ingestive behavior Hoarding Nest building Exploration Play Tonic immobility (playing dead) Other miscellaneous behaviors ( personal grooming , hibernation , etc.) Reproductive behavior General descriptions Developmental psychology Control ( nervous system and endocrine system ) Imprinting Evolution of sexual characteristics/behaviors Social behavior Imitation Behavior genetics Instincts Sensory-perceptual processes Neural and endocrine correlates of behavior Motivation Evolution Learning Qualitative and functional comparisons Consciousness and mind Notable comparative psychologists [ edit ] Noted comparative psychologists, in this broad sense, include: Aristotle Frank Beach F.J.J. Buytendijk Charles Darwin James Mark Baldwin Allen and Beatrix Gardner Harry F. Harlow Donald Hebb Richard Herrnstein L.T. Hobhouse Clark L. Hull Linus Kline Wolfgang Köhler Konrad Lorenz Emil Wolfgang Menzel Jr.

Neal E. Miller C. Lloyd Morgan O. Hobart Mowrer Robert Lockhard Ivan Pavlov Irene Pepperberg George Romanes Thorleif Schjelderup-Ebbe Sara Shettleworth B.F. Skinner Willard Small Edward C. Tolman Edward L. Thorndike Jakob von Uexküll Margaret Floy Washburn John B. Watson Wilhelm Wundt Many of these were active in fields other than animal psychology; this is characteristic of comparative psychologists.

Related fields [ edit ] Fields of psychology and other disciplines that draw upon, or overlap with, comparative psychology include: Animal cognition Behavioral ecology Biosemiotics Ethology Evolutionary neuroscience Experimental analysis of behavior Neuroethology Operant conditioning Physiological psychology Psychopharmacology Trans-species psychology Zoosemiotics Notes [ edit ] ^ Raffaele d'Isa; Charles I. Abramson (2023).

"The origin of the phrase comparative psychology: an historical overview" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

14 : 1174115.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1174115 .

PMC 10225565 .

PMID 37255515 .

^ a b c d e Dewsbury, D. (1978).

Comparative Animal Behavior . McGraw-Hill Book Company. New York, NY.

^ Papini, M.R. (2003). Comparative Psychology. In Handbook of Research Methods in Experimental Psychology . Ed. Stephen F. Davis. Blackwell. Malden, MA.

^ a b c d Dewsbury, D. (1984).

Comparative Psychology in the Twentieth Century . Hutchinson Ross Publishing Company. Stroudsburg, PA.

^ Tinbergen, N. (1963). "On aims and methods of ethology".

Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie .

20 (4): 410– 33.

doi : 10.1111/j.1439-0310.1963.tb01161.x .

^ ( Haque 2004 , p. 376) ^ ( Plott 2000 , p. 461) ^ Beach, Frank. (1950) The snark was a boojum. ' American Psychologist, 5' , 115-24.

^ Simon, Armando. (2017) A brief essay on how comparative psychology became an endangered species. ' Revista Interamericana de Psicologia, 51 , 107-110.' ^ Abramson, Charles. (2015) A crisis in comparative psychology: Where have all the  undergraduates gone? Additional comments. ' Innovative Teaching, 4,' article 7, 1-10.

^ Wynne, C. D. L. (1978).

Animal Cognition: The Mental Lives of Animals . Palgrave. New York, NY.

^ Kellogg, W.N. and L.A. Kellogg. (1933) The Ape and The Child: A Comparative Study of the Environmental Influence Upon Early Behavior . Hafner Publishing Co., New York and London.

^ Terrace (1979) ^ Savage-Rumbaugh (1987) ^ Klaus Zuberbühler (2015).

"Linguistic capacity of non-human animals" (PDF) .

Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science .

6 (3): 313– 321.

doi : 10.1002/wcs.1338 .

hdl : 10023/8091 .

PMID 26263232 .

^ Pepperberg, I. M. 1991 A communicative approach to animal cognition: a study of conceptual abilities of a grey parrot. In: Cognitive Ethology: the Minds of Other Animals (Ed. Carolyn A. Ristau), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale New Jersey; Hove and London England.

^ John W. Pilley; Alliston K. Reid (2011).

"Border collie comprehends object names as verbal referents" (PDF) .

Behavioural Processes .

86 (2): 184– 195.

doi : 10.1016/j.beproc.2010.11.007 .

PMID 21145379 .

S2CID 18753940 .

^ p. 2, Menzel, R. & Fischer, J. (2010) Animal Thinking: Contemporary Issues in Comparative Cognition ^ Wasserman & Zentall (eds) (2006); Comparative Cognition ^ Shettleworth, Sara J. (2010); Cognition, Evolution, and Behavior (2nd Ed) , Oxford Univ. Press.

^ Canadian Council on Animal Care (April 2021).

CCAC guidelines: Animal welfare assessment (PDF) .

ISBN 978-0-919087-89-7 .

^ Lee, Gwang-Hoon; Jo, Woori; Kang, Tae-Ku; Oh, Taeho; Kim, KilSoo (2023-03-19).

"Assessment of Stress Caused by Environmental Changes for Improving the Welfare of Laboratory Beagle Dogs" .

Animals .

13 (6): 1095.

doi : 10.3390/ani13061095 .

ISSN 2076-2615 .

PMC 10044678 .

PMID 36978636 .

^ Camps, Tomàs; Amat, Marta; Manteca, Xavier (2019-12-12).

"A Review of Medical Conditions and Behavioral Problems in Dogs and Cats" .

Animals .

9 (12): 1133.

doi : 10.3390/ani9121133 .

ISSN 2076-2615 .

PMC 6941081 .

PMID 31842492 .

^ Ian (16 April 2008).

"Interview - Siberian Husky Club of Great Britain" . Preloved . Retrieved May 4, 2015 .

^ Dass, Dr. Amrita (October 23, 2008).

"Pet Peeves" .

The Telegraph (Calcutta) . Archived from the original on October 25, 2008 . Retrieved May 4, 2015 .

^ Mullin, Molly. "Animals and Anthropology." Society and Animals: Journal of Human-Animal Studies . 2002. Web. < http://www.societyandanimalsforum.org/sa/sa10.4/mullin.shtml Archived 2012-03-22 at the Wayback Machine >.

^ Ingold, Ted, ed.

What Is an Animal?

Routledge, 1994. 14–15.

^ Goleman, Daniel (1990-01-11).

"HEALTH; Children and Their Pets: Unexpected Psychological Benefits" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2023-02-06 .

^ Wood, Lisa; Giles-Corti, Billie; Bulsara, Max (2005). "The Pet Connection: Pets as a Conduit for Social Capital?".

Social Science and Medicine .

61 (6): 1159– 73.

doi : 10.1016/j.socscimed.2005.01.017 .

PMID 15970228 .

References [ edit ] Haque, Amber (2004), "Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contributions of Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim Psychologists", Journal of Religion and Health , 43 (4): 357– 77, doi : 10.1007/s10943-004-4302-z , S2CID 38740431 Plott, C. (2000), Global History of Philosophy: The Period of Scholasticism , Motilal Banarsidass , ISBN 81-208-0551-8 Further reading [ edit ] Johnson-Pynn, J.; Fragaszy, D.M.; Cummins-Sebree, S. (2003).

"Common territories in comparative and developmental psychology: The quest for shared means and meaning in behavioral investigations" (PDF) .

International Journal of Comparative Psychology .

16 : 1– 27.

doi : 10.46867/C4D308 .

S2CID 6674770 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-12-18 . Retrieved 2007-05-16 .

External links [ edit ] Animal Psychology v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Ethology Branches Animal cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal sexual behaviour Animal welfare science Anthrozoology Bee learning and communication Behavioural ecology Behavioral endocrinology Behavioural genetics Breed Cognitive ethology Comfort behaviour Grooming Comparative psychology Emotion in animals Ethogram Evolutionary neuroscience Feeding Hover Human ethology Instinct Learning Neuroethology Pain in animals Philosophical ethology Sociobiology Species-typical behavior Stereotypy Structures Hive Honeycomb Nest Instinct Swarm Tool use by non-humans Zoosemiotics Zoomusicology Ethologists Patrick Bateson Marc Bekoff Donald Broom John B. Calhoun Charles Darwin Marian Dawkins Richard Dawkins Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt Dian Fossey Karl von Frisch Jane Goodall Heini Hediger Julian Huxley Konrad Lorenz Desmond Morris Thomas Sebeok William Homan Thorpe Nikolaas Tinbergen Jakob von Uexküll Wolfgang Wickler E. O. Wilson Solly Zuckerman Societies Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour International Society for Applied Ethology Journals Animal Behaviour Animal Cognition Animal Welfare Behavioral Ecology Behaviour Category v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐h6b2n
Cached time: 20250812015729
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.702 seconds
Real time usage: 0.851 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3342/1000000
Revision size: 26917/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 182647/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3929/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 104414/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.437/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8769391/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  654.068      1 -total
 27.06%  176.961      1 Template:Reflist
 24.20%  158.257      1 Template:Psychology_sidebar
 23.93%  156.514      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.26%  112.879      8 Template:Cite_journal
 15.58%  101.880      4 Template:Excerpt
 11.18%   73.118      5 Template:Navbox
 11.04%   72.184      1 Template:Unbalanced
  9.41%   61.539      1 Template:Ambox
  8.99%   58.800      1 Template:Psychology Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:380406:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015729 and revision id 1303624898. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Comparative_psychology&oldid=1303624898 " Categories : Comparative psychology Behavioural sciences Comparisons Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles needing more viewpoints from September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 02:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Comparative psychology 34 languages Add topic

