Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Provisions Toggle Provisions subsection 1.1 Annex I 1.2 Annex II 1.3 Annex III 1.4 Annex IV 1.5 Annex V 1.6 Annex VI 1.6.1 IMO 2020 2 Amendments 3 Implementation and enforcement 4 Enforcement of MARPOL Annex VI 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents MARPOL 73/78 33 languages العربية Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hausa Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International marine environmental convention MARPOL 73/78 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 as modified by the Protocol of 1978 MARPOL 73/78 ratifying states (as of April 2008) Effective 2 October 1983 Parties 158 [ 1 ] Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 as modified by the Protocol of 1978 , or " MARPOL 73/78 " (short for "marine pollution") is one of the most important international marine environmental conventions .

[ 2 ] It was developed by the International Maritime Organization with an objective to minimize pollution of the oceans and seas, including dumping , oil and air pollution .

The original MARPOL was signed on 17 February 1973, but did not come into force at the signing date. The current convention is a combination of 1973 Convention and the 1978 Protocol, [ 3 ] which entered into force on 2 October 1983. As of January 2018, 156 states are parties to the convention, being flag states of 99.42% of the world's shipping tonnage.

[ 1 ] All ships flagged under countries that are signatories to MARPOL are subject to its requirements, regardless of where they sail, and member nations are responsible for vessels registered on their national ship registry.

[ 4 ] Provisions [ edit ] MARPOL is divided into Annexes according to various categories of pollutants, each of which deals with the regulation of a particular group of ship emissions.

List of the MARPOL 73/78 Annexes Annex Title Entry into force [ 1 ] [ 5 ] No. of Contracting Parties/States [ 1 ] α % of the World Tonnage [ 1 ] β Annex I Prevention of pollution by oil & oily water 2 October 1983 Annex II Control of pollution by noxious liquid substances in bulk 6 April 1987 Annex III Prevention of pollution by harmful substances carried by sea in packaged form 1 July 1992 138 97.59 Annex IV Pollution by sewage from ships 27 September 2003 Annex V Pollution by garbage from ships 31 December 1988 Annex VI Prevention of air pollution from ships 19 May 2005 72 94.70 Notes ^α As of 31 July 2013 ^β Based on World Fleet Statistics as of 31 December 2012 Annex I [ edit ] Main article: Marpol Annex I MARPOL Annex I came into force on 2 October 1983 and deals with the discharge of oil into the ocean environment.

[ 6 ] It incorporates the oil discharge criteria prescribed in the 1969 amendments to the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil (OILPOL). It specifies tanker design features that are intended to minimize oil discharge into the ocean during ship operations and in case of accidents. It provides regulations with regard to the treatment of engine room bilge water ( OWS ) for all large commercial vessels and ballast and tank cleaning waste ( ODME ). It also introduces the concept of "special sea areas (PPSE)", which are considered to be at risk to pollution by oil.  Discharge of oil within them has been completely outlawed, with a few minimal exceptions.

[ 5 ] The first half of MARPOL Annex I deals with engine room waste. There are various generations of technologies and equipment that have been developed to prevent waste such as oily water separators (OWS), oil content meters (OCM), and port reception facilities .

[ 7 ] The second part of the MARPOL Annex I has more to do with cleaning the cargo areas and tanks.

Oil discharge monitoring equipment (ODME) is a very important technology mentioned in MARPOL Annex I that has greatly helped improve sanitation in these areas.

[ 7 ] The oil record book is another integral part of MARPOL Annex I , helping crew members log and keep track of oily wastewater discharges, among other things.

Annex II [ edit ] MARPOL Annex II came into force on 2 October 1983. It details the discharge criteria for the elimination of pollution by noxious liquid substances carried in large quantities. It divides substances into [ clarification needed ] and introduces detailed operational standards and measures. The discharge of pollutants is allowed only to reception facilities with certain concentrations and conditions. No matter what, no discharge of residues containing pollutants is permitted within 12 nautical miles (22 kilometres) of the nearest land. Stricter restrictions apply to "special areas".

[ 5 ] Annex II covers the International Bulk Chemical Code (IBC Code) in conjunction with Chapter 7 of the SOLAS Convention . Previously, chemical tankers constructed before 1 July 1986 must comply with the requirements of the Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk (BCH Code).

[ 8 ] Annex III [ edit ] MARPOL Annex III came into force on 1 July 1992.  It contains general requirements for the standards on packing, marking, labeling, documentation, stowage, quantity subtraction, division and notifications for preventing pollution by harmful substances. The Annex is in line with the procedures detailed in the International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code, which has been expanded to include marine pollutants.

[ 9 ] The amendments entered into force on 1 January 1991.

[ 5 ] Annex IV [ edit ] Marpol Annex IV came into force on 27 September 2003.  It introduces requirements to control pollution of the sea by sewage from ships.

Annex V [ edit ] MARPOL 73-78 Instructions MARPOL Annex V ( Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution by Garbage from Ships ) came into force on 31 December 1988.  It specifies the distances from land in which materials may be disposed of and subdivides different types of garbage and marine debris. The requirements are much stricter in a number of "special areas" but perhaps the most prominent part of the Annex is the complete ban of dumping plastic into the ocean.

[ 10 ] Annex VI [ edit ] MARPOL Annex VI came into force on 19 May 2005.  It introduces requirements to regulate the air pollution being emitted by ships, including the emission of ozone-depleting substances, Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) , Sulfur Oxides (SOx) , Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) and shipboard incineration. It also establishes requirements for reception facilities for wastes from exhaust gas cleaning systems, incinerators, fuel oil quality, off-shore platforms and drilling rigs, and the establishment of Sulfur Emission Control Areas (SECAs) .

[ 5 ] IMO 2020 [ edit ] As of 1 January 2020, new emission standards are enforced for fuel oil used by ships, in a regulation known as IMO 2020 . The global sulphur limit (outside SECA's) dropped from an allowed 3.5% sulphur in marine fuels to 0.5%.

[ 11 ] This will significantly improve the air quality in many populated coastal and port areas, which will prevent over 100,000 early deaths each year, and many more cases of asthma in these regions and cities.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Over 170 countries have signed on to the changes, including the United States.

[ 14 ] This is expected to create massive changes for the shipping and oil industries, with major updates required to ships and the increased production of lower sulfur fuel.

[ 15 ] Bunker fuels used within an emission control zone (i.e. North Sea) must have a sulphur content level of less than 0.1% (1000ppm).

The IMO has worked on ensuring consistent implementation of the 0.5% sulphur limit in its Marine Environmental Protection Committee (MEPC) and its subcommittee on Pollution Prevention and Response (PPR). This has led to the development on several regulatory and practical measures (FONAR's, Carriage Ban, Ship Implementation Plan etc.) to enable any non-compliance to be detected, for example during port state controls (PSC's).

[ 16 ] Amendments [ edit ] MARPOL Annex VI amendments according with MEPC 176(58) came into force 1 July 2010.

[ 17 ] Amended Regulations 12 concerns control and record keeping of Ozone Depleting Substances.

[ 18 ] Amended Regulation 14 [ 19 ] concerns mandatory fuel oil change over procedures for vessels entering or leaving SECA areas and FO sulphur limits.

MARPOL Annex V has been amended multiple times, changing different aspects of the original text.

MEPC.219(63) came into force on 2 March 2012 to generally prohibit the discharge of any garbage into the ocean, with the exception of food wastes, cargo residues, wash-water, and animal carcasses.

[ 20 ] There are further provisions describing when and how to dispose of the acceptable wastes.

MEPC.220(63) came into force on 2 March 2012 to encourage the creation of a waste management plan on-board vessels.

[ 21 ] Implementation and enforcement [ edit ] Admiralty and maritime law History Code of Hammurabi Corpus Juris Civilis Digesta Ordinamenta et consuetudo maris Amalfian Laws Hanseatic League Features Fishing Illegal Fisheries law Maritime transport Shipping / ferry Cargo Freight Shipbuilding Merchant marine Cargo ship Passenger ship Mortgage Registration Marine insurance Act of God Cargo Collision General average Seaworthiness Total loss Maritime security Letter of marque Drugs Piracy Pollution Smuggling Wartime prizes Contract of carriage / charterparty Affreightment Agency Barratry Bill of lading Brokerage Chartering Consignment Demurrage Force majeure Invoice Commercial Pro forma Laytime Lien Maritime Manifest Packing list Proof of delivery Salvage Law Terms International Waybill Parties Agent Factor Freight forwarder Captain (Master) The captain goes down with the ship Carrier Charterer Freight company Manager Consignee Consignor Principal Owner Seaman Mutiny Stevedore Judiciaries Admiralty court Vice admiralty court International organizations International Maritime Organization Comité Maritime International London Maritime Arbitrators Association International Association of Classification Societies ( Lloyd's Register ) International conventions Hague-Visby Rules Hamburg Rules Rotterdam Rules Maritime Labour Convention International Convention on Salvage United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) International piracy law SOLAS Convention MARPOL Convention Ballast Water Management Convention Anti-fouling Convention International Convention on Load Lines International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea SAR Convention Athens Convention Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic International Codes IMDG Code ISM Code ISPS Code Polar Code IGC Code IBC Code TDC Code IS Code International Grain Code IMSBC Code INF Code v t e In order for IMO standards to be binding, they must first be ratified by a total number of member countries whose combined gross tonnage represents at least 50% of the world's gross tonnage, a process that can be lengthy.  A system of tacit acceptance has therefore been put into place, whereby, if no objections are heard from a member state after a certain period has elapsed, it is assumed they have assented to the treaty.

All six Annexes have been ratified by the requisite number of nations; the most recent is Annex VI, which took effect in May 2005. The country where a ship is registered ( Flag State ) is responsible for certifying the ship's compliance with MARPOL's pollution prevention standards. Each signatory nation is responsible for enacting domestic laws to implement the convention and effectively pledges to comply with the convention, annexes, and related laws of other nations.  In the United States, for example, the relevant implementation legislation is the Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships .

One of the difficulties in implementing MARPOL arises from the very international nature of maritime shipping. The country that the ship visits can conduct its own examination to verify a ship's compliance with international standards and can detain the ship if it finds significant noncompliance . When incidents occur outside such country's jurisdiction or jurisdiction cannot be determined, the country refers cases to flag states, in accordance with MARPOL. A 2000 US GAO report documented that even when referrals have been made, the response rate from flag states has been poor.

[ 22 ] On 1 January 2015, maritime shipping levels became legally subject to new MARPOL directives because the SECA (Sulphur Emission Controlled Areas) zone increased in size. This larger SECA zone will include the North Sea , Scandinavia , and parts of the English Channel . This area is set to include all of the Republic of Ireland's international waters in 2020 culminating in all of Western Europe's subjection to the MARPOL directive. This has proven controversial for shipping and ferry operators across Europe.

Concerns have been raised about the environmental damage moving back to the roads by some of the larger ferry operators that ship substantial amounts of freight and passenger traffic via these routes affected by IMO standards. They claim that MARPOL will drive up ferry costs for the consumer and freight forwarding companies pushing them back onto the European roadways as a financially more cost effective measure compared to increased ferry costs, thereby defeating the object of reducing water pollution.

[ 23 ] Enforcement of MARPOL Annex VI [ edit ] Concerns have also been raised whether the emission regulation in MARPOL Annex VI, such as the 0.5% global sulphur limit, can be enforced on international waters by non-flag States, as some ships sail under a flag of convenience . It is believed that the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ( UNCLOS ) allows port States to assert jurisdiction over such violations of emission regulation (also of future regulations of GHG) when they occur on the high seas. Coastal States can assert jurisdiction over violations occurring within their waters, with certain exceptions pertaining to innocent passage and the right of transit passage. The special obligations for flag States and the broadened jurisdictions for coastal and port States, to enforce MARPOL (including Annex VI) are found within the special provisions of part XII of UNCLOS.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Crude oil washing International Maritime Organization IMO Net-Zero Framework , a proposed addition to MARPOL Annex VI Marine energy management Marine fuel management Maritime environmental crime Merchant Shipping (Pollution) Act 2006 Ship pollution Oil Pollution Act van 1990 MARPOL Annex I Oily water separator (marine) Oil content meter Port Reception Facilities Port of Boulogne-sur-Mer References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "Status of Treaties" (PDF) , IMO , 16 December 2019, archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2020 , retrieved 31 December 2019 ^ "What is MARPOL Convention? IMO Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships" .

^ "Chronology & Search" .

MAX1 Studies .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 July 2015 .

^ Copeland, Claudia (6 February 2008).

"Cruise Ship Pollution: Background, Laws and Regulations, and Key Issues" (PDF) .

Congressional Research Service . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 April 2013.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain ^ a b c d e "MARPOL73-78: Brief history – list of amendments to date and where to find them" .

MARPOL73-78: Brief history – list of amendments to date and where to find them . IMO. 2012. Archived from the original on 6 March 2015 . Retrieved 3 June 2015 .

^ "I.7.10 (OILPOL, 1954) INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE PREVENTION OF POLLUTION OF THE SEA BY OIL, 1954, AS AMENDED" .

The Ratification of Maritime Conventions . Institute of Maritime Law, Southampton University. 9 December 2022.

^ a b "International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL)" .

imo.org . Archived from the original on 4 October 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2015 .

^ "IBC Code" .

imo.org . Archived from the original on 30 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Anish (23 August 2022).

"What is International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG)?" .

Marine Insight . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ "Garbage" .

imo.org . Pollution Prevention. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 April 2018 .

^ "IMO 2020 – cutting sulphur oxide emissions" .

International Maritime Organization . 1 January 2020 . Retrieved 9 January 2025 .

^ Sofiev, Mikhail; Winebrake, James J.; Johansson, Lasse; Carr, Edward W.; Prank, Marje; Soares, Joana; Vira, Julius; Kouznetsov, Rostislav; Jalkanen, Jukka-Pekka; Corbett, James J. (6 February 2018).

"Cleaner fuels for ships provide public health benefits with climate tradeoffs" .

Nature Communications .

9 (1): 406.

Bibcode : 2018NatCo...9..406S .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-017-02774-9 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 5802819 .

PMID 29410475 .

^ Corbett, James J.; Winebrake, James J.; Carr, Edward W. (12 August 2016). "Health Impacts Associated with Delay of MARPOL Global Sulphur Standards" (Document). Finnish Meteorological Institute.

^ Meredith, Sam (15 July 2019).

"The 'biggest change in oil market history' is less than six months away" .

CNBC . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ Viens, Ashley (12 June 2019).

"IMO 2020: The Big Shipping Shake-Up" .

Visual Capitalist . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ "Index of MEPC Resolutions and Guidelines related to MARPOL Annex VI" , IMO , archived from the original on 9 August 2020 , retrieved 4 October 2019 ^ "MEPC 176(58)" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 7 July 2009 . Retrieved 7 February 2018 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Regulations 12" . Archived from the original on 22 May 2010.

^ "Regulation 14" . Archived from the original on 22 May 2010.

^ "MEPC.219(63)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 February 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2018 .

^ "MEPC.220(63)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 February 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2018 .

^ Marine Pollution: Progress Made to Reduce Marine Pollution by Cruise Ships, but Important Issues Remain (PDF) (Report). U. S. Government Accountability Office. 7 March 2000. p. 20.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2010.

^ "What is MARPOL and its impact to the freight market?" .

freightlink.co.uk . Archived from the original on 28 October 2014.

^ Jesper Jarl Fanø (2019). Enforcing International Maritime Legislation on Air Pollution through UNCLOS. Hart Publishing.

ISBN 9781509927760 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to MARPOL .

International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (MARPOL 73/78) Archived 25 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Amendments to the Annex of the Protocol of 1978 relating to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships Archived 8 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Treaty available in ECOLEX-the gateway to environmental law (English) IMO Overview of Emission Control Areas v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Ports and harbors Types Shore facility Home port Fuelling station Inland harbor Inland port Landing Outport Port of entry Trust port Dry port Anchorage Wharf Naval base Rankings World's busiest port Busiest container ports Busiest by tonnage Busiest by cruise passengers Countries by container port traffic Locations Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Southern Port management Maritime transport Port authority Port state control Harbour engineer Port operator Security Port operations simulator Terminal Operating System Conventions SOLAS MARPOL 73/78 STCW Ballast Water Management Convention Transport portal Category Commons Wiktionary "Port" Wiktionary "Harbor" WikiProject Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5987z
Cached time: 20250817044844
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.638 seconds
Real time usage: 0.769 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2961/1000000
Revision size: 31945/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 162581/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2219/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 139134/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.374/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9552366/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  607.267      1 -total
 31.91%  193.765      1 Template:Reflist
 14.00%   84.994      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
 13.70%   83.168      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.43%   75.493     17 Template:Cite_web
 10.75%   65.292      2 Template:Citation
  9.32%   56.624      1 Template:Short_description
  9.18%   55.775      2 Template:Navbox
  6.42%   38.967      1 Template:Pollution
  5.62%   34.142      2 Template:Sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:308347:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044844 and revision id 1299005450. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MARPOL_73/78&oldid=1299005450 " Categories : Environmental treaties Water pollution Environmental impact of shipping Ocean pollution International Maritime Organization treaties Treaties concluded in 1973 Treaties concluded in 1978 Treaties entered into force in 1983 Maritime law treaties 1983 in the environment 1978 in London Treaties of Albania Treaties of Algeria Treaties of Angola Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda Treaties of Argentina Treaties of Australia Treaties of Austria Treaties of Azerbaijan Treaties of the Bahamas Treaties of Bahrain Treaties of Bangladesh Treaties of Barbados Treaties of Belarus Treaties of Belgium Treaties of Belize Treaties of the People's Republic of Benin Treaties of Bolivia Treaties of Brunei Treaties of Brazil Treaties of the People's Republic of Bulgaria Treaties of Cambodia Treaties of Cameroon Treaties of Canada Treaties of Cape Verde Treaties of Chile Treaties of the People's Republic of China Treaties of Colombia Treaties of the Comoros Treaties of the Republic of the Congo Treaties of the Cook Islands Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Croatia Treaties of Cuba Treaties of Cyprus Treaties of Czechoslovakia Treaties of the Czech Republic Treaties of North Korea Treaties of Denmark Treaties of Djibouti Treaties of Dominica Treaties of the Dominican Republic Treaties of Ecuador Treaties of Egypt Treaties of El Salvador Treaties of Equatorial Guinea Treaties of Estonia Treaties of Fiji Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Gabon Treaties of the Gambia Treaties of Georgia (country) Treaties of West Germany Treaties of East Germany Treaties of Ghana Treaties of Greece Treaties of Guatemala Treaties of Guinea Treaties of Guyana Treaties of Honduras Treaties of the Hungarian People's Republic Treaties of Iceland Treaties of India Treaties of Indonesia Treaties of Iran Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Israel Treaties of Italy Treaties of Jamaica Treaties of Japan Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Kazakhstan Treaties of Kenya Treaties of Kiribati Treaties of Kuwait Treaties of Latvia Treaties of Lebanon Treaties of Lithuania Treaties of Luxembourg Treaties of Madagascar Treaties of Malawi Treaties of Malaysia Treaties of the Maldives Treaties of Malta Treaties of the Marshall Islands Treaties of Mauritania Treaties of Mauritius Treaties of Mexico Treaties of Moldova Treaties of Monaco Treaties of Mongolia Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Mozambique Treaties of Myanmar Treaties of Namibia Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of New Zealand Treaties of Nicaragua Treaties of Nigeria Treaties of Niue Treaties of Norway Treaties of Oman Treaties of Pakistan Treaties of Palau Treaties of Panama Treaties of Papua New Guinea Treaties of Peru Treaties of the Philippines Treaties of the Polish People's Republic Treaties of Portugal Treaties of Qatar Treaties of Romania Treaties of the Soviet Union Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis Treaties of Saint Lucia Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Treaties of Samoa Treaties of São Tomé and Príncipe Treaties of Saudi Arabia Treaties of Senegal Treaties of Serbia and Montenegro Treaties of Seychelles Treaties of Singapore Treaties of Sierra Leone Treaties of Slovakia Treaties of the Solomon Islands Treaties of South Africa Treaties of Spain Treaties of Sri Lanka Treaties of Suriname Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Switzerland Treaties of Syria Treaties of Thailand Treaties of Togo Treaties of Tonga Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of Turkey Treaties of Turkmenistan Treaties of Tuvalu Treaties of Ukraine Treaties of the United Arab Emirates Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of Tanzania Treaties of the United States Treaties of Uruguay Treaties of Vanuatu Treaties of Venezuela Treaties of Vietnam Treaties of Yugoslavia Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 1973 in London Treaties extended to Greenland Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles Treaties extended to Aruba Treaties extended to the Isle of Man Treaties extended to Jersey Treaties extended to the Cayman Islands Treaties extended to Bermuda Treaties extended to Gibraltar Treaties extended to the Falkland Islands Treaties extended to the British Virgin Islands Treaties extended to British Hong Kong Treaties extended to Portuguese Macau Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents MARPOL 73/78 33 languages Add topic

