Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Surroundings 2 History 3 Sports 4 Religions 5 International relations Toggle International relations subsection 5.1 Twin Towns – Sister Cities 6 Notable people 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Olkusz 37 languages Беларуская Български Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano עברית Jawa Kaszëbsczi Latina Latviešu Lietuvių مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Ślůnski Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 50°17′N 19°34′E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.283°N 19.567°E ﻿ / 50.283; 19.567 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Place in Lesser Poland Voivodeship, Poland Olkusz Rynek (Market Square) with the Saint Andrew Basilica and town hall Flag Coat of arms Olkusz Coordinates: 50°17′N 19°34′E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.283°N 19.567°E ﻿ / 50.283; 19.567 Country Poland Voivodeship Lesser Poland County Olkusz Gmina Olkusz Government • Mayor Roman Piaśnik Area • Total 25.63 km 2 (9.90 sq mi) Population (2014) • Total 36,607 • Density 1,400/km 2 (3,700/sq mi) Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Postal code 32-300 - 32-305 Car plates KOL Website http://www.olkusz.eu Olkusz [ˈɔlkuʂ] ( Yiddish : עלקיש Elkish ) is a town in southern Poland with 36,607 inhabitants (2014).

[ 1 ] Situated in the Lesser Poland Voivodeship (since 1999), previously in Katowice Voivodeship (1975–1998), it is the capital of Olkusz County . Olkusz is known for its abundance of silver , which is mined and extracted in the vicinity.

Surroundings [ edit ] The city is on the Baba River, a tributary of the Sztoła, with a major road reaching it from Warsaw and Kraków , making it the central city of the vicinity. Tourists who wish to visit nature and historical sites, start from here. Also, Olkusz is located on the main railroad line, which connects Upper Silesia and Zaglebie with Kielce . The Starczynów Desert is located nearby, and wind-blown sands from the desert troubled the town until the desert was planted with trees in 1949 resulting in the desert becoming overgrown.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Early 20th-century view of the Rynek (Market Square) On the city's website, a myth is cited that the city was founded by ancient Phoenicians (Canaanites) who traveled here and found lead ore. The origin of the name Olkusz is cited as the ancient Phoenician (Canaanite Hebrew) "Elkhuds" meaning "to chisel". However, the Hebrew word for "to chisel" was "lakhrot" and the likelihood of the ancient Phoenicians having reached Poland is very low.

A first written historical document from the year 1299 refers to the city of Olkusz, although it was granted town rights earlier. It was located within the Seniorate Province of the fragmented Kingdom of Poland , and then it was a royal town of Poland, administratively located in the Kraków Voivodeship in the Lesser Poland Province of the Polish Crown . The inhabitants were mostly wealthy, due to the lead mines. Silver was discovered too. Various wars crossed the path of this town, which was at its lowest at the end of the 17th century (see: The Deluge ).

In the Third Partition of Poland (1795) the town was annexed by Austria . Following the Austro-Polish War of 1809 it was regained by Poles and included within the short-lived Duchy of Warsaw , and after the duchy's dissolution in 1815, the town fell to the Russian Partition of Poland. Fights of the Polish January Uprising took place in the area in 1863.

Francesco Nullo , hero of the fights for Italian and Polish independence died in the Battle of Krzykawka nearby, and then was buried at the cemetery in Olkusz.

Poland eventually regained independence and control of the town after World War I in 1918.

The Bloody Wednesday Olkusz 1940. German soldier guarding prone men of Olkusz on 31 July. The picture has been described as "known to everyone in Olkusz".

[ 3 ] : 212 During the joint German-Soviet invasion of Poland , which started World War II in September 1939, the town was invaded by Germany. Already during the invasion, the Germans committed the first executions of local Poles (see also Nazi crimes against the Polish nation ).

[ 4 ] Under German occupation , the town was annexed directly into Germany. Poles from Olkusz were among the victims of a massacre committed in Celiny in June 1940. On 16 July 1940, in retaliation for the killing of a German policeman, the Germans carried out a massacre of 20 Polish hostages.

[ 5 ] On 31 July 1940, the Germans gathered all Polish and Jewish men aged 15 to 55 and subjected them to torture and murder . The German terror campaign against the local population was aimed at the planned Germanisation of the town and the region.

[ 6 ] The occupation ended in January 1945, and the town was restored to Poland.

Sports [ edit ] The town's most notable sports club is KS Olkusz with football and athletics sections.

[ 7 ] Defensive walls Memorial to Italian volunteers who fought for Polish independence in the January Uprising of 1863 Religions [ edit ] Roman Catholicism 4  parishes: St Andrew's Basilica St Maximilian Maria Kolbe Church St Barbara's Church Good Shepherd Church Jehovah's Witnesses Pentecostalism Seventh-day Adventist Church Jewish (40% of the population before the Holocaust ) [ 8 ] International relations [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Poland Twin Towns – Sister Cities [ edit ] Bergamo , Italy [ 9 ] Schwalbach am Taunus , Germany Staffordshire Moorlands , United Kingdom Notable people [ edit ] Paweł Blehm , Polish chess grandmaster Marcin Bylica a.k.a. Martin Bylica and Marcin z Olkusza, Polish astrologer and astronomer Paweł Czarnota , Polish chess Grandmaster Antoni Kocjan , Polish war hero and famous glider engineer Henryk Mandelbaum , noted Polish survivor of the Holocaust Tadeusz Rydzyk , Roman Catholic priest and Redemptorist Rabbi Dov Berish Einhorn References [ edit ] ^ "Główny Urząd Statystyczny" [Central Statistical Office] (in Polish).

To search: Select "Miejscowości (SIMC)" tab, select "fragment (min. 3 znaki)" ( minimum 3 characters ), enter town name in the field below, click "WYSZUKAJ" ( Search ).

^ "Pustynie w Polsce - ile ich jest i gdzie się znajdują?" .

National Geographic Polska . 2 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .

^ Ireneusz Cieślik; Olgerd Dziechciarz; Krzysztof Kocjan (2007).

Olkusz - zagłada i pamięć: dyskusja o ofiarach wojny i świadectwa ocalałych Żydów . Olkuskie Stowarzyszenie Kulturalne "Brama".

ISBN 978-83-60592-19-9 .

^ Wardzyńska, Maria (2009).

Był rok 1939. Operacja niemieckiej policji bezpieczeństwa w Polsce. Intelligenzaktion (in Polish). Warszawa: IPN . p. 136.

^ Wardzyńska, pp. 142-143 ^ Wardzyńska, pg. 143 ^ "Strona internetowa KS Olkusz w Olkuszu" (in Polish) . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ "History | Virtual Shtetl" .

^ "Gemellaggi e relazioni internazionali" (official website) (in Italian). Comune di Bergamo. 7 April 2006. Archived from the original on 29 October 2007 . Retrieved 28 March 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Olkusz at Wikimedia Commons Official website Olkusz's Internet forum Olkusz city website, with contemporary images Archived 2015-12-01 at the Wayback Machine Nature around Olkusz Jewish Community in Olkusz on Virtual Shtetl Images of the Bloody Wednesday of Olkusz (Note that the name is Rabbi Hagerman and not Hangerman.) Images of deportation during the holocaust WWII The full story of the famous Olkusz image identification (in Hebrew) Olkusz -full screen gallery v t e Olkusz County Seat: Olkusz Urban gmina Bukowno Urban-rural gminas Gmina Olkusz Gmina Wolbrom Rural gminas Gmina Bolesław Gmina Klucze Gmina Trzyciąż v t e Gmina Olkusz Town and seat Olkusz Villages Bogucin Mały Braciejówka Gorenice Kogutek Kosmołowski Kosmolów Niesułowice Olewin Osiek Pazurek Podlesie Rabsztyn Sieniczno Troks Wiśliczka Witeradów Zawada Zederman Zimnodół Żurada Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Olkusz&oldid=1303825856 " Categories : Olkusz Sites of Nazi war crimes during the Invasion of Poland Mining in Poland Holocaust locations in Poland Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Yiddish-language text Articles needing additional references from March 2015 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Hebrew-language sources (he) This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 07:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Olkusz 37 languages Add topic

