Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 1.1 Development 1.2 Medieval England 1.3 Medieval Ireland 1.4 Eastern Orthodoxy 1.5 Oriental Orthodoxy 2 Judaism 3 Islam 4 Other groups 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Hagiography 60 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Picard Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biography of a saint or religious figure "Lives of saints" redirects here. For works with this title, see Lives of the Saints (disambiguation) .

Page from Vita Sancti Martini by Sulpicius Severus A hagiography ( / ˌ h æ ɡ i ˈ ɒ ɡ r ə f i / ; from Ancient Greek ἅγιος , hagios ' holy ' and -γραφία , -graphia ' writing ' ) [ 1 ] is a biography of a saint or an ecclesiastical leader, as well as, by extension, an adulatory and idealized biography of a preacher, priest, founder, saint, monk, nun or icon in any of the world's religions.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Early Christian hagiographies might consist of a biography or vita (from Latin vita , life, which begins the title of most medieval biographies), a description of the saint's deeds or miracles, an account of the saint's martyrdom (called a passio ), or be a combination of these.

The Eagle symbol of St John the Evangelist from the Book of Dimma folio 104v. (Dublin, Trinity College, MS.A.IV.23) Christian hagiographies focus on the lives, and notably the miracles , ascribed to men and women canonized by the Roman Catholic church , the Eastern Orthodox Church , the Oriental Orthodox churches , and the Church of the East . Other religious traditions such as Buddhism , [ 5 ] Hinduism , [ 6 ] Taoism , [ 7 ] Islam , Sikhism and Jainism also create and maintain hagiographical texts (such as the Sikh Janamsakhis ) concerning saints, gurus and other individuals believed to be imbued with sacred power.

When referring to modern, non-ecclesiastical works, the term hagiography is often used today as a pejorative reference to biographies and histories whose authors are perceived to be uncritical or excessively reverential toward their subject.

Hagiographic works, especially those of the Middle Ages , can incorporate a record of institutional and local history , and evidence of popular cults , customs, and traditions .

[ 8 ] Christianity [ edit ] Further information: Legendary material in Christian hagiography Development [ edit ] Hagiography constituted an important literary genre in the early Christian church , providing some informational history along with the more inspirational stories and legends . A hagiographic account of an individual saint could consist of a biography ( vita ), a description of the saint's deeds or miracles, an account of the saint's martyrdom ( passio ), or be a combination of these.

The genre of lives of the saints first came into being in the Roman Empire as legends about Christian martyrs were recorded. The dates of their deaths formed the basis of martyrologies . In the 4th century, there were three main types of catalogs of lives of the saints: annual calendar catalogue, or menaion (in Greek , μηναῖον , menaion means "monthly" ( adj , neut ), lit. "lunar"), biographies of the saints to be read at sermons ; synaxarion ("something that collects"; Greek συναξάριον , from σύναξις , synaxis i.e. "gathering", "collection", "compilation"), or a short version of lives of the saints, arranged by dates; paterikon ("that of the Fathers"; Greek πατερικόν ; in Greek and Latin, pater means "father"), or biography of the specific saints, chosen by the catalog compiler.

The earliest lives of saints focused on desert fathers who lived as ascetics from the 4th century onwards. The life of Anthony of Egypt is usually considered the first example of this new genre of Christian biography.

[ 9 ] In Western Europe , hagiography was one of the more important vehicles for the study of inspirational history during the Middle Ages . The Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine compiled a great deal of medieval hagiographic material, with a strong emphasis on miracle tales. Lives were often written to promote the cult of local or national states, and in particular to develop pilgrimages to visit relics . The bronze Gniezno Doors of Gniezno Cathedral in Poland are the only Romanesque doors in Europe to feature the life of a saint. The life of Saint Adalbert of Prague , who is buried in the cathedral, is shown in 18 scenes, probably based on a lost illuminated copy of one of his Lives.

The Bollandist Society continues the study, academic assembly, appraisal and publication of materials relating to the lives of Christian saints (see Acta Sanctorum ).

Medieval England [ edit ] Many of the important hagiographical texts composed in medieval England were written in the vernacular dialect Anglo-Norman . With the introduction of Latin literature into England in the 7th and 8th centuries the genre of the life of the saint grew increasingly popular. When one contrasts it to the popular heroic poem, such as Beowulf , one finds that they share certain common features. In Beowulf , the titular character battles against Grendel and his mother , while the saint, such as Athanasius ' Anthony (one of the original sources for the hagiographic motif) or the character of Guthlac , battles against figures no less substantial in a spiritual sense. Both genres then focus on the hero-warrior figure, but with the distinction that the saint is of a spiritual sort.

Imitation of the life of Christ was then the benchmark against which saints were measured, and imitation of the lives of saints was the benchmark against which the general population measured itself. In Anglo-Saxon and medieval England, hagiography became a literary genre par excellence for the teaching of a largely illiterate audience. Hagiography provided priests and theologians with classical handbooks in a form that allowed them the rhetorical tools necessary to present their faith through the example of the saints' lives.

Of all the English hagiographers no one was more prolific nor so aware of the importance of the genre as Abbot Ælfric of Eynsham . His work Lives of the Saints [ 10 ] contains set of sermons on saints' days, formerly observed by the English Church. The text comprises two prefaces, one in Latin and one in Old English , and 39 lives beginning on 25 December with the nativity of Christ and ending with three texts to which no saints' days are attached. The text spans the entire year and describes the lives of many saints, both English and continental, and harks back to some of the earliest saints of the early church.

There are two known instances where saint's lives were adapted into vernacular plays in Britain. These are the Cornish-language works Beunans Meriasek and Beunans Ke , about the lives of Saints Meriasek and Kea , respectively.

[ 11 ] Other examples of hagiographies from England include: the Chronicle by Hugh Candidus [ 12 ] the Secgan Manuscript [ 13 ] [ 14 ] the list of John Leyland [ 15 ] [ 16 ] possibly the book Life by Saint Cadog [ 17 ] Vita Sancti Ricardi Episcopi et Confessoris Cycestrensis / Life of Richard of Chichester by Ralph Bocking .

[ 18 ] The Book of Margery Kempe is an example of autohagiography, in which the subject dictates her life using the hagiographic form.

Medieval Ireland [ edit ] Calendar entries for 1 and 2 January of the Martyrology of Oengus Ireland is notable in its rich hagiographical tradition, and for the large amount of material which was produced during the Middle Ages. Irish hagiographers wrote primarily in Latin while some of the later saint's lives were written in the hagiographer's native vernacular Irish . Of particular note are the lives of St. Patrick , St. Columba (Latin)/Colum Cille (Irish) and St. Brigit/Brigid —Ireland's three patron saints. The earliest extant Life was written by Cogitosus .  Additionally, several Irish calendars relating to the feastdays of Christian saints (sometimes called martyrologies or feastologies ) contained abbreviated synopses of saint's lives, which were compiled from many different sources.  Notable examples include the Martyrology of Tallaght and the Félire Óengusso . Such hagiographical calendars were important in establishing lists of native Irish saints, in imitation of continental calendars.

Eastern Orthodoxy [ edit ] Visual hagiography of St Paraskeva ( Patriarchate of Peć , 1719–20) Example of Greek Orthodox visual hagiography. This is one of the best known surviving Byzantine mosaics in Hagia Sophia – Christ Pantocrator flanked by the Virgin Mary and John the Baptist made in the 12th century.

In the 10th century, a Byzantine monk Simeon Metaphrastes was the first one to change the genre of lives of the saints into something different, giving it a moralizing and panegyrical character. His catalog of lives of the saints became the standard for all of the Western and Eastern hagiographers, who would create relative biographies and images of the ideal saints by gradually departing from the real facts of their lives. Over the years, the genre of lives of the saints had absorbed a number of narrative plots and poetic images (often, of pre-Christian origin, such as dragon fighting etc.), mediaeval parables , short stories and anecdotes .

The genre of lives of the saints was introduced in the Slavic world in the Bulgarian Empire in the late 9th and early 10th century, where the first original hagiographies were produced on Cyril and Methodius , Clement of Ohrid and Naum of Preslav . Eventually the Bulgarians brought this genre to Kievan Rus' together with writing and also in translations from the Greek language. In the 11th century, they began to compile the original life stories of their first saints, e.g.

Boris and Gleb , Theodosius Pechersky etc. In the 16th century, Metropolitan Macarius expanded the list of the Russian saints and supervised the compiling process of their life stories. They would all be compiled in the so-called Velikiye chet'yi-minei catalog (Великие Четьи-Минеи, or Great Menaion Reader ), consisting of 12 volumes in accordance with each month of the year. They were revised and expanded by St.

Dimitry of Rostov in 1684–1705.

The Life of Alexander Nevsky was a particularly notable hagiographic work of the era.

Today, the works in the genre of lives of the saints represent a valuable historical source and reflection of different social ideas, world outlook and aesthetic concepts of the past.

Oriental Orthodoxy [ edit ] The Oriental Orthodox Churches also have their own hagiographic traditions. For instance, Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church hagiographies in the Ge'ez language are known as gadl (Saint's Life).

[ 19 ] There are some 200 hagiographies about indigenous saints.

[ 20 ] They are among the most important Medieval Ethiopian written sources, and some have accurate historical information.

[ 21 ] They are written by the disciples of the saints. Some were written a long time after the death of a saint, but others were written not long after the saint's demise.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Fragments from an Old Nubian hagiography of Saint Michael are extant.

[ 24 ] Judaism [ edit ] Jewish hagiographic writings are largely a medieval and later phenomenon, attributing miracles to rabbis and figures sometimes from much earlier eras, such as those of the Talmud or the Bible. They became increasingly popular  in Kabbalistic writings and later in the Hasidic movement.

[ 25 ] Islam [ edit ] Hagiography in Islam began in the Arabic language with biographical writing about the Prophet Muhammad in the 8th century CE, a tradition known as sīra . From about the 10th century CE, a genre generally known as manāqib also emerged, which comprised biographies of the imams ( madhāhib ) who founded different schools of Islamic thought ( madhhab ) about shariʿa , and of Ṣūfī saints . Over time, hagiography about Ṣūfīs and their miracles came to predominate in the genre of manāqib .

[ 26 ] Likewise influenced by early Islamic research into hadiths and other biographical information about the Prophet, Persian scholars began writing Persian hagiography , again mainly of Sūfī saints, in the eleventh century CE.

The Islamicisation of the Turkish regions led to the development of Turkish biographies of saints, beginning in the 13th century CE and gaining pace around the 16th. Production remained dynamic and kept pace with scholarly developments in historical biographical writing until 1925, when Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (d. 1938) placed an interdiction on Ṣūfī brotherhoods. As Turkey relaxed legal restrictions on Islamic practice in the 1950s and the 1980s, Ṣūfīs returned to publishing hagiography, a trend which continues in the 21st century.

[ 27 ] Other groups [ edit ] The pseudobiography of L. Ron Hubbard compiled by the Church of Scientology is commonly described as a heavily fictionalized hagiography.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Biography portal Catholicism portal Christianity portal History portal Jean Bolland Boniface Consiliarius Alban Butler Danilo's student Hippolyte Delehaye Namtar (biography) Pseudepigrapha Reginald of Durham Secular saint References [ edit ] ^ "hagiography" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Rico G. Monge (2016). Rico G. Monge, Kerry P. C. San Chirico and Rachel J. Smith (ed.).

Hagiography and Religious Truth: Case Studies in the Abrahamic and Dharmic Traditions . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

7– 22.

ISBN 978-1474235792 .

^ Jeanette Blonigen Clancy (2019).

Beyond Parochial Faith: A Catholic Confesses . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 137.

ISBN 978-1532672828 .

^ Rapp, Claudia (2012). "Hagiography and the Cult of Saints in the Light of Epigraphy and Acclamations".

Byzantine Religious Culture . Brill Academic. pp.

289– 311.

doi : 10.1163/9789004226494_017 .

ISBN 978-9004226494 .

^ Jonathan Augustine (2012), Buddhist Hagiography in Early Japan , Routledge, ISBN 978-0415646291 ^ David Lorenzen (2006), Who Invented Hinduism?

, Yoda Press, ISBN 978-8190227261 , pp. 120–121 ^ Robert Ford Campany (2002), To Live as Long as Heaven and Earth: A Translation and Study of Ge Hong's Traditions of Divine Transcendents , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0520230347 ^ Davies, S. (2008).

Archive and manuscripts: contents and use: using the sources (3rd ed.). Aberystwyth, UK: Department of Information Studies, Aberystwyth University. p. 5.20.

ISBN 978-1906214159 ^ Talbot, Alice-Mary (21 November 2012).

"Hagiography" .

academic.oup.com .

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199252466.013.0082 . Retrieved 21 April 2024 .

^ Ælfric of Eynsham .

The Lives of the Saints . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Koch, John T. (2006).

Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. pp.

203– 205.

ISBN 1851094407 . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ Barbara Yorke , Nunneries and the Anglo-Saxon Royal Houses (Continuum, 2003) p. 22 ^ Stowe MS 944 Archived 3 January 2014 at archive.today , British Library ^ G. Hickes, Dissertatio Epistolaris in Linguarum veterum septentrionalium thesaurus grammatico-criticus et archeologicus (Oxford 1703–05), p. 115.

^ John Leland , The Collectanea of British affairs , Volume 2.

p. 408 .

^ Liuzza, R. M. (2006).

"The Year's Work in Old English Studies" (PDF) .

Old English News Letter .

39 (2). Medieval Institute, Western Michigan University: 8.

^ Tatlock, J. S. P. (1939). "The Dates of the Arthurian Saints' Legends".

Speculum .

14 (3): 345– 365.

doi : 10.2307/2848601 .

JSTOR 2848601 .

S2CID 163470282 .

p. 345 ^ Jones, David, ed. (1995).

Saint Richard of Chichester : the sources for his life . Lewes: Sussex Record Society. p. 8.

ISBN 0854450408 .

^ Kelly, Samantha (2020).

A Companion to Medieval Ethiopia and Eritrea . Brill.

ISBN 978-9004419582 .

^ Kefyalew Merahi. Saints and Monasteries in Ethiopia. 2 vols. Vol. 2, Addis Ababa: Commercial Printing Press, 2003.

^ Tamrat, Taddesse (1970).

Hagiographies and the Reconstruction of Medieval Ethiopian History .

^ "Lives of Ethiopian Saints" .

Link Ethiopia . Archived from the original on 5 March 2017 . Retrieved 4 March 2017 .

^ Galawdewos (2015).

The Life and Struggles of Our Mother Walatta Petros: A Seventeenth-Century African Biography of an Ethiopian Woman . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691164212 .

^ van Gerven Oei, Vincent W. J.; Laisney, Vincent Pierre-Michel; Ruffini, Giovanni; Tsakos, Alexandros; Weber-Thum, Kerstin; Weschenfelder, Petra (2016). Van Gerven Oei, Vincent W.J.; Laisney, Vincent Pierre-Michel; Ruffini, Giovanni; Tsakos, Alexandros; Weber-Thum, Kerstin; Weschenfelder, Petra (eds.).

The Old Nubian Texts from Attiri . punctum books.

doi : 10.21983/P3.0156.1.00 .

hdl : 20.500.12657/25470 .

ISBN 978-0-9982375-7-2 .

^ "Hagiography", Jewish Virtual Library .

^ Ch. Pellat, "Manāḳib", in Encyclopaedia of Islam , ed. by P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, and W.P. Heinrichs, 2nd edn, 12 vols (Leiden: Brill, 1960–2005), doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0660 .

^ Alexandre Papas, "Hagiography, Persian and Turkish", in Encyclopaedia of Islam, Three , ed. by Kate Fleet, Gudrun Krämer, Denis Matringe, John Nawas, and Everett Rowson (Leiden: Brill, 2007–), doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_23914 .

^ Tucker, Ruth A. (1989).

Another Gospel: Cults, Alternative Religions, and the New Age Movement .

Zondervan .

ISBN 0310259371 .

OL 9824980M .

^ Lewis, James R.; Hammer, Olav (2007).

The Invention of Sacred Tradition . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-86479-4 . Retrieved 8 August 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Berschin, Walter.

Biographie und Epochenstil im lateinischen Mittelalter . 5 volumes. Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 1986–2004, ISBN 3-7772-8606-0 .

DeWeese, Devin.

Islamization and Native Religion in the Golden Horde: Baba Tukles and Conversion to Islam in Historical and Epic Tradition . State College, PA: Penn State University Press, 2007.

Eden, Jeff.

Warrior Saints of the Silk Road: Legends of the Qarakhanids . Brill: Leiden, 2018.

Heffernan, Thomas J.

Sacred Biography: Saints and Their Biographers in the Middle Ages.

Oxford University Press, 1992.

Ivanović, Miloš (2019). "Serbian hagiographies on the warfare and political struggles of the Nemanjić dynasty (from the twelfth to the fourteenth century)".

Reform and Renewal in Medieval East and Central Europe: Politics, Law and Society . Cluj-Napoca: Romanian Academy, Center for Transylvanian Studies. pp.

103– 129.

Mariković, Ana and Vedriš, Trpimir eds.

Identity and alterity in Hagiography and the Cult of Saints (Bibliotheca Hagiotheca, Series Colloquia 1). Zagreb: Hagiotheca, 2010.

Renard, John.

Friends of God: Islamic Images of Piety, Commitment, and Servanthood . Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008.

Vauchez, André , La sainteté en Occident aux derniers siècles du Moyen Âge (1198–1431) ( BEFAR , 241). Rome, 1981. [Engl. transl.: Sainthood in the Later Middle Ages . Cambridge, 1987; Ital. transl.: La santità nel Medioevo . Bologna, 1989].

von der Nahmer, Dieter.

Die lateinische Heiligenvita. Eine Einführung in die lateinische Hagiographie.

Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1994, ISBN 978-3-534-19190-1 .

External links [ edit ] Look up hagiography in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hagiography .

Hippolyte Delehaye, The Legends of the Saints: An Introduction to Hagiography (1907) Delehaye, Hippolyte (1911).

"Hagiology" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). pp.

816– 817.

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Hagiography" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

James Kiefer's Hagiographies Societé des Bollandistes Archived 29 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine Hagiography Society v t e Topics about Saints Calendar of saints General Roman Calendar Tridentine calendar Eastern Orthodox calendar Anglican calendars Coptic calendar Lutheran calendar Traditions Folk saint Equal-to-apostles Relic Catacomb saints Translation Hagiography Lists of saints Catholic Child Orthodox Titles Symbology of the Saints Saints in Protestantism Levitation of saints Theology Communion of saints Veneration Intercession Prayer for the dead Confessors list Martyrs list Christian Diocletian Passion bearers Patron saint Places Mariology Canonization process Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Servant of God list The Venerable list Beatification list Equivalent canonization Related topics Apostle Bishop Companions Roman Martyrology Saints in Anglicanism Saints in Methodism Patristics Early Christian writers Church Fathers Women of the patristic age Prophet Phallic saint Saints portal v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain 2 Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐bf252
Cached time: 20250814215038
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.835 seconds
Real time usage: 1.017 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8378/1000000
Revision size: 24872/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 382030/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10310/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 48/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 127884/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.477/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18831876/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  802.413      1 -total
 27.00%  216.644     17 Template:Navbox
 26.62%  213.587      1 Template:Reflist
 18.21%  146.156      1 Template:Historiography
 17.92%  143.823      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.20%  105.891     10 Template:Lang
 10.59%   85.007     36 Template:Ill
  9.87%   79.163      1 Template:Cite_OED
  8.36%   67.051     13 Template:Cite_book
  7.47%   59.957      1 Template:Saints Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:162789:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215038 and revision id 1304954599. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hagiography&oldid=1304954599 " Categories : Christian hagiography Sainthood Christian genres Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 04:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hagiography 60 languages Add topic

