Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Notable works 3 Impact 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mansur ibn Ilyas 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français مصرى کوردی Тоҷикӣ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of Mansur ibn Ilyas' colored illustrations of human anatomy. This illustration highlights the arterial and nervous systems as viewed from behind. From: Mansur ibn Ilyas: Tashrīḥ-i badan-i insān.

تشريح بدن انسان . Manuscript, ca. 1450, U.S. National Library of Medicine.

Manṣūr ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Yūsuf Ibn Ilyās ( منصور ابن محمد ابن احمد ابن يوسف ابن الياس ) was a late 14th-century and early 15th-century Persian [ 1 ] physician from Shiraz , Timurid Persia , commonly known for his publication of the colored atlas of the human body, Mansur's Anatomy. It is important to know that al-Jurjani (1040–1136) published a book called " Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi " which Mansur could have copied the illustrations from his book.

[ 2 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Mansur ibn Ilyas was born in the mid-14th century in the city of Shiraz, located in the providence of Fars in central Persia, in what is modern day Shiraz, Iran. He was born into a wealthy and well respected family. Mansur received most of his education from his family in Shiraz, who were also well established scholars, physicians, and active as jurists and poets.

[ 3 ] He was educated in traditional schools in the Persian province of Fars and traveled to many other cities, which assisted in his education. Most notably, Mansur traveled several times to the city of Tabriz , which was known for its rich scientific background.

Notable works [ edit ] Mansur wrote many medical manuscripts ranging from a synopsis of general medicine, Kifaya-yi Mansuri ( Persian : کفایه منصوری ), to Tashrih-i Mansuri ( تشریح منصوری ), a system-based anatomical work complete with colored illustrations of different organ systems. He dedicated both of his major medical writings, a general medical encyclopedia, and a study of anatomy to rulers of the Persian province of Fars, Prince Pir Mohammad Bahador Khan, the grandson of Tamerlane . Throughout his works, Mansur engaged in then-controversial topics, and made references to the works of Aristotle , Hippocrates , al-Razi , and Avicenna .

The work he was most known for was his, Tashrīḥ-i badan-i insān ( تشریح بدن انسان , The Anatomy of the Human Body ) ( MS P 19 ), also known as Mansur's Anatomy ( تشریح منصوری Tashrīḥi Manṣūri ) Commissioned by Zayn al-Abidin ( زین العابدین ), an important political figure in being the last Muzaffarid ruler of Fars, Mansur's Anatomy is a medical treatise of about forty manuscript folios. It consists of seven sections: an introduction, five chapters covering the osseous, nervous, muscular, venous, and arterial systems, and an appendix on the formation of the fetus and compound organs, such as the heart. Instead of discussing interrelated functions of organs, he discussed organs based on their hierarchical ordering of functionality-related groups according to their importance to the life of the body. In this manner he discussed the anatomy of the vital and respiratory organs, and then the anatomy of the organs of nourishment, perception, and finally, reproduction. A concluding section on compound organs, such as the heart and brain, and on the formation of the fetus, was illustrated with a diagram showing a pregnant woman. Mansur's Anatomy is chiefly recognized for its inclusion of such colored anatomical illustrations, the first of its kind in the Arabic world.

[ 4 ] Physicians and philosophers often argued whether the heart or brain was formed first in the fetus, and this debate forms an important part of Mansur ibn Ilyas' written works. In his works, Mansur ibn Ilyas argues that the heart is the first organ to form, unlike Hippocrates who argued that the brain is the first organ. Mansur ibn Ilyas' reasoning for the heart as the primary organ was that the semen is composed of air and strong heat, creating a substance called pneuma , which needs to be contained or it will decompose. The containment of the pneuma is within the heart, creating the body and making the heart the main source of the body's natural heat. The heart also acts as the main force in forming the other organs; using the heat from the heart, the heart is able to provide the rest of the body with nourishment. This marks the start of the formation of the liver, which holds the source of nourishment within it. Lastly, Mansur argued that the brain is the organ that contains the senses, and these senses are what gives life force to the body. If the brain is formed first, like Hippocrates said, then there is nothing for the brain to give life to. The heart needs to be formed before the brain, so that the brain can give its life force to the rest of the body.

[ 5 ] Throughout his works, Mansur made references to the works of Aristotle , Hippocrates, al-Razi , and Avicenna .

Kifāyah-i Mujāhidīyah كفايه مجاهديه (MS P 28, item 4) ( The Sufficient [book] for Mujahid ) Impact [ edit ] While Mansur's Anatomy was not the first notation of the human body, it is considered to be the first color atlas ever created. This document led to a great deal of change in the way the Islamic world viewed human anatomy at the time, as until this point a color atlas was considered to be against Islamic law. Mansur ibn Ilyas is also credited with one of the earliest anatomical sketches of a pregnant woman; while many believe his other illustrations to have been inspired by earlier Latin and Greek writings, the pregnant woman is considered an original work.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] List of Iranian scientists Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mansur ibn Ilyas .

References [ edit ] ^ Zarshenas, Mohammad M.; Zargaran, Arman; Mehdizadeh, Alireza; Mohagheghzadeh, Abdolali (2016). "Mansur ibn Ilyas (1380-1422 AD): A Persian anatomist and his book of anatomy, Tashrih-i Mansuri".

Journal of Medical Biography .

24 (1): 67– 71.

doi : 10.1177/0967772013479474 .

PMID 26873170 .

S2CID 43458959 .

^ Jurjānī, IsmāʻĪl Ibn Ḥasan.

"The Treasure of Khvarazm'Shah" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

^ "Islamic Culture and the Medical Arts: Anatomy." U.S National Library of Medicine. U.S. National Library of Medicine, 15 Apr. 1994. Web. 21 Apr. 2015.

^ : Khalili M, et al, Illustration of the heart and blood vessels in medieval times, Int J Cardiol (2010), doi:10.1016/j.
ijcard.2009.11.061 ^ J. Newman, Andrew (1998).

Tashrīḥ-i Manṣūr-i: Human Anatomy between the Galen and Prophetical Medical Traditions . La science dans le monde iranien à l'époque islamique: Tehran: Institut Français de Recherche en Iran. pp.

253– 271.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Khalili M, et al, Illustration of the heart and blood vessels in medieval times, Int J Cardiol (2010), doi:10.1016/j. ijcard.2009.11.061 C.A. Storey, Persian Literature: A Bio-Bibliographical Survey. Volume II, Part 2: E.Medicine (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1971) Lutz Richter-Bernburg, Persian Medical Manuscripts at the University of California, Los Angeles: A Descriptive Catalogue, Humana Civilitas, vol. 4 (Malibu: Udena Publications, 1978).

Fateme Keshavarz, A Descriptive and Analytical Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts in the Library of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine (London: Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, 1986), pp 123–129 and 340–342.

Russell, Gul A. (1997).

"Ebn Elyās, Manṣūr" . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. VIII(1). Encyclopædia Iranica Foundation. pp.

16– 20.

External links [ edit ] Mansur ibn Ilyas: Tashrīḥ-i badan-i insān تشريح بدن انسان . Selected pages scanned from the original work. Historical Anatomies on the Web. US National Library of Medicine.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Netherlands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mansur_ibn_Ilyas&oldid=1266965982 " Categories : 14th-century Iranian physicians Physicians from the Timurid Empire People from Shiraz Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Persian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 3 January 2025, at 01:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mansur ibn Ilyas 7 languages Add topic

