Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Scientific work 3 Works 4 Further reading 5 References Toggle the table of contents Wilhelm Homberg 12 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Occitan Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German chemist, alchemist and natural philosopher This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Wilhelm Homberg" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Wilhelm Homberg (January 8, 1652 – September 24, 1715), also known as Guillaume Homberg in French , was a German natural philosopher .

Life [ edit ] Wilhelm Homberg was the son of John Homberg, a Saxon gentleman, originally from Quedlinburg , who was stripped of his inheritance during the Thirty Years' War . Wilhelm Homberg was born at Batavia (modern Jakarta ) in 1652 while his father was serving as  an officer of the Dutch East India Company . Coming to Europe with his family in 1670, he studied law at Jena and Leipzig , and in 1674 became an advocate at Magdeburg . In that town he made the acquaintance of Otto von Guericke , and under his influence determined to devote himself to natural science. He, therefore, travelled in various parts of Europe for study, and after graduating in medicine at Wittenberg , settled in Paris in 1682. From 1685 to 1690 he practised as a physician at Rome; then returning to Paris in 1691, he was elected a member of the Academy of Sciences and appointed director of communication by Madame Wagner, December 28, 1697. Subsequently he became teacher of physics and chemistry (1702), and private physician (1705) to the duke of Orleans . His death occurred at Paris in 1715.

[ 1 ] Scientific work [ edit ] Homberg practised natural philosophy at a time of transition between alchemy and chemistry . Before 1700, most of his work focused on pneumatics and the vacuum, using an improved air pump of his own design. He did attempt chrysopoeia but also he made what are still regarded as solid contributions to chemical and physical knowledge, recording observations on the preparation of Kunkel's phosphorus , on the green colour produced in flames by copper, on the crystallization of common salt, on the salts of plants, on the saturation of bases by acids, on the freezing of water and its evaporation in vacuo , etc. Much of his work was published in the Recueil de l'Académie des Sciences from 1692 to 1714. He is also supposed to be the first one who proposed distillation at reduced pressure to prevent thermal decomposition.

[ 2 ] The "Sal Sedativum Hombergi" is boracic acid , which he discovered in 1702, and "Homberg's phosphorus" is prepared by fusing sal-ammoniac with quick lime .

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Fontenelle , "Éloge de Monsieur Homberg", Œuvres de Monsieur de Fontenelle , vol. 2, 1785.

Further reading [ edit ] Peterschmitt, Luc; Franckowiak, Rémi (2005). "La chimie de Homberg: Une vérité certaine dans une physique contestable".

Early Science and Medicine .

10 (1): 65– 90.

doi : 10.1163/1573382053123511 .

Principe, Lawrence M.

(2020).

The Transmutations of Chymistry: Wilhelm Homberg and the Académie Royale des Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

doi : 10.7208/chicago/9780226700816.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780226700786 .

S2CID 203260851 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ "Homberg, Wilhelm | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2023-09-28 .

Attribution Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Homberg, Wilhelm" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Israel People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wilhelm_Homberg&oldid=1304375471 " Categories : 1652 births 1715 deaths 17th-century German philosophers 18th-century German philosophers German alchemists 17th-century German chemists 18th-century German chemists Members of the French Academy of Sciences People from Batavia, Dutch East Indies 17th-century alchemists 18th-century alchemists Natural philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wilhelm Homberg 12 languages Add topic

