Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Influence 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Academic genealogy 5 languages العربية Български Deutsch Esperanto Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Links between academics based on mentorships For other uses, see Genealogy (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Academic genealogy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An example of an academic genealogy, the supervisorial relationship between Dutch topologist Johannes De Groot and his namesake, also a Dutch topologist descended from the senior De Groot via four different paths of academic supervision An academic genealogy (or scientific genealogy ) organizes a family tree of scientists and scholars according to mentoring relationships, often in the form of dissertation supervision relationships, and not according to genetic relationships as in conventional genealogy . Since the term academic genealogy has now developed this specific meaning, its additional use to describe a more academic approach to conventional genealogy would be ambiguous, so the description scholarly genealogy is now generally used in the latter context.

Overview [ edit ] The academic lineage or academic ancestry of someone is a chain of professors who have served as academic mentors or thesis advisors of each other, ending with the person in question. Many genealogical terms are often recast in terms of academic lineages, so one may speak of academic descendants , children , siblings , etc. One method of developing an academic genealogy is to organize individuals by prioritizing their degree of relationship to a mentor/advisor as follows: (1). doctoral students, (2). post-doctoral researchers, (3). master's students and (4). current students, including undergraduate researchers.

[ 1 ] Through the 19th century, particularly for graduates in sciences such as chemistry , it was common to have completed a degree in medicine or pharmacy before continuing with post-graduate or post-doctoral studies.

[ 2 ] Until the early 20th century, attaining professorial status or mentoring graduate students did not necessarily require a doctorate or graduate degree.

[ 2 ] For instance, the University of Cambridge did not require a formal doctoral thesis until 1919, and academic genealogies that include earlier Cambridge students tend to substitute an equivalent mentor. Academic genealogies are particularly easy to research in the case of Spain 's doctoral degrees , because until 1954 only Complutense University had the power to grant doctorates . This means that all holders of a doctorates in Spain can trace back their academic lineage to a doctoral supervisor who was a member of Complutense's Faculty.

[ citation needed ] Websites such as the Mathematics Genealogy Project [ 3 ] [ 4 ] or the Chemical Genealogy [ 5 ] document academic lineages for specific subject areas, while some other sites, such as Neurotree and Academic Family Tree aim to provide a complete academic genealogy across all fields of academia.

Influence [ edit ] Academic genealogy may influence research results in areas of active research.  Hirshman et al. examined a controversial medical question, the value of maximal surgery for high grade glioma , and demonstrated that a physician's medical academic genealogy can affect his or her findings and approaches to treatment.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Bennett, Albert F.; Lowe, Charles (1 April 2005).

"The Academic Genealogy of George A. Bartholomew" .

Integrative and Comparative Biology .

45 (2): 231– 233.

doi : 10.1093/icb/45.2.231 .

PMID 21676766 . Retrieved 7 September 2022 .

^ a b Rocke, Alan J.; Ihde, Aaron J. (February 1, 1979).

"A Badger chemist genealogy: The faculty at the University of Wisconsin-Madison" .

Journal of Chemical Education .

56 (2): 93– 95.

doi : 10.1021/ed056p93 . Retrieved 7 September 2022 .

^ Carr, Sarah (August 18, 1999), "Retired Mathematician Develops a Family Tree of the Scholars in His Field" , The Chronicle of Higher Education .

^ Jackson, Allyn (2007), "A labor of love: the Mathematics Genealogy Project" (PDF) , Notices of the American Mathematical Society , 54 (8): 1002– 1003 .

^ Chemical Genealogy Database Homepage ^ Hirshman, Brian R (January 4, 2016), "Impact of medical academic genealogy on publication patterns: An analysis of the literature for surgical resection in brain tumor patients", Annals of Neurology , 79 (2): 169– 177, doi : 10.1002/ana.24569 , hdl : 2027.42/137227 , PMID 26727354 , S2CID 5491065 External links [ edit ] The Academic Family Tree : A project combining academic genealogies of 38 (as of August 2015) academic disciplines Neurotree: The neuroscience family tree Linguistree: The linguistics family tree Mathematics genealogy search (includes much of computer science and physics) The Astronomy Genealogy Project Chemical genealogy Scientific genealogy master list (two sections: Scientists Associated with Concepts in Chemistry & Physics; Scientists Associated with Discovering the Elements) How to trace your scientific genealogy Philosophy Family Tree Automatic doctoral advisor genealogy diagram using Wikipedia by Nghia Ho Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Academic_genealogy&oldid=1301686324 " Categories : Academia Genealogy History of science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 05:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Academic genealogy 5 languages Add topic

