Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Principles 3 Participation 4 Examples 5 Related concepts 6 Criticism 7 Alternative to capitalism 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Commons-based peer production 15 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 עברית Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of producing value For broader coverage of this topic, see Peer production .

The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Commons-based peer production ( CBPP ) is a term coined by Harvard Law School professor Yochai Benkler .

[ 1 ] It describes a model of socio-economic production in which large numbers of people work cooperatively ; usually over the Internet .

Commons -based projects generally have less rigid hierarchical structures than those under more traditional business models.

One of the major characteristics of the commons-based peer production is its non-profit scope.

[ 2 ] : 43 Often—but not always—commons-based projects are designed without a need for financial compensation for contributors. For example, sharing of STL (file format) design files for objects freely on the internet enables anyone with a 3-D printer to digitally replicate the object, saving the prosumer significant money.

[ 3 ] Synonymous terms for this process include consumer co-production and collaborative media production.

[ 2 ] : 63 Overview [ edit ] The history of commons-based peer production communities (by the P2Pvalue project) [ undue weight?

– discuss ] Yochai Benkler used this term as early as 2001. Benkler first introduced the term in his 2002 paper in the Yale Law Journal (published as a pre-print in 2001) "Coase's Penguin, or Linux and the Nature of the Firm", whose title refers to the Linux mascot and to Ronald Coase , who originated the transaction costs theory of the firm that provides the methodological template for the paper's analysis of peer production. The paper defines the concept as "decentralized information gathering and exchange" and credits Eben Moglen as the scholar who first identified it without naming it.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Yochai Benkler contrasts commons -based peer production with firm production , in which tasks are delegated based on a central decision-making process, and market-based production , in which allocating different prices to different tasks serves as an incentive to anyone interested in performing a task.

In his book The Wealth of Networks (2006), Yochai Benkler significantly expands on his definition of commons-based peer production. According to Benkler, what distinguishes commons-based production is that it doesn't rely upon or propagate proprietary knowledge: "The inputs and outputs of the process are shared, freely or conditionally, in an institutional form that leaves them equally available for all to use as they choose at their individual discretion." To ensure that the knowledge generated is available for free use, commons-based projects are often shared under an open license .

Not all commons-based production necessarily qualifies as commons-based peer production. According to Benkler, peer production is defined not only by the openness of its outputs, but also by a decentralized, participant-driven working method of working.

[ 7 ] Peer production enterprises have two primary advantages over traditional hierarchical approaches to production: Information gain : Peer production allows individuals to self-assign tasks that suit their own skills, expertise, and interests. Contributors can generate dynamic content that reflects the individual skills and the "variability of human creativity." Great variability of human and information resources leads to substantial increasing returns to scale to the number of people, and resources and projects that may be accomplished without need for a contract or other factor permitting the proper use of the resource for a project.

[ 8 ] In Wikinomics , Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams suggest an incentive mechanism behind common-based peer production. "People participate in peer production communities," they write, "for a wide range of intrinsic and self-interested reasons....basically, people who participate in peer production communities love it. They feel passionate about their particular area of expertise and revel in creating something new or better." [ 9 ] Aaron Krowne offers another definition: Commons-based peer production refers to any coordinated, (chiefly) internet-based effort whereby volunteers contribute project components, and there exists some process to combine them to produce a unified intellectual work. CBPP covers many different types of intellectual output, from software to libraries of quantitative data to human-readable documents (manuals, books, encyclopedias, reviews, blogs, periodicals, and more).

[ 10 ] Principles [ edit ] First, the potential goals of peer production must be modular .

[ 11 ] In other words, objectives must be divisible into components, or modules, each of which can be independently produced.

[ 11 ] That allows participants to work asynchronously, without having to wait for each other's contributions or coordinate with each other in person.

[ 8 ] Second, the granularity of the modules is essential. Granularity refers to the degree to which objects are broken down into smaller pieces (module size).

[ 8 ] Different levels of granularity will allow people with different levels of motivation to work together by contributing small or large grained modules, consistent with their level of interest in the project and their motivation.

[ 8 ] Third, a successful peer-production enterprise must have low-cost integration —the mechanism by which the modules are integrated into a whole end product. Thus, integration must include both quality controls over the modules and a mechanism for integrating the contributions into the finished product at relatively low cost.

[ 8 ] Participation [ edit ] Participation in commons-based peer production is often voluntary and not necessarily associated with getting profit out of it. Thus, the motivation behind this phenomenon goes far beyond traditional capitalistic theories , which picture individuals as self-interested and rational agents, such portrayal is also called homo economicus .

However, it can be explained through alternative theories as behavioral economics . Famous psychologist Dan Ariely in his work Predictably Irrational explains that social norms shape people's decisions as much as market norms. Therefore, individuals tend to be willing to create value because of their social constructs, knowing that they won't be paid for that. He draws an example of a thanksgiving dinner: offering to pay would likely offend the family member who prepared the dinner as they were motivated by the pleasure of treating family members.

[ 12 ] Similarly, commons-based projects, as claimed by Yochai Benkler , are the results of individuals acting "out of social and psychological motivations to do something interesting".

[ 13 ] He goes on describing the wide range of reasons as pleasure, socially and psychologically rewarding experiences, to the economic calculation of possible monetary rewards (not necessarily from the project itself).

[ 14 ] On the other hand, the need for collaboration and interaction lies at the very core of human nature and turns out to be a very essential feature for one's survival. Enhanced with digital technologies, allowing easier and faster collaboration which was not as noticeable before, it resulted in a new social, cultural and economic trend named collaborative society . This theory outlines further reasons for individuals to participate in peer production such as collaboration with strangers, building or integrating into a community or contributing to a general good.

[ 2 ] Examples [ edit ] This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( September 2020 ) This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Additional examples of commons-based peer production communities (by the P2Pvalue project) One day living with commons-based peer production communities (by the P2Pvalue project) Examples of projects using commons-based peer production include: Linux , a computer operating system kernel GNU , a computer operating system generally used in conjunction with the kernel Linux SHARE (computing) , an early mainframe code-sharing group that persists today LibreOffice , an office suite for computer desktops, mobiles and cloud collaboration Slashdot , a news and announcements website Wikipedia , an open-collaborative online encyclopedia iNaturalist , a biodiversity citizen science platform Distributed Proofreaders , which proof reads public domain e-texts for publication on Project Gutenberg SETI@home , a volunteer computational project which searches for extra terrestrial life Kuro5hin , a discussion site for technology and culture Clickworkers , a citizen science program SourceForge , a software development organization RepRap Project , a project to create an open-source self-copying 3D printer.

Pirate Bay , a shared index of bittorrents (under legal scrutiny in Sweden as of February 2009) OpenStreetMap , a collaborative free map of the world.

Wikiprogress , a former project for collecting information measuring the progress of societies.

Ushahidi , activist mapping.

Open Source Ecology , a project for designing and building open source industrial machines, fabricated by eXtreme Manufacturing .

GROWL , a degrowth education network producing open materials and curricula.

Community gardening , people working together to grow things and then share the resulting produce.

Firefox , a free and open source web browser.

Related concepts [ edit ] See also: Open-source model Interrelated concepts to Commons-based peer production are the processes of peer governance and peer property. To begin with, peer governance is a new mode of governance and bottom-up mode of participative decision-making that is being experimented in peer projects, such as Wikipedia and FLOSS ; thus peer governance is the way that peer production, the process in which common value is produced, is managed.

[ 15 ] Peer Property indicates the innovative nature of legal forms such as the General Public License, the Creative Commons, etc. Whereas traditional forms of property are exclusionary ("if it is mine, it is not yours"), peer property forms are inclusionary. It is from all of us, i.e. also for you, provided you respect the basic rules laid out in the license, such as the openness of the source code for example.

[ 16 ] The ease of entering and leaving an organization is a feature of adhocracies .

The principle of commons-based peer production is similar to collective invention, a model of open innovation in economics coined by Robert Allen.

[ 17 ] Also related: Open-source economics and Commercial use of copyleft works .

Criticism [ edit ] Some believe that the commons-based peer production (CBPP) vision, while powerful and groundbreaking, needs to be strengthened at its root because of some allegedly wrong assumptions concerning free and open-source software (FOSS).

[ 18 ] [ clarification needed ] The CBPP literature regularly and explicitly quotes FOSS products as examples of artifacts "emerging" by virtue of mere cooperation, with no need for supervising leadership (without "market signals or managerial commands", in Benkler's words).

It can be argued, however, that in the development of any less than trivial piece of software, irrespective of whether it be FOSS or proprietary, a subset of the (many) participants always play—explicitly and deliberately—the role of leading system and subsystem designers, determining architecture and functionality, while most of the people work “underneath” them in a logical, functional sense.

[ 19 ] From a micro-level, Bauwens and Pantazis are of the view that CBPP models should be considered a prototype, since it cannot reproduce itself fully outside of the limits that capitalism has imposed on it as a result of the interdependence of CBPP with capitalist competition. The innovative activities of CBPP occur within capitalist competitive contexts, and capitalist firms can gain competitive advantage over firms that rely on personal research without proprietary knowledge, because the former is able to utilize and access the knowledge commons, especially in digital commons where participants in CBPP struggle to earn direct livelihood for themselves. CBPP is then at the risk of being subordinated.

[ 20 ] Alternative to capitalism [ edit ] The neutrality of this section is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Proponents argue that commons-based peer production (CBPP) represents an alternative form of production from traditional capitalism .

[ 21 ] However, CBPP supporters acknowledged in 2019 that it was still a prototype of a new way of producing, and CBPP could not yet be considered a complete form of production by itself. According to Bauwens, Kostakis, and Pazaitis, CBPP "is currently a prototype since it cannot as yet fully reproduce itself outside of mutual dependence with capitalism." [ 21 ] : 6 They claim the market and state will not disappear if CBPP triumphs over traditional capitalism (i.e., if CBPP becomes "the dominant way of allocating the necessary resources for human self-reproduction").

[ 21 ] : 5 Rather, the market and state will become instruments in service to maintaining the commons and the development of entrepreneurs that contribute to the commons as well as help more commoners become free to also earn their living through giving to the commons.

[ 21 ] : 17 A socio-economic shift pursued by CBPP will not be straightforward or lead to a utopia, but it could help solve some current issues.

[ which?

] As with any economic transition, new problems will emerge and the transition will be complicated. However, proponents of CBPP argue that moving towards a CBPP production model will be ideal [ clarification needed ] and a step forward for society.

[ 21 ] CBPP is still a prototype of what a new way of production and society would look like, and can't separate itself completely from capitalism: CBPP proponents believe commoners should find innovative ways to become more autonomous from capitalism.

[ 21 ] They also assert that, in a society led by commons, the market would continue to exist as in capitalism, but it would shift from being mainly extractive to being predominantly generative.

[ 21 ] Both scenarios, the extractive as well as the generative, can include elements which are based on peer-to-peer (P2P) dynamics, or social peer-to-peer processes . Therefore, one should not only discuss peer production as an opposing alternative to current forms of market organization, but also needs to discuss how both manifest in the organizations of today’s economy. Four scenarios can be described along the lines of profit maximization and commons on one side, and centralized and decentralized control over digital production infrastructure, such as for example networking technologies: netarchical capitalism, distributed capitalism, global commons, and localized commons. Each of them uses P2P elements to a different extent and thus leads to different outcomes: [ 22 ] Netarchical capitalism: In this version of capitalism, P2P elements are mainly found in digital platforms, through which individuals can interact with each other. These platforms are controlled by the platform owners, which capture the value of the P2P exchanges.

[ 22 ] Distributed capitalism: As compared to the first type, platforms are not centrally controlled in this form of capitalism, and individual autonomy and large-scale participation play an important role. However, it is still a form a capitalism, meaning it is mainly extractive, and profit maximization is the main motive.

[ 22 ] Global commons: This scenario is generative as it aims to add social and environmental value. It uses the digital commons to organize and deploy initiatives globally.

[ 22 ] Local commons: Similar to the global commons, the local commons are also a generative scenario. However, they use global digital commons to organize activities locally, for example by using global designs to at the same time as local supply chains for manufacturing.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-rival good – Economic good that has more total value when shared Carr–Benkler wager Co-creation – Product or service design process Cognitive Surplus – Book by Clay Shirky – a book Collaboration – Act of working together Collaborative software development model – Creation and maintenance of software Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Common ownership – Economic arrangement Crowdsourcing – Sourcing services or funds from a group Crowdsourcing software development Motivations of open source programmers – Open collaboration movement supporting open-source licenses Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Gamification – Using game design elements in non-games Decentralized planning (economics) – Type of economic system Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Distributed manufacturing – Coordinated decentralized manufacturing Fablab – Small-scale workshop for digital fabrication Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Gift economy – Mode of exchange where valuables are given without rewards Here Comes Everybody – 2008 book by Clay Shirky Knowledge commons – Collectively shared and managed information Mass collaboration – Many people working on a single project Nonformal learning – Category of learning situation Open collaboration – Collaboration with a result open to all Peer learning – Educational practice of interaction among students Peer review – Evaluation by peers with similar expertise Production for use – Economic concept Prosumer – Person who consumes and produces a product Open business – Business approach that draws on ideas from openness movements Open manufacturing – Model of localised production Open music model – Economic and technological framework which foresees the playback of prerecorded music as a service Open-source hardware – Hardware from the open-design movement Social peer-to-peer processes – Type of decentralized and distributed network architecture Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ Steven Johnson (September 21, 2012).

"The Internet? We Built That" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2012-09-24 .

The Harvard legal scholar Yochai Benkler has called this phenomenon 'commons-based peer production'.

^ a b c Dariusz Jemielniak; Aleksandra Przegalinska (18 February 2020).

Collaborative Society . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-35645-9 .

^ Petersen, Emily E.; Pearce, Joshua (March 2017).

"Emergence of Home Manufacturing in the Developed World: Return on Investment for Open-Source 3-D Printers" .

Technologies .

5 (1): 7.

doi : 10.3390/technologies5010007 .

^ Benkler, Yochai (2002). "Coase's Penguin, or, Linux and "The Nature of the Firm" ".

The Yale Law Journal .

112 (3): 369– 446.

arXiv : cs/0109077 .

doi : 10.2307/1562247 .

JSTOR 1562247 .

S2CID 16684329 .

a mode I call commons-based peer production ^ Benkler, Yochai (2002).

"Coase's Penguin, or, Linux and "The Nature of the Firm" " .

The Yale Law Journal .

112 (3): 369– 446.

arXiv : cs/0109077 .

doi : 10.2307/1562247 .

hdl : 10535/2974 .

ISSN 0044-0094 .

JSTOR 1562247 .

S2CID 16684329 .

Commons-based peer production, the emerging third model of production I describe here ^ Benkler, Yochai (2002).

"Freedom in the commons: Towards a political economy of information" .

Duke Law Journal .

52 : 1245– 1276.

The most radically new and unfamiliar element in this category is commons-based peer production of information, knowledge, and culture ^ Benkler, Yochai (2006).

The Wealth of Networks . Yale University Press. pp.

73–74 .

ISBN 978-0-300-11056-2 .

^ a b c d e Benkler, Yochai; Nissenbaum, Helen (2006).

"Commons-based Peer Production and Virtue" (PDF) .

The Journal of Political Philosophy . 4.

14 (4): 394– 419.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9760.2006.00235.x . Retrieved 22 October 2011 .

^ Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything (2006), by Don Tapscott and Anthony D. Williams, Portfolio Books, p 70 ^ Krowne, Aaron (March 1, 2005). " The FUD based encyclopedia: Dismantling the Fear, Uncertainty and Doubt aimed at Wikipedia and other free knowledge sources Archived 2006-02-09 at the Wayback Machine .

Free Software Magazine .

^ a b Kostakis, Vasilis (2019).

"How to reap the benefits of the "digital revolution"? Modularity and the commons" .

Halduskultuur .

20 (1): 4– 19.

doi : 10.32994/hk.v20i1.228 .

S2CID 242184840 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ Ariely, Dan (2008).

Predictably irrational: the hidden forces that shape our decisions (1st ed.). New York: Harper.

ISBN 978-0-06-135323-9 .

OCLC 182521026 .

^ "Yochai Benkler: Open-source economics - YouTube" .

www.youtube.com . 21 April 2008.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-13 . Retrieved 2020-12-26 .

^ Benkler, Yochai (2003-04-01).

"Freedom in the Commons: Towards a Political Economy of Information" .

Duke Law Journal .

52 (6): 1245– 1276.

ISSN 0012-7086 .

^ Kostakis, Vasilis (2010).

"Peer governance and Wikipedia" .

First Monday .

15 ( 3– 1).

^ Michel Bauwens (2005): The Political Economy of Peer Production Archived 2019-04-14 at the Wayback Machine . In: CTheory ^ Allen, Robert C. (1983). "Collective invention".

Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization .

4 : 1– 24.

doi : 10.1016/0167-2681(83)90023-9 .

S2CID 16680958 .

^ Magrassi, P.

(2010).

Free and Open-Source Software is not an Emerging Property but Rather the Result of Studied Design Archived 2010-11-12 at the Wayback Machine Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Intellectual Capital, Knowledge Management & Organisational Learning, Hong Kong Polytechnic, Nov. 2010 ^ Magrassi, Paolo (2010). "Free and Open-Source Software is not an Emerging Property but Rather the Result of Studied Design".

arXiv : 1012.5625 [ cs.CY ].

^ Bauwens, Michel; Pantazis, Alekos (March 2018). "The ecosystem of commons-based peer production and its transformative dynamics".

The Sociological Review .

66 (2): 302– 319.

doi : 10.1177/0038026118758532 .

ISSN 0038-0261 .

S2CID 149275750 .

^ a b c d e f g Bauwens, M.; Kostakis, V.; Pazaitis, A. (2019).

Peer to Peer: The Commons Manifesto . London: University of Westminster Press. pp.

1– 10.

^ a b c d e Bauwens, M.; Kostakis, V.; Pazaitis, A. (2019).

Peer to Peer: The Commons Manifesto . London: University of Westminster Press. pp.

33– 45.

ISBN 978-1-911534-78-5 .

Listen to this article ( 13 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 3 November 2018 ( 2018-11-03 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) v t e Intellectual property activism Issues Artificial scarcity Censorship by copyright Copyright infringement Copyright troll Digital rights management Gripe site Legal aspects of file sharing Mashup digital music novel videos Monopolies of knowledge Music piracy Orphan works Biopiracy Bioprospecting Patents biological software software patent debate trolling Public domain Concepts All rights reversed Alternative compensation system Anti-copyright notice Business models for open-source software Copyleft Commercial use of copyleft works Commons-based peer production Electronic sell-through Free content Free-software license Libertarian positions Open content Open-design movement Open music model Open patent Open source hardware software Prizes instead of patents contests Share-alike Video on demand Movements Access to Knowledge movement Anti-copyright Cultural environmentalism Free-culture movement Free software movement Organizations Pro-copyright Copyright Alliance Pro-copyleft Anna's Archive Creative Commons Electronic Frontier Foundation Free Software Foundation Library Genesis Open Rights Group Organization for Transformative Works The Anarchist Library The Pirate Bay Piratbyrån Pirate Party Public Knowledge Sci-Hub Shadow library Students for Free Culture Z-Library People Cory Doctorow Alexandra Elbakyan Rick Falkvinge Lawrence Lessig Richard Stallman Peter Suber Peter Sunde Aaron Swartz Documentaries Steal This Film Good Copy Bad Copy RiP!: A Remix Manifesto TPB AFK The Internet's Own Boy v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐jv9w6
Cached time: 20250814221943
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.790 seconds
Real time usage: 1.145 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8228/1000000
Revision size: 25865/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 128299/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4280/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 99606/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.501/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20976906/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  993.393      1 -total
 34.86%  346.339     29 Template:Annotated_link
 25.40%  252.337      1 Template:Reflist
 10.34%  102.683      1 Template:Cite_news
  8.74%   86.820      4 Template:Navbox
  7.37%   73.184      1 Template:Short_description
  6.56%   65.210      1 Template:Intellectual_property_activism
  6.23%   61.883     10 Template:Cite_journal
  5.89%   58.486      1 Template:Npov
  5.75%   57.132      4 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1673404:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221943 and revision id 1304571679. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commons-based_peer_production&oldid=1304571679 " Categories : Collaboration Economic systems Free and open-source software Peer-to-peer Public commons Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from November 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with minor POV problems from February 2021 Articles needing cleanup from September 2020 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from September 2020 Articles needing additional references from November 2020 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2024 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 21:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commons-based peer production 15 languages Add topic

