Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics of harmonisation 2 Harmonisation versus unification 3 Efforts to achieve harmonisation 4 Harmonisation and convergence of law 5 Harmonization of substantive criminal law 6 Harmonisation of criminal procedural law 7 See also 8 Notes Toggle the table of contents Harmonisation of law 6 languages Čeština Deutsch עברית 日本語 Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Harmonisation of law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the European Union , harmonisation of law (or simply harmonisation ) is the process of creating common standards across the internal market. Though each EU member state has primary responsibility for the regulation of most matters within their jurisdiction, and consequently each has its own laws, harmonisation aims to: create consistency of laws, regulations, standards and practices, so that the same rules will apply to businesses that operate in more than one member state, and so that the businesses of one state do not obtain an economic advantage over those in another as a result of different rules.

reduced compliance and regulatory burdens for businesses operating nationally or trans-nationally.

An objective of the European Union to achieve uniformity in laws of member states is to facilitate free trade and protect citizens.

[ 1 ] Harmonisation is a process of ascertaining the admitted limits of international unification but does not necessarily amount to a vision of total uniformity.

[ 2 ] Characteristics of harmonisation [ edit ] Harmonisation is usually not comprehensive but partial, in that it does not seek to create a sole authority of law on a particular subject. This is because measures to harmonise law cannot go further than that which is necessary.

[ 3 ] Harmonisation is unsystematic. The directives of the European Union do not focus on or contain comprehensive regulation of the entire law. The directives regulate some very specific issues and they regulate them only for particular situations or circumstances and only for particular types of parties. This is most prevalent in European Union contract law.

[ 4 ] Harmonisation generally takes place on two levels of governance, the overarching body and each of the members individually. Taking the European Union, the two levels are the European level and national level. Although both European and national legislators share the legislative responsibilities, neither of these bodies has final responsibility for the whole. Also, there is no superior political authority which has the final say on who is responsible for what, i.e. no overarching authority over the European and national legislators.  The European Court of Justice may however determine the extent of harmonisation when determining cases.

[ 4 ] Harmonisation is dynamic, in that the instruments of harmonisation aim at change, in particular improving and establishing consistent conditions for the operation of legal principles.

[ 4 ] Harmonisation versus unification [ edit ] The unification and harmonisation of laws are similar in the sense that both involve approximating several legal systems and both are also oriented towards establishing some level of integration from a previous situation characterized by diversity.

[ 5 ] On the other hand, unification and harmonisation have different fundamental aims. The former works towards complete unity in substance and detail whereas the latter avoids complete uniformity, [ 6 ] and is primarily concerned with approximating the fundamental principles of national laws.

[ 7 ] In unification, for example, a new law completely replaces the national laws that have existed before. A harmonisation law on the European level does not exceed mere approximation [ 8 ] and leaves the national differences in place as long as they are not expressly regulated by the harmonising law.

[ 7 ] Here, national laws merely become closer but not identical.

[ 9 ] Unification also focuses on substituting or combining two or more legal systems and replacing them with a single system. Harmonisation on the other hand seeks to co-ordinate different legal systems by “eliminating major differences and creating minimum requirements or standards” “Unlike unification which contemplates the substitution of two or more legal systems with one single system, harmonisation of law arises exclusively in comparative law literature, and especially in conjunction with interjurisdictional, private transactions. Harmonisation seeks to ‘effect an approximation or coordination of different legal provision or systems by eliminating major differences and creating minimum requirements or standards’ [ 10 ] ”.

[ 11 ] Harmonisation can be seen as a step towards unification and, in a way, harmonisation aims or strives towards unification.

Efforts to achieve harmonisation [ edit ] Harmonisation is not a new concept. However, the problem is that no harmonisation project has ever reached completion. That is due to the nature of harmonisation, it is designed to incorporate different legal systems under a basic framework.

This is the appeal of harmonisation, it takes into account the local factors yet applies general principles to make a consistent framework of law. It generally incorporates local factors under a relatively unified framework.

[ 12 ] An example of harmonisation can be drawn from the European Union and the use of Directives.

Directives require transposition into the domestic legal system of the Member State in order to become effective. If a Member State fails to transpose the Directive in a timely manner or fails to do it at all, the Directive will take 'direct effect', that is, individuals are able to derive rights from that Directive directly despite not being transposed into domestic law.

[ 13 ] A Directive could be transposed through enactment under legislation from the national parliament or through agreement by reference.

[ 14 ] The Directives are flexible to the extent that the national authorities of the Member States have the choice of the form and method of the implementation of the Directive. This takes into account the fact that Member States have differing legal systems.

[ 15 ] Hence this allows the establishment of a harmonised framework of laws whilst preserving the established national laws of each member. This is the major appeal of harmonisation over unification.

Harmonisation can be achieved in two ways, actively or passively. The most common is the active pursuit of harmonisation usually through the enactment of legislation which incorporates the harmonised principles into the local law. Passive harmonisation may occur through non-legislative agreements or a convergence of case law. So far, passive harmonisation is the least successful since the non-legislative agreements tend to be voluntary. The convergence of case law is more promising since: "All that matters is that the courts of different European States achieve similar results in the same cases, regardless of which norms, doctrines or procedures they apply in order to reach this end." [ 16 ] Harmonisation and convergence of law [ edit ] Harmonisation is synonymous with convergence of the law however harmonisation is usually associated via active pursuit through enacting legislation whereas convergence is generally associated with a passive approach such as a natural convergence of law through custom and frequent use of harmonised principles.

The most prominent example of harmonisation in international law is UNCITRAL (United Nations Commission on International Trade Law).

Harmonization of substantive criminal law [ edit ] The competence of the EU with regard to substantive criminal law is limited to only include the establishment of minimum rules concerning the definition of criminal offences and sanctions in the areas of particularly serious crimes with a cross-border dimension. Therefore, the EU may outline the specific criminal conduct and the minimum sanctions for an offence that a Member State must criminalise within their domestic system. Common minimum rules are allowed in areas concerning the definition of criminal offences and sanctions of particularly serious crimes with a cross-border dimension, resulting from the nature or impact of such offences or from a special need to combat them on a common basis. These serious crimes are terrorism, human trafficking, sexual exploitation of women and children, drug trafficking, arms trafficking, money laundering, corruption, counterfeiting of means of payment, computer crime and organised crime.

The EU has assumed some competence to ensure harmonisation of laws where these address ‘particularly serious crimes with a cross-border dimension’. So far, the legislation adopted by the EU has focused on harmonising the definition of offences, sanctions and questions of jurisdiction.

Harmonisation of criminal procedural law [ edit ] Harmonisation of criminal procedural law only entails adapting national law to European requirements, not completely replacing national law with European standards. Adopting appropriate measures regarding the fight against crime should be undertaken to achieve the objective of the EU to provide an area of freedom, security and justice, where the EU has shared competence with Member States. The EU has the power to act only as far as the Member States cannot sufficiently do themselves and must not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties.

Minimum rules may be prescribed by a Directive in the areas of mutual admissibility of evidence, rights of individuals in criminal procedure and the rights of victims of crime. In other aspects of criminal procedure, legislation to harmonise must be unanimously decided by the Council and approved by the European Parliament.

See also [ edit ] 28th regime Criticisms of globalization European Union law Federal preemption (United States) Home state regulation Intergovernmental immunity (United States) Interposition (United States) Lesser magistrate Mutual recognition agreement Paramountcy (Canada) Parliamentary sovereignty Primacy of European Union law Reverse discrimination (EU law) Rule according to higher law Supremacy Clause Uniform Act Notes [ edit ] ^ Peter E Nygh, Peter Butt (ed). (1997). ‘’Butterworth Australian LEGAL Dictionary’’. page 543 ^ Menski, W. (2005). ‘’Comparative Law in a Global Context’’. London: Cambridge University Press. page 39 ^ Hesselink, M. The Ideal of Codification and the Dynamics of Europeanisation: The Dutch Experience in the book by Vogenauer, S and Weatherill, S (ed). (2006). ‘’The Harmonization of European Contract Law Implications for European Private Laws, Business and Legal Practice’’. Oxford and Portland, Oregon: Hart Publishing. Page 49 ^ a b c Hesselink, M. The Ideal of Codification and the Dynamics of Europeanisation: The Dutch Experience in the book by Vogenauer, S and Weatherill, S (ed). (2006). ‘’The Harmonization of European Contract Law Implications for European Private Laws, Business and Legal Practice’’. Oxford and Portland, Oregon: Hart Publishing. Page 50 ^ Cheng, Chia-Jui (1988).

Clive M. Schmitthoff's Select Essays on International Trade Law . Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers/Graham & Trotman. p. 109.

ISBN 9024737028 .

^ Andenas, Mads; Andersen, Camilla (2012).

Theory and Practice of Harmonisation . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 309.

ISBN 9781849800013 .

^ a b Cheng, p. 109.

^ Andenas & Andersen, p. 309.

^ Gharavi, Hamid; Liebscher, Christoph (2002).

The International Effectiveness of the Annulment of an Arbitral Award . The Hague: Kluwer Law International. p. 170.

ISBN 9041117172 .

^ Kamba (1974) 23 ICLQ 485, 501 ^ de Cruz, P. (1999). ‘’Comparative Law in a Changing World’’. London: Cavendish Publishing.

^ Hesselink, M. The Ideal of Codification and the Dynamics of Europeanisation: The Dutch Experience in the book by Vogenauer, S and Weatherill, S (ed). (2006).

The Harmonisation of European Contract Law Implications for European Private Laws, Business and Legal Practice . Oxford and Portland, Oregon: Hart Publishing. Page 48 ^ Francovich and Others [1991] ECR I-5357 ^ Ginsburg, T and Cooter RD. "Leximetrics: Why the Same Laws are Longer in Some Countries than Others" ( http://law.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1080&context=alea ), American Law and Economics Association Annual Meetings 2004, Paper 64 . 2004.

^ Craig P and de Búrca, G. (3rd edn).

EU Law: Text, Cases and Materials . Oxford University Press. Page 203. in the book by Vogenauer, S and Weatherill, S (ed). (2006).

The Harmonisation of European Contract Law Implications for European Private Laws, Business and Legal Practice . Oxford and Portland, Oregon: Hart Publishing. Page 115 ^ Colombi Ciacchi, A. "Non-Legislative Harmonisation of Private Law under the European Constitution: The Case of Unfair Suretyships", (2005). 13 European Review of Private Law page 285 in the book by Vogenauer, S and Weatherill, S (ed). (2006).

The Harmonisation of European Contract Law Implications for European Private Laws, Business and Legal Practice . Oxford and Portland, Oregon: Hart Publishing. Page 198 v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value v t e Forms of economic integration Trade bloc Preferential trading area Free-trade area Economic partnership Passport-free zone Single market Economic union Customs union Monetary union Customs and monetary union Economic and monetary union Complete economic integration Shared policies Fiscal union Social union Political union Theory Economic integration effects Friction of distance Harmonisation of law Theory of the second best Regions Europe Latin America Middle East North America v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harmonisation_of_law&oldid=1301949933 " Categories : European Union legal terminology European Union law Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from April 2009 All articles that may contain original research Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2009 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harmonisation of law 6 languages Add topic

