Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Importance 2 History 3 Methodology 4 Hand digging 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Borehole 28 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Чӑвашла Čeština Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Lietuvių മലയാളം मराठी Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski తెలుగు Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Boreholes ) Narrow shaft bored in the ground Borehole digging for a borewell or tube well Borewell digging A woman in Uganda collects water from a borehole and attached hand pump A drilled well in Ghana; the borehole is not visible A borehole is a narrow shaft bored in the ground, either vertically or horizontally. A borehole may be constructed for many different purposes, including the extraction of water ( drilled water well and tube well ), other liquids (such as petroleum ), or gases (such as natural gas ). It may also be part of a geotechnical investigation , environmental site assessment , mineral exploration , temperature measurement, as a pilot hole for installing piers or underground utilities, for geothermal installations, or for underground storage of unwanted substances, e.g. in carbon capture and storage .

Importance [ edit ] A water resources borehole into the chalk aquifer under the North Downs , England at Albury Engineers and environmental consultants use the term borehole to collectively describe all of the various types of holes drilled as part of a geotechnical investigation or environmental site assessment (a so-called Phase II ESA). This includes holes advanced to collect soil samples, water samples or rock cores, to advance in situ sampling equipment, or to install monitoring wells or piezometers .  Samples collected from boreholes are often tested in a laboratory to determine their physical properties, or to assess levels of various chemical constituents or contaminants.

Typically, a borehole used as a water well is completed by installing a vertical pipe (casing) and well screen to keep the borehole from caving. This also helps prevent surface contaminants from entering the borehole and protects any installed pump from drawing in sand and sediment.

Oil and natural gas wells are completed in a similar, albeit usually more complex, manner.

As detailed in proxy (climate) , borehole temperature measurements at a series of different depths can be effectively " inverted " (a mathematical formula to solve a matrix equation) to help estimate historic surface temperatures.

Clusters of small-diameter boreholes equipped with heat exchangers made of plastic PEX pipe can be used to store heat or cold between opposing seasons in a mass of native rock. The technique is called seasonal thermal energy storage . Media that can be used for this technique ranges from gravel to bedrock. There can be a few to several hundred boreholes, and in practice, depths have ranged from 50 to 300 metres (150 to 1,000 ft).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] Borehole drilling has a long history. By at least the Han dynasty (202 BC – 220 AD), the Chinese used deep borehole drilling for mining and other projects. The British sinologist and historian Michael Loewe states that borehole sites could reach as deep as 600 metres (2,000 ft).

[ 3 ] K.S. Tom describes the drilling process: "The Chinese method of deep drilling was accomplished by a team of men jumping on and off a beam to impact the drilling bit while the boring tool was rotated by buffalo and oxen." [ 4 ] This was the same method used for extracting petroleum in California during the 1860s (i.e. "kicking her down").

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] A Western Han dynasty bronze foundry discovered in Xinglong, Hebei had nearby mining shafts which reached depths of 100 metres (330 ft) with spacious mining areas; the shafts and rooms were complete with a timber frame, ladders and iron tools.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] By the first century BC, Chinese craftsmen cast iron drill bits and drillers were able to drill boreholes up to 1,500 metres (4,900 ft) deep.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] By the eleventh century AD, the Chinese were able to drill boreholes up to 900 metres (3,000 ft) in depth. Drilling for boreholes was time-consuming and long. As the depth of the holes varied, the drilling of a single well could last nearly one full decade.

[ 4 ] It was not up until the 19th century that Europe and the West would catch up and rival ancient Chinese borehole drilling technology.

[ 10 ] [ 5 ] For many years, the world's longest borehole was the Kola Superdeep Borehole in Russia. From 2011 until August 2012 the record was held by the 12,345-metre (40,502 ft) long Sakhalin-I Odoptu OP-11 Well, offshore the Russian island Sakhalin .

[ 11 ] The Chayvo Z-44 extended-reach well took the title of the world's longest borehole on 27 August 2012. Z-44's total measured depth is 12,376 metres (40,604 ft). However, ERD wells are more shallow than the Kola Borehole, owing to a large horizontal displacement. In July 2023, China began drilling deep boreholes, one at the Sichuan Basin expected to reach 10,520 metres (34,510 ft) into the ground and the other at the Tarim Basin with a planned depth of 11,100 metres (36,400 ft).

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Methodology [ edit ] Further information: Well drilling Drillers may sink a borehole using a drilling rig or a hand-operated rig. The machinery and techniques to advance a borehole vary considerably according to manufacturer, geological conditions, and the intended purpose. For offshore drilling floating units or platforms supported by the seafloor are used for the drilling rig.

Hand digging [ edit ] Two borehole diggers manually digging a borehole Especially in developing countries many boreholes are still dug by hand. The digging begins with manual labor using basic tools such as shovels, picks, and crowbars. Workers excavate the soil layer by layer, often using a circular motion to create a well-shaped hole. The process is slow and demanding, requiring teamwork and coordination. To prevent the walls from collapsing and to ensure water quality, the borehole is lined with materials like bricks, stones, or concrete rings. This reinforcement maintains the integrity of the borehole's structure and helps to prevent contamination. A concrete platform or slab may be installed at the bottom to prevent sediment from entering the water. The top of the borehole is capped to protect it from debris and contamination.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Askam Borehole in Pennsylvania Casing cutter Deep borehole disposal Hole opener Horizontal drillhole disposal Kola Superdeep Borehole Vertical seismic profile References [ edit ] ^ Hellström G. (2008).

Large-Scale Applications of Ground-Source Heat Pumps in Sweden.

IEA HP Annex 29 Workshop, Zurich, May 19, 2008.

^ Stiles, Lynn (June 1998).

"Underground thermal energy storage in the US" .

IEA Heat Pump Centre Newsletter .

16 (2): 22– 23.

^ Loewe (1968), 194.

^ a b c Tom (1989), 103.

^ a b Hobson, John M. (2004).

The Eastern Origins of Western Civilisation . Cambridge University Press. p. 215.

ISBN 978-0521547246 .

^ Loewe (1968), 191.

^ Wang (1982), 105.

^ Hossain, M. E.; Abdullah Al-Majed, Abdulaziz (2015).

Fundamentals of Sustainable Drilling Engineering . Wiley-Scrivener (published March 2, 2015).

ISBN 978-0470878170 .

^ Rezende, Lisa (2007).

Chronology of Science . Checkmark Books (published April 1, 2007). pp.

40 .

ISBN 978-0816071197 .

^ a b Conner, Clifford D. (2005).

A People's History of Science: Miners, Midwives, and Low Mechanicks . Nation Books. pp.

175 .

ISBN 978-1560257486 .

^ Sakhalin-1 Project Drills World's Longest Extended-Reach Well Archived 2011-01-31 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lau, Chris (2023-07-21).

"China is drilling some of the world's deepest holes in hunt for natural resources" .

CNN . Retrieved 2023-07-23 .

^ "China is drilling some of the deepest holes in hunt for natural resources" .

www.9news.com.au . 2023-07-23 . Retrieved 2023-07-23 .

^ "Transformative Borehole Drilling Projects: Empowering Carbon Credit Initiatives - 2050 Paris |" . 2023-08-01 . Retrieved 2024-01-03 .

External links [ edit ] Look up borehole in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

https://webapps.usgs.gov/nibi/ Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boreholes .

Boreholes: Swiss Geological Survey v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology v t e Man-made and man-related subterranea Natural features Cave Cenote Grotto Sinkhole Civilian features Bank vault Basement Burial vault (tomb) Borehole Catacombs Dungeon Dugout (shelter) Dry well Earth shelter Erdstall Fogou Hypogeum Manhole Rapid transit Rock-cut tomb Root cellar Tunnel Utility vault Underground city Well Wine cave Secret passage Semi-basement Stepwell Storm cellar Smuggling tunnel Ventilation shaft Military features Air raid shelter Bunker Blast shelter Casemate Fallout shelter Missile launch facility (silo) Scallywag bunker Underground base Underground hangar Spider hole Mining , quarrying , and underground construction Rock-cut architecture Subsurface utility engineering Tunnel construction Underground mine ventilation Underground hard-rock mining Underground soft-rock mining Related topics Cave dweller Caves of Maastricht Civil defense Coober Pedy Houston tunnel system Kőbánya cellar system Tunnel warfare Tunnel network Trench warfare Underground living Underground City (Beijing) Underground City, Montreal Mine exploration Mines of Paris Mole people Naples underground geothermal zone Sapping Subterranean London Subterranean Toledo Subterranean warfare Subterranean fiction Earth shelters US Bill Gates' house Forestiere Underground Gardens Underground House Colorado Underground House Las Vegas Underground World Home Earth shelters UK Underhill, Holme Hockerton Housing Project Malator Earth shelters Australia Coober Pedy Lightning Ridge Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Drilling Boreholes in Africa Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Borehole&oldid=1296755345 " Categories : Chinese inventions Drilling technology Hole making Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 02:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Borehole 28 languages Add topic

