Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background (pre-1941) 1.2 Declarations by the Allies of World War II (1941–1944) 1.3 Founding (1945) 1.4 Cold War (1947–1991) 1.5 Post-Cold War (1991–present) 2 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 2.1 General Assembly 2.2 Security Council 2.3 UN Secretariat 2.4 International Court of Justice 2.5 Economic and Social Council 2.6 Specialized agencies 2.7 Funds, programmes, and other bodies 3 Membership Toggle Membership subsection 3.1 Group of 77 4 Objectives Toggle Objectives subsection 4.1 Peacekeeping and security 4.2 Human rights 4.3 Economic development and humanitarian assistance 4.4 Environment and climate 4.5 Other global issues 5 Funding 6 Assessments and reviews 7 Awards 8 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 8.1 Role 8.2 Representation and structure 8.3 Exclusion of nations 8.4 Independence 8.5 National sovereignty 8.6 Bias 8.7 Effectiveness 8.8 Inefficiency and corruption 9 Model United Nations 10 Hymn to the United Nations 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Citations 13.2 Bibliography 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle External links subsection 15.1 Official websites 15.2 Others Toggle the table of contents United Nations 291 languages Acèh Адыгэбзэ Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай 贛語 Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Iñupiatun Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Li Niha Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano ߒߞߏ Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch Pangasinan پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Pinayuanan Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Reo tahiti Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు Tetun ไทย ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga Tshivenda ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Tyap Тыва дыл Удмурт Basa Ugi Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Toba Batak Mandailing Kadazandusun Ghanaian Pidgin Jaku Iban Tolışi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intergovernmental organization "UN" redirects here. For other uses, see UN (disambiguation) and United Nations (disambiguation) .

United Nations Arabic : منظمة الأمم المتحدة Chinese : 联合国 French : Organisation des Nations unies Russian : Организация Объединённых Наций Spanish : Organización de las Naciones Unidas Flag Emblem Members of the United Nations Headquarters 760 United Nations Plaza , Manhattan, New York City ( international zone ) Official languages Arabic Chinese English French Russian Spanish [ 1 ] Official script Arabic Cyrillic Latin Simplified Chinese Type Intergovernmental organization Membership 193 member states 2 observer states Leaders • Secretary‑General António Guterres • Deputy Secretary-General Amina J. Mohammed • General Assembly President Philemon Yang • Economic and Social Council President Bob Rae Establishment • UN Charter signed 26 June 1945 (80 years ago) ( 1945-06-26 ) • Charter entered into force 24 October 1945 (79 years ago) ( 1945-10-24 ) Website un .org Preceded by League of Nations The United Nations ( UN ) is the global intergovernmental organization established by the signing of the UN Charter on 26 June 1945 with the articulated mission of maintaining international peace and security , to develop friendly relations among states , to promote international cooperation, and to serve as a centre for harmonizing the actions of states in achieving those goals.

The United Nations headquarters is located in New York City , with several other offices located in Geneva , Nairobi , Vienna , and The Hague . The UN comprises six principal organizations: the General Assembly , the Security Council , the Economic and Social Council , the International Court of Justice , the Secretariat , and the Trusteeship Council which, together with several specialized agencies and related agencies, make up the United Nations System . There are in total 193 member states and 2 observer states.

The UN has primarily focused on economic and social development, particularly during the wave of decolonization in the mid-20th century. The UN has been praised as a leader of peace and human development, with many officers and agencies having been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize , but has also been criticized for perceived ineffectiveness, bias, and corruption.

History Main article: History of the United Nations Background (pre-1941) Haile Selassie I at the League of Nations appealing Italy's invasion in 1936 which the League failed to intervene.

In the century prior to the UN's creation, several international organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross were formed to ensure protection and assistance for victims of armed conflict and strife.

[ 2 ] During World War I , several major leaders, especially U.S. president Woodrow Wilson , advocated for a world body to guarantee peace. The winners of the war, the Allies , met to decide on formal peace terms at the Paris Peace Conference . The League of Nations was approved and started operations, but the United States never joined. On 10 January 1920, the League of Nations formally came into being when the Covenant of the League of Nations , ratified by 42 nations in 1919, took effect.

[ 3 ] The League Council acted as an executive body directing the Assembly's business. It began with four permanent members—the United Kingdom , France , Italy , and Japan .

After some limited successes and failures during the 1920s, the League proved ineffective in the 1930s, as it failed to act against the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1933. Forty nations voted for Japan to withdraw from Manchuria but Japan voted against it and walked out of the League instead of withdrawing from Manchuria.

[ 4 ] It also failed to act against the Second Italo-Ethiopian War , after the appeal for international intervention by Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie I at Geneva in 1936 went with no avail, including when calls for economic sanctions against Italy failed. Italy and other nations left the League.

[ 5 ] When World War II broke out in 1939, the League effectively closed down.

[ 6 ] Declarations by the Allies of World War II (1941–1944) 1943 sketch by Franklin Roosevelt of the UN original three branches: The Four Policemen , an executive branch, and an international assembly of forty UN member states.

The first step towards the establishment of the United Nations was the Inter-Allied Conference in London that led to the Declaration of St James's Palace on 12 June 1941.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] By August 1941, American President Franklin Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill had drafted the Atlantic Charter ; which defined goals for the post-war world. At the subsequent meeting of the Inter-Allied Council in London on 24 September 1941, the eight governments in exile of countries under Axis occupation , together with the Soviet Union and representatives of the Free French Forces , unanimously adopted adherence to the common principles of policy set forth by Britain and the United States.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Roosevelt and Churchill met at the White House in December 1941 for the Arcadia Conference . Roosevelt is considered a founder of the UN, [ 11 ] [ 12 ] and coined the term United Nations to describe the Allied countries .

[ 13 ] Churchill accepted it, noting its use by Lord Byron .

[ 14 ] The text of the Declaration by United Nations was drafted on 29 December 1941, by Roosevelt, Churchill, and Harry Hopkins . It incorporated Soviet suggestions but included no role for France. One major change from the Atlantic Charter was the addition of a provision for religious freedom , which Stalin approved after Roosevelt insisted.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Roosevelt's idea of the " Four Powers ", refers to the four major Allied countries, the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China , emerged in the Declaration by the United Nations.

[ 17 ] On New Year's Day 1942, Roosevelt, Churchill, the Soviet Union's former Foreign Minister Maxim Litvinov , and the Chinese Premier T. V. Soong signed the " Declaration by United Nations ", [ 18 ] and the next day the representatives of twenty-two other nations added their signatures. During the war, the United Nations became the official term for the Allies. In order to join, countries had to sign the Declaration and declare war on the Axis powers .

[ 19 ] The October 1943 Moscow Conference resulted in the Moscow Declarations , including the Four Power Declaration on General Security . This declaration was signed by the Allied Big Four —the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and China—and aimed for the creation "at the earliest possible date of a general international organization". This was the first public announcement that a new international organization was being contemplated to replace the League of Nations. The Tehran Conference followed shortly afterwards at which Roosevelt, Churchill and Joseph Stalin , the leader of the Soviet Union, met and discussed the idea of a post-war international organization.

The new international organization was formulated and negotiated amongst the delegations from the Allied Big Four at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference from 21 September to 7 October 1944. They agreed on proposals for the aims, structure and functioning of the new organization.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] It took the conference at Yalta in February 1945, and further negotiations with the Soviet Union, before all the issues were resolved.

[ 20 ] Founding (1945) The UN in 1945: founding members in light blue, protectorates and territories of the founding members in dark blue (Some nations' land would be different from now.) By 1 March 1945, 21 additional states had signed the Declaration by the United Nations.

[ 23 ] After months of planning, the UN Conference on International Organization opened in San Francisco on 25 April 1945. It was attended by 50 nations' governments and a number of non-governmental organizations.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] The delegations of the Big Four chaired the plenary meetings.

[ 27 ] Previously, Churchill had urged Roosevelt to restore France to its status of a major power after the liberation of Paris in August 1944. The drafting of the Charter of the United Nations was completed over the following two months, and it was signed on 26 June 1945 by the representatives of the 50 countries.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The UN officially came into existence on 24 October 1945, upon ratification of the Charter by the five permanent members of the Security Council : the United States, the United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union and China — and by a majority of the other 46 nations.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The first meetings of the General Assembly , with 51 nations represented, [ a ] and the Security Council took place in London beginning in January 1946.

[ 30 ] Debates began at once, covering topical issues such as the presence of Russian troops in Iranian Azerbaijan and British forces in Greece .

[ 34 ] British diplomat Gladwyn Jebb served as interim secretary-general.

The General Assembly selected New York City as the site for the headquarters of the UN. Construction began on 14 September 1948 and the facility was completed on 9 October 1952. The Norwegian Foreign Minister, Trygve Lie , was the first elected UN secretary-general .

[ 30 ] Cold War (1947–1991) Dag Hammarskjöld was a particularly active secretary-general from 1953 until he died in 1961.

Though the UN's primary mandate was peacekeeping , the division between the United States and the Soviet Union often paralysed the organization; generally allowing it to intervene only in conflicts distant from the Cold War .

[ 35 ] Two notable exceptions were a Security Council resolution on 7 July 1950 authorizing a US-led coalition to repel the North Korean invasion of South Korea , passed in the absence of the Soviet Union, [ 30 ] [ 36 ] and the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement on 27 July 1953.

[ 37 ] On 29 November 1947, the General Assembly approved resolution 181 , a proposal to partition Palestine into two states, with Jerusalem placed under a special international regime.

[ 38 ] The plan failed [ 39 ] and a civil war broke out in Palestine, that led to the creation of the state of Israel afterward.

[ 40 ] Two years later, Ralph Bunche , a UN official, negotiated an armistice to the resulting conflict , with the Security Council deciding that "an armistice shall be established in all sectors of Palestine".

[ 39 ] [ 41 ] On 7 November 1956, the first UN peacekeeping force was established to end the Suez Crisis ; [ 42 ] however, the UN was unable to intervene against the Soviet Union's simultaneous invasion of Hungary , following the country's revolution .

[ 43 ] On 14 July 1960, the UN established the United Nations Operation in the Congo (or UNOC), the largest military force of its early decades, to bring order to Katanga , restoring it to the control of the Democratic Republic of the Congo by 11 May 1964.

[ 44 ] While travelling to meet rebel leader Moise Tshombe during the conflict, Dag Hammarskjöld , often named as one of the UN's most effective secretaries-general, [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] died in a plane crash . Months later he was posthumously awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .

[ 48 ] In 1964, Hammarskjöld's successor, U Thant , deployed the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus , which would become one of the UN's longest-running peacekeeping missions.

[ 49 ] With the spread of decolonization in the 1960s, the UN's membership shot up due to an influx of newly independent nations. In 1960 alone, 17 new states joined the UN, 16 of them from Africa.

[ 42 ] On 25 October 1971, with opposition from the United States, but with the support of many Third World nations, the People's Republic of China was given the Chinese seat on the Security Council in place of the Republic of China (also known as Taiwan). The vote was widely seen as a sign of waning American influence in the organization.

[ 50 ] Third World nations organized themselves into the Group of 77 under the leadership of Algeria, which briefly became a dominant power at the UN.

[ 51 ] On 10 November 1975, a bloc comprising the Soviet Union and Third World nations passed a resolution , over strenuous American and Israeli opposition, declaring Zionism to be a form of racism . The resolution was repealed on 16 December 1991, shortly after the end of the Cold War.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] With an increasing Third World presence and the failure of UN mediation in conflicts in the Middle East , Vietnam , and Kashmir , the UN increasingly shifted its attention to its secondary goals of economic development and cultural exchange.

[ 54 ] By the 1970s, the UN budget for social and economic development was far greater than its peacekeeping budget.

[ citation needed ] Post-Cold War (1991–present) Kofi Annan , secretary-general from 1997 to 2006 Flags of member nations at the United Nations Headquarters , seen in 2007 Marking of the UN's 70th anniversary – Budapest, 2015 After the Cold War, the UN saw a radical expansion in its peacekeeping duties, taking on more missions in five years than it had in the previous four decades.

[ 55 ] Between 1988 and 2000, the number of adopted Security Council resolutions more than doubled, and the peacekeeping budget increased more than tenfold.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] The UN negotiated an end to the Salvadoran Civil War , launched a successful peacekeeping mission in Namibia , and oversaw democratic elections in post- apartheid South Africa and post- Khmer Rouge Cambodia.

[ 60 ] In 1991, the UN authorized a US-led coalition that repulsed Iraq's invasion of Kuwait .

[ 61 ] Brian Urquhart , the under-secretary-general of the UN from 1971 to 1985, later described the hopes raised by these successes as a "false renaissance" for the organization, given the more troubled missions that followed.

[ 58 ] Beginning in the last decades of the Cold War , critics of the UN condemned the organization for perceived mismanagement and corruption.

[ 62 ] In 1984, American President Ronald Reagan withdrew the United States' funding from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (or UNESCO) over allegations of mismanagement, followed by the United Kingdom and Singapore.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Boutros Boutros-Ghali , the secretary-general from 1992 to 1996, initiated a reform of the Secretariat, somewhat reducing the size of the organization.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] His successor, Kofi Annan , initiated further management reforms in the face of threats from the US to withhold its UN dues.

[ 66 ] Though the UN Charter had been written primarily to prevent aggression by one nation against another, in the early 1990s the UN faced several simultaneous, serious crises within Somalia, Haiti, Mozambique, and the nations that previously made up Yugoslavia.

[ 67 ] The UN mission in Somalia was widely viewed as a failure after the United States' withdrawal following casualties in the Battle of Mogadishu . The UN mission to Bosnia faced worldwide ridicule for its indecisive and confused mission in the face of ethnic cleansing.

[ 68 ] In 1994, the UN Assistance Mission for Rwanda failed to intervene in the Rwandan genocide amidst indecision in the Security Council.

[ 69 ] From the late 1990s to the early 2000s, international interventions authorized by the UN took a wider variety of forms. The United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 authorized the NATO -led Kosovo Force beginning in 1999. The UN mission in the Sierra Leone Civil War was supplemented by a British military intervention . The invasion of Afghanistan in 2001 was overseen by NATO.

[ 70 ] In 2003, the United States invaded Iraq despite failing to pass a UN Security Council resolution for authorization, prompting a new round of questioning of the UN's effectiveness.

[ 71 ] Under the eighth secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon , the UN intervened with peacekeepers in crises such as the War in Darfur in Sudan and the Kivu conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and sent observers and chemical weapons inspectors to the Syrian Civil War .

[ 72 ] In 2013, an internal review of UN actions in the final battles of the Sri Lankan Civil War in 2009 concluded that the organization had suffered a "systemic failure".

[ 73 ] In 2010, the organization suffered the worst loss of life in its history, when 101 personnel died in the Haiti earthquake .

[ 74 ] Acting under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 in 2011, NATO countries intervened in the First Libyan Civil War .

The Millennium Summit was held in 2000 to discuss the UN's role in the 21st century.

[ 75 ] The three-day meeting was the largest gathering of world leaders in history, and it culminated in the adoption by all member states of the Millennium Development Goals (or MDGs), a commitment to achieve international development in areas such as poverty reduction , gender equality and public health . Progress towards these goals, which were to be met by 2015, was ultimately uneven. The 2005 World Summit reaffirmed the UN's focus on promoting development, peacekeeping, human rights and global security.

[ 76 ] The Sustainable Development Goals (or SDGs) were launched in 2015 to succeed the Millennium Development Goals.

[ 77 ] In addition to addressing global challenges, the UN has sought to improve its accountability and democratic legitimacy by engaging more with civil society and fostering a global constituency.

[ 78 ] In an effort to enhance transparency, in 2016 the organization held its first public debate between candidates for secretary-general.

[ 79 ] On 1 January 2017, Portuguese diplomat António Guterres , who had previously served as the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , became the ninth secretary-general. Guterres has highlighted several key goals for his administration, including an emphasis on diplomacy for preventing conflicts, more effective peacekeeping efforts, and streamlining the organization to be more responsive and versatile to international needs.

[ 80 ] On 13 June 2019, the UN signed a Strategic Partnership Framework with the World Economic Forum in order to "jointly accelerate" the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development .

[ 81 ] In 2025, the UN began facing a financial crisis resulting from delays in member state due payments.

[ 82 ] A major problem is that the United States, a major contributor, often intentionally does not pay in full and delays its payments in order to influence the UN, such as on topics like the Gaza war , as the existence of the UN relies on such payments. Other countries have begun to follow suit, triggering a financial crisis.

[ 83 ] In 19 May 2025, only 61 countries paid their dues on time and in full.

[ 82 ] The crisis is causing massive budget cuts within the UN, with the UN warning that millions of lives are being put at risk.

[ 84 ] [ 82 ] Structure Main article: United Nations System The United Nations is part of the broader UN System, which includes an extensive network of institutions and entities. Central to the organization are five principal organs established by the UN Charter: the General Assembly , the Security Council , the Economic and Social Council , the International Court of Justice and the UN Secretariat .

[ 85 ] A sixth principal organ, the Trusteeship Council , suspended its operations on 1 November 1994 upon the independence of Palau ; the last remaining UN trustee territory.

[ 86 ] Four of the five principal organs are located at the main UN Headquarters in New York City, while the International Court of Justice is seated in The Hague .

[ 87 ] Most other major agencies are based in the UN offices at Geneva , [ 88 ] Vienna , [ 89 ] and Nairobi , [ 90 ] and additional UN institutions are located throughout the world. The six official languages of the UN, used in intergovernmental meetings and documents, are Arabic , Chinese , English , French , Russian and Spanish .

[ 91 ] On the basis of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations , the UN and its agencies are immune from the laws of the countries where they operate, safeguarding the UN's impartiality with regard to host and member countries.

[ 92 ] Below the six organs are, in the words of the author Linda Fasulo, "an amazing collection of entities and organizations, some of which are actually older than the UN itself and operate with almost complete independence from it".

[ 93 ] These include specialized agencies, research and training institutions, programmes and funds and other UN entities.

[ 94 ] All organizations in the UN system obey the Noblemaire principle , which calls for salaries that will attract and retain citizens of countries where compensation is highest, and which ensures equal pay for work of equal value regardless of the employee's nationality.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] In practice, the International Civil Service Commission , which governs the conditions of UN personnel, takes reference to the highest-paying national civil service.

[ 97 ] Staff salaries are subject to an internal tax that is administered by the UN organizations.

[ 95 ] [ 98 ] Principal organs of the United Nations [ 99 ] v t e UN General Assembly — Deliberative assembly of all UN member states — UN Secretariat — Administrative organ of the UN — International Court of Justice — Universal court for international law — May resolve non-compulsory recommendations to states or suggestions to the Security Council (UNSC); Decides on the admission of new members, following proposal by the UNSC; Adopts the budget; Elects the non-permanent members of the UNSC; all members of the Economic and Social Council; the UN Secretary-General (following their proposal by the UNSC); and the fifteen judges of the International Court of Justice (ICJ). Each country has one vote.

Supports the other UN bodies administratively (for example, in the organization of conferences, the writing of reports and studies and the preparation of the budget); Its chairperson—the UN Secretary-General —is elected by the General Assembly for a five-year mandate and is the UN's foremost representative.

Decides disputes between states that recognize its jurisdiction; Issues legal opinions; Renders judgment by relative majority . Its fifteen judges are elected by the UN General Assembly for nine-year terms.

UN Security Council — For international security issues — UN Economic and Social Council — For global economic and social affairs — UN Trusteeship Council — For administering trust territories ( currently inactive ) — Responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security ; May adopt compulsory resolutions ; Has fifteen members: five permanent members with veto power and ten elected members .

Responsible for co-operation between states as regards economic and social matters; Co-ordinates co-operation between the UN's numerous specialized agencies ; Has 54 members, elected by the General Assembly to serve staggered three-year mandates.

Was originally designed to manage colonial possessions that were former League of Nations mandates ; Has been inactive since 1994, when Palau , the last trust territory, attained independence.

General Assembly Main article: United Nations General Assembly Mikhail Gorbachev , leader of the Soviet Union, addressing the UN General Assembly in December 1988 The General Assembly is the primary deliberative assembly of the UN. Composed of all UN member states , the assembly gathers at annual sessions at the General Assembly Hall , but emergency sessions can be summoned.

[ 100 ] The assembly is led by a president , elected by the member states on a rotating regional basis, and 21 vice-presidents.

[ 101 ] The first session convened on 10 January 1946 in the Methodist Central Hall in London and comprised representatives of 51 nations.

[ 30 ] When the General Assembly decides on seminal questions such as those on peace and security, admission of new members and budgetary matters, a two-thirds majority of those present and voting is required.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] All other questions are decided by a majority vote. Each member has one vote. Apart from the approval of budgetary matters, resolutions are not binding on the members. The Assembly may make recommendations on any matters within the scope of the UN, except matters of peace and security that are under consideration by the Security Council.

[ 100 ] Draft resolutions can be forwarded to the General Assembly by its six main committees: [ 104 ] First Committee (Disarmament and International Security) Second Committee (Economic and Financial) Third Committee (Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural) Fourth Committee (Special Political and Decolonization) Fifth Committee (Administrative and Budgetary) Sixth Committee (Legal) As well as by the following two committees: General Committee – a supervisory committee consisting of the assembly's president, vice-presidents, and committee heads Credentials Committee – responsible for determining the credentials of each member nation's UN representatives Security Council Main article: United Nations Security Council Colin Powell , the US Secretary of State , demonstrates a vial with alleged Iraq chemical weapon probes to the UN Security Council on Iraq war hearings, 5 February 2003.

The Security Council is charged with maintaining peace and security among nations. While other organs of the UN can only make recommendations to member states, the Security Council has the power to make binding decisions that member states have agreed to carry out, under the terms of Charter Article 25.

[ 105 ] The decisions of the council are known as United Nations Security Council resolutions .

[ 106 ] The Security Council is made up of fifteen member states: five permanent members (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States) and ten non-permanent members (currently Algeria , Ecuador , Guyana , Japan , Malta , Mozambique , the Republic of Korea , Sierra Leone , Slovenia and Switzerland ).

[ 107 ] The five permanent members hold veto power over UN resolutions, allowing a permanent member to block adoption of a resolution, though not debate. The ten temporary seats are held for two-year terms, with five members elected each year by the General Assembly on a regional basis .

[ 108 ] The presidency of the Security Council rotates alphabetically each month.

[ 109 ] UN Secretariat Main articles: United Nations Secretariat and Secretary-General of the United Nations António Guterres , the current secretary-general The UN Secretariat carries out the day-to-day duties required to operate and maintain the UN system.

[ 110 ] It is composed of tens of thousands of international civil servants worldwide and headed by the secretary-general , who is assisted by the deputy secretary-general .

[ 111 ] The Secretariat's duties include providing information and facilities needed by UN bodies for their meetings and carrying out tasks as directed by the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and other UN bodies.

[ 112 ] The secretary-general acts as the spokesperson and leader of the UN. The position is defined in the UN Charter as the organization's chief administrative officer.

[ 113 ] Article 99 of the charter states that the secretary-general can bring to the Security Council's attention "any matter which in their opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security", a phrase that secretaries-general since Trygve Lie have interpreted as giving the position broad scope for action on the world stage.

[ 114 ] The office has evolved into a dual role of an administrator of the UN organization and a diplomat and mediator addressing disputes between member states and finding consensus to global issues .

[ 115 ] The secretary-general is appointed by the General Assembly, after being recommended by the Security Council, where the permanent members have veto power. There are no specific criteria for the post, but over the years it has become accepted that the position shall be held for one or two terms of five years.

[ 116 ] The current secretary-general is António Guterres of Portugal, who replaced Ban Ki-moon in 2017.

Secretaries-general of the United Nations [ 117 ] No.

Name Country of origin Took office Left office Notes – Gladwyn Jebb United Kingdom 24 October 1945 2 February 1946 Served as acting secretary-general until Lie's election 1 Trygve Lie Norway 2 February 1946 10 November 1952 Resigned 2 Dag Hammarskjöld Sweden 10 April 1953 18 September 1961 Died in office 3 U Thant Burma 30 November 1961 31 December 1971 First non-European to hold office 4 Kurt Waldheim Austria 1 January 1972 31 December 1981 5 Javier Pérez de Cuéllar Peru 1 January 1982 31 December 1991 6 Boutros Boutros-Ghali Egypt 1 January 1992 31 December 1996 Served for the shortest time 7 Kofi Annan Ghana 1 January 1997 31 December 2006 8 Ban Ki-moon South Korea 1 January 2007 31 December 2016 9 António Guterres Portugal 1 January 2017 Incumbent International Court of Justice Main article: International Court of Justice The ICJ ruled that Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia in 2008 did not violate international law.

The International Court of Justice (or ICJ), sometimes known as the World Court, [ 118 ] is the primary judicial organ of the UN. It is the successor to the Permanent Court of International Justice and occupies the body's former headquarters in the Peace Palace in The Hague, Netherlands , making it the only principal organ not based in New York City. The ICJ's main function is adjudicating disputes among nations. Examples of issues they have heard include war crimes, violations of state sovereignty and ethnic cleansing.

[ 119 ] The court can also be called upon by other UN organs to provide advisory opinions on matters of international law.

[ 120 ] All UN member states are parties to the ICJ Statute , which forms an integral part of the UN Charter, and non-members may also become parties. The ICJ's rulings are binding upon parties and, along with its advisory opinions, serve as sources of international law .

[ 118 ] The court is composed of 15 judges appointed to nine-year terms by the General Assembly. Every sitting judge must be from a different nation.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] Economic and Social Council Main article: United Nations Economic and Social Council The Economic and Social Council (or the ECOSOC) assists the General Assembly in promoting international economic and social co-operation and development.

[ 122 ] It was established to serve as the UN's primary forum for global issues and is the largest and most complex UN body.

[ 122 ] The ECOSOC's functions include gathering data, conducting studies and advising and making recommendations to member states.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Its work is carried out primarily by subsidiary bodies focused on a wide variety of topics. These include the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues , which advises UN agencies on issues relating to indigenous peoples , the United Nations Forum on Forests , which coordinates and promotes sustainable forest management, the United Nations Statistical Commission , which co-ordinates information-gathering efforts between agencies, and the Commission on Sustainable Development , which co-ordinates efforts between UN agencies and NGOs working towards sustainable development . ECOSOC may also grant consultative status to non-governmental organizations.

[ 123 ] As of April 2021 [update] almost 5,600 organizations have this status.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Specialized agencies Main article: List of specialized agencies of the United Nations The UN Charter stipulates that each primary organ of the United Nations can establish various specialized agencies to fulfill its duties.

[ 127 ] Specialized agencies are autonomous organizations working with the United Nations and each other through the coordinating machinery of the Economic and Social Council. Each was integrated into the UN system through an agreement with the UN under UN Charter article 57.

[ 128 ] There are fifteen specialized agencies, which perform functions as diverse as facilitating international travel, preventing and addressing pandemics, and promoting economic development.

[ 129 ] [ b ] Specialized agencies of the United Nations No.

Acronym Agency Headquarters Head Established 1 FAO Food and Agriculture Organization Rome , Italy Qu Dongyu 1945 2 ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization Montreal, Quebec , Canada Juan Carlos Salazar 1947 3 IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development Rome , Italy Alvaro Lario 1977 4 ILO International Labour Organization Geneva , Switzerland Gilbert Houngbo 1946 (1919) 5 IMO International Maritime Organization London , United Kingdom Arsenio Dominguez 1948 6 IMF International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C.

, United States Kristalina Georgieva 1945 (1944) 7 ITU International Telecommunication Union Geneva , Switzerland Doreen Bogdan-Martin 1947 (1865) 8 UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Paris , France Audrey Azoulay 1945 9 UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization Vienna , Austria Gerd Müller 1967 10 UNWTO World Tourism Organization Madrid , Spain Zurab Pololikashvili 1974 11 UPU Universal Postal Union Bern , Switzerland Masahiko Metoki 1947 (1874) 12 WBG World Bank Group Washington, D.C.

, United States Ajay Banga (president) 1945 (1944) 13 WHO World Health Organization Geneva , Switzerland Tedros Adhanom 1948 14 WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization Geneva , Switzerland Daren Tang 1974 15 WMO World Meteorological Organization Geneva , Switzerland Celeste Saulo (secretary-general) Abdulla Al Mandous (president) 1950 (1873) Funds, programmes, and other bodies The United Nations system includes a myriad of autonomous, separately administered funds, programmes, research and training institutes, and other subsidiary bodies .

[ 130 ] Each of these entities have their own area of work, governance structure, and budgets such as the World Trade Organization (or the WTO) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (or the IAEA), operate independently of the UN but maintain formal partnership agreements. The UN performs much of its humanitarian work through these institutions, such as preventing famine and malnutrition (the World Food Programme ), protecting vulnerable and displaced people (the UNHCR ), and combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic (the UNAIDS ).

[ 131 ] Programmes and funds of the United Nations Acronyms Agency Headquarters Head Established UNDP United Nations Development Programme New York City , United States Achim Steiner 1965 UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund New York City , United States Catherine M. Russell 1946 UNCDF United Nations Capital Development Fund New York City , United States Marc Bichler 1966 WFP World Food Programme Rome , Italy Cindy McCain 1963 UNEP United Nations Environment Programme Nairobi , Kenya Inger Andersen 1972 UNFPA United Nations Population Fund New York City , United States Natalia Kanem 1969 UN-HABITAT United Nations Human Settlements Programme Nairobi , Kenya Maimunah Mohd Sharif 1978 UNV United Nations Volunteers Bonn , Germany Toily Kurbanov 1978 Membership Main articles: Member states of the United Nations and Expulsion from the United Nations 193 UN member states 2 UN Observer States (Palestine, Holy See) 2 eligible Non-Member States (Niue, Cook Islands) 17 non-self-governing territories Antarctica All the world's undisputed independent states are members of the United Nations.

[ 132 ] South Sudan , which joined 14 July 2011, is the most recent addition, bringing a total of 193 UN member states.

[ 133 ] The UN Charter outlines the membership rules: Membership in the United Nations is open to all other peace-loving states that accept the obligations contained in the present Charter and, in the judgment of the Organization, are able and willing to carry out these obligations.

The admission of any such state to membership in the United Nations will be effected by a decision of the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council. Chapter II, Article 4.

[ 134 ] Under the leadership of Sukarno , Indonesia was the first and only country that attempted to leave the United Nations.

In addition, there are two non-member observer states : the Holy See and Palestine .

[ 135 ] [ c ] The Cook Islands and Niue , both states in free association with New Zealand , are full members of several UN specialized agencies and have had their "full treaty-making capacity" recognized by the Secretariat.

[ 136 ] Indonesia was the first and the only nation that attempted to withdraw its membership from the United Nations, in protest to the election of Malaysia as a non-permanent member of the Security Council in 1965 during conflict between the two countries .

[ 137 ] After forming CONEFO as a short-lived rival to the UN, Indonesia resumed its membership in 1966.

Group of 77 Main article: Group of 77 The Group of 77 (or the G77) at the UN is a loose coalition of developing nations that is designed to promote its members' collective economic interests and create an enhanced joint negotiating capacity in the UN. Seventy-seven nations founded the organization, but by November 2013 the organization had since expanded to 133 member countries.

[ 138 ] The group was founded 15 June 1964 by the "Joint Declaration of the Seventy-Seven Countries" issued at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (or the UNCTAD). The group held its first major meeting in Algiers in 1967, where it adopted the Charter of Algiers and established the basis for permanent institutional structures.

[ 139 ] With the adoption of the New International Economic Order by developing countries in the 1970s, the work of the G77 spread throughout the UN system.

[ 140 ] Similar groupings of developing states also operate in other UN agencies, such as the Group of 24 (or the G-24), which operates in the IMF on monetary affairs.

[ 141 ] Objectives The overarching strategy of the United Nations is captured in the United Nations Common Agenda .

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Peacekeeping and security Main articles: United Nations peacekeeping and List of United Nations peacekeeping missions United Nations Peacekeeping Logo The UN, after approval by the Security Council, sends peacekeepers to regions where armed conflict has recently ceased or paused to enforce the terms of peace agreements and to discourage combatants from resuming hostilities. Since the UN does not maintain its own military, peacekeeping forces are voluntarily provided by member states. These soldiers are sometimes nicknamed "Blue Helmets" because they wear distinctive blue helmets.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] Peacekeeping forces as a whole received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988.

[ 146 ] The UN has carried out 71 peacekeeping operations since 1947, and As of April 2021 [update] , over 88,000 peacekeeping personnel from 121 nations have been deployed on missions.

[ 147 ] The largest is the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (or UNMISS), which has close to 19,200 uniformed personnel, [ 148 ] and the smallest, the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (or UNMOGIP), consists of 113 civilians and experts charged with monitoring the ceasefire in Jammu and Kashmir . UN peacekeepers with the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (or UNTSO) have been stationed in the Middle East since 1948, the longest-running active peacekeeping mission.

[ 149 ] A study by the RAND Corporation in 2005 found the UN to be successful in two-thirds of its peacekeeping efforts. It compared efforts at nation-building by the UN to those of the United States and found that 87.5% of UN cases are at peace, as compared with 50% of U.S. cases at peace.

[ 150 ] Also in 2005, the Human Security Report documented a decline in the number of wars, genocides , and human rights abuses since the end of the Cold War, and presented evidence, albeit circumstantial, that international activism – mostly spearheaded by the UN – has been the main cause of the decline in armed conflict.

[ 151 ] Situations in which the UN has not only acted to keep the peace but also intervened include the Korean War and the authorization of intervention in Iraq after the Gulf War.

[ 152 ] Further studies published between 2008 and 2021 determined UN peacekeeping operations to be more effective at ensuring long-lasting peace and minimizing civilian casualties.

[ 153 ] The UN Buffer Zone in Cyprus was established in 1974 following the Turkish invasion of Cyprus .

The UN has also drawn criticism for perceived failures. In many cases, member states have shown reluctance to achieve or enforce Security Council resolutions. Disagreements in the Security Council about military action and intervention are seen as having failed to prevent the Bangladesh genocide in 1971 , [ 154 ] the Cambodian genocide in the 1970s, [ 155 ] and the Rwandan genocide in 1994.

[ 156 ] Similarly, UN inaction is blamed for failing to either prevent the Srebrenica massacre or complete the peacekeeping operations during the Somali Civil War .

[ 157 ] UN peacekeepers have also been accused of child rape, soliciting prostitutes, and sexual abuse during various peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, [ 158 ] Haiti, [ 159 ] Liberia, [ 160 ] Sudan, [ 161 ] Burundi, and Côte d'Ivoire.

[ 162 ] Scientists cited UN peacekeepers from Nepal as the source of the 2010s Haiti cholera outbreak , which killed more than 8,000 people.

[ 163 ] A Nepalese soldier on a peacekeeping deployment providing security at a rice distribution site in Haiti during 2010 In addition to peacekeeping, the UN is also active in encouraging disarmament . Regulation of armaments was included in the writing of the UN Charter in 1945 and was envisioned as a way of limiting the use of human and economic resources for their creation.

[ 105 ] The advent of nuclear weapons came only weeks after the signing of the charter, resulting in the first resolution of the first General Assembly meeting calling for specific proposals for "the elimination from national armaments of atomic weapons and of all other major weapons adaptable to mass destruction".

[ 164 ] The UN has been involved with arms-limitation treaties such as the Outer Space Treaty , the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , the Seabed Arms Control Treaty , the Biological Weapons Convention , the Chemical Weapons Convention , and the Ottawa Treaty .

[ 165 ] Three UN bodies oversee arms proliferation issues: the International Atomic Energy Agency , the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission .

[ 166 ] Additionally, many peacekeeping missions focus on disarmament: several operations in West Africa disarmed roughly 250,000 former combatants and secured tens of thousands of weapons and millions of munitions.

[ 167 ] Human rights One of the UN's primary purposes is "promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion", and member states pledge to undertake "joint and separate action" to protect these rights.

[ 127 ] [ 168 ] Eleanor Roosevelt with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , 1949 In 1948, the General Assembly adopted a Universal Declaration of Human Rights , drafted by a committee headed by American diplomat and activist Eleanor Roosevelt , and including the French lawyer René Cassin . The document proclaims basic civil, political and economic rights common to all human beings, though its effectiveness towards achieving these ends has been disputed since its drafting.

[ 169 ] The Declaration serves as a "common standard of achievement for all people and all nations" rather than a legally binding document, but it has become the basis of two binding treaties, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights .

[ 170 ] In practice, the UN is unable to take significant action against human rights abuses without a Security Council resolution, though it does substantial work in investigating and reporting abuses.

[ 171 ] In 1979, the General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women ; followed by the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1989.

[ 172 ] With the end of the Cold War, the push for human rights action took on new impetus.

[ 173 ] The United Nations Commission on Human Rights was formed in 1993 to oversee human rights issues for the UN, following the recommendation of that year's World Conference on Human Rights . Jacques Fomerand, a scholar of the UN, describes the organization's mandate as "broad and vague", with only "meagre" resources to carry it out.

[ 174 ] In 2006, it was replaced by a Human Rights Council consisting of 47 nations.

[ 175 ] Also in 2006, the General Assembly passed a Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People , [ 176 ] and in 2011 it passed its first resolution recognizing the rights of members of the LGBTQ+ community.

[ 177 ] Other UN bodies responsible for women's rights issues include the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women , the United Nations Development Fund for Women and the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women .

[ 178 ] The UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, one of three bodies with a mandate to oversee issues related to indigenous peoples, held its first session in 2002.

[ 179 ] Economic development and humanitarian assistance Millennium Development Goals [ 180 ] Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger Achieve universal primary education Promote gender equality and empower women Reduce child mortality Improve maternal health Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases Ensure environmental sustainability Develop a global partnership for development Another primary purpose of the UN is "to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural and humanitarian character".

[ 168 ] Numerous bodies have been created to work towards this goal, primarily under the authority of the General Assembly and the ECOSOC.

[ 181 ] In 2000, the 192 UN member states agreed to achieve eight Millennium Development Goals by 2015.

[ 182 ] The Sustainable Development Goals were launched in 2015 to succeed the Millennium Development Goals.

[ 77 ] The SDGs have an associated financing framework called the Addis Ababa Action Agenda .

The UN Development Programme (or the UNDP), an organization for grant-based technical assistance, is one of the leading bodies in the field of international development . The organization also publishes the UN Human Development Index , a comparative measure ranking countries by poverty, literacy, education, life expectancy, and other factors.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] The Food and Agriculture Organization (or the FAO) promotes agricultural development and food security.

[ 185 ] The United Nations Children's Fund (or UNICEF) was created in 1946 to aid European children after the Second World War and expanded its mission to provide aid around the world and to uphold the convention on the Rights of the Child.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Three former directors of the Global Smallpox Eradication Programme reading the news that smallpox has been globally eradicated in 1980 The World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund (or the IMF) are independent, specialized agencies and observers within the UN framework.

[ 188 ] They were initially formed separately from the UN through the Bretton Woods Agreement .

[ 189 ] The World Bank provides loans for international development, while the IMF promotes international economic co-operation and gives emergency loans to indebted countries.

[ 190 ] In Jordan , UNHCR remains responsible for the Syrian refugees and the Zaatari refugee camp .

The World Health Organization (or WHO), which focuses on international health issues and disease eradication, is another of the UN's largest agencies. In 1980, the agency announced that the eradication of smallpox had been completed. In subsequent decades, WHO eradicated polio , river blindness , and leprosy .

[ 191 ] The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (or UNAIDS) coordinated the organization's response to the AIDS epidemic.

[ 192 ] The UN Population Fund , which also dedicates part of its resources to combating HIV, is the world's largest source of funding for reproductive health and family planning services.

[ 193 ] Along with the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement , the UN takes a leading role in coordinating emergency relief.

[ 194 ] The World Food Programme (or the WFP) provides food aid in response to famine, natural disasters, and armed conflict. The organization feeds an average of 90 million people in 80 nations per year.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (or the UNHCR) works to protect the rights of refugees, asylum seekers and stateless people.

[ 196 ] The UNHCR and the WFP programmes are funded by voluntary contributions from governments, corporations, and individuals, though the UNHCR's administrative costs are paid for by the UN's primary budget.

[ 197 ] Environment and climate Further information: United Nations Environment Programme , United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Beginning with the formation of the UN Environmental Programme (or the UNEP) in 1972, the UN has made environmental issues a prominent part of its agenda. A lack of success in the first two decades of UN work in this area led to the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992; which sought to give new impetus to these efforts.

[ 198 ] In 1988, the UNEP and the World Meteorological Organization (or the WMO), another UN organization, established the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , which assesses and reports on research on global warming .

[ 199 ] The UN-sponsored Kyoto Protocol set legally binding emissions reduction targets for ratifying states.

[ 200 ] Other global issues Since the UN's creation, over 80 colonies have attained independence. The General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in 1960 with no votes against but abstentions from all major colonial powers. The UN works towards decolonization through groups including the UN Committee on Decolonization .

[ 201 ] The committee lists seventeen remaining " non-self-governing territories ", the largest and most populous of which is the Western Sahara .

[ 202 ] The UN also declares and co-ordinates international observances that bring awareness to issues of international interest or concern; examples include World Tuberculosis Day , Earth Day , and the International Year of Deserts and Desertification .

[ 203 ] Starting in 2023, the United Nations Office for Digital and Emerging Technologies has organized an annual UN Open Source Week to facilitate collaborative and international technological projects, AI policies, and governance.

[ 204 ] Funding Top 25 contributors to the United Nations budget for the period 2022–2024 [ 205 ] Member state Contribution (% of UN budget) United States 22.000 China 15.254 Japan 8.033 Germany 6.111 United Kingdom 4.375 France 4.318 Italy 3.189 Canada 2.628 South Korea 2.574 Spain 2.134 Australia 2.111 Brazil 2.013 Russia 1.866 Netherlands 1.377 Mexico 1.221 Saudi Arabia 1.184 Switzerland 1.134 India 1.044 Sweden 0.871 Turkey 0.845 Poland 0.837 Belgium 0.828 Argentina 0.719 Norway 0.679 Austria 0.679 Other member states 11.976 The UN budget for 2024 was $3.59 billion, not including additional resources donated by members, such as peacekeeping forces.

[ 206 ] Including specialized agencies of the UN , the UN System Chief Executives Board for Coordination reports total expenses of $67.4 billion in 2022 for 43 United Nations entities.

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] The UN is financed from assessed and voluntary contributions from its member states. The General Assembly approves the regular budget and determines the assessment for each member. This is broadly based on the relative capacity of each nation to pay, as measured by its gross national income (or GNI), with adjustments for external debt and low per capita income.

[ 209 ] The Assembly has established the principle that the UN should not be unduly dependent on any one member to finance its operations. Thus, there is a "ceiling" rate, setting the maximum amount that any member can be assessed for the regular budget. In December 2000, the Assembly revised the scale of assessments in response to pressure from the United States. As part of that revision, the regular budget ceiling was reduced from 25% to 22%.

[ 210 ] For the least developed countries (or LDCs), a ceiling rate of 0.01% is applied.

[ 209 ] In addition to the ceiling rates, the minimum amount assessed to any member nation (or "floor" rate) is set at 0.001% of the UN budget ($31,000 for the two-year budget 2021–2022).

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] A large share of the UN's expenditure addresses its core mission of peace and security, and this budget is assessed separately from the main organizational budget.

[ 213 ] The peacekeeping budget for the 2021–2022 fiscal year is $6.38 billion, supporting 66,839 personnel deployed in 12 missions worldwide.

[ 214 ] UN peace operations are funded by assessments, using a formula derived from the regular funding scale that includes a weighted surcharge for the five permanent Security Council members, who must approve all peacekeeping operations. This surcharge serves to offset discounted peacekeeping assessment rates for less developed countries. The largest contributors to the UN peacekeeping budget for 2023–2024 are: the United States (26.94%), China (18.68%), Japan (8.03%), Germany (6.11%), the United Kingdom (5.35%), France (5.28%), Italy (3.18%), Canada (2.62%), South Korea (2.57%) and Russia (2.28%).

[ 215 ] Special UN programmes not included in the regular budget, such as UNICEF and the World Food Programme, are financed by voluntary contributions from member governments, corporations, and private individuals.

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] Assessments and reviews Main articles: Reform of the United Nations and Reform of the United Nations Security Council The 2001 Nobel Peace Prize to the UN—diploma in the lobby of the UN Headquarters in New York City Several studies have examined the Security Council's responsiveness to armed conflict. Findings suggests that the Council is more likely to meet and deliberate on conflicts that are more intense and have led to more humanitarian suffering, but that its responsiveness is also shaped by the political interests of member states and in particular of the permanent members.

[ 218 ] UN peacekeeping missions are assessed to be generally successful. A book looking at 47 peace operations by Virginia Page Fortna of Columbia University found that UN-led conflict resolution usually resulted in long-term peace.

[ 219 ] Political scientists Hanne Fjelde, Lisa Hultman and Desiree Nilsson of Uppsala University studied twenty years of data on peacekeeping missions, concluding that they were more effective at reducing civilian casualties than counterterrorism operations by nation states.

[ 220 ] Georgetown University professor Lise Howard postulates that UN peacekeeping operations are more effective due to their emphasis on "verbal persuasion, financial inducements and coercion short of offensive military force, including surveillance and arrest", which are likelier to change the behavior of warring parties.

[ 153 ] British historian Paul Kennedy states that while the organization has suffered some major setbacks, "when all its aspects are considered, the UN has brought great benefits to our generation and will bring benefits to our children's and grandchildren's generations as well." [ 221 ] In 2012, then French President François Hollande stated that "France trusts the United Nations. She knows that no state, no matter how powerful, can solve urgent problems, fight for development and bring an end to all crises. France wants the UN to be the centre of global governance".

[ 222 ] In his 1953 address to the United States Committee for United Nations Day, American President Dwight D. Eisenhower expressed his view that, for all its flaws, "the United Nations represents man's best organized hope to substitute the conference table for the battlefield".

[ 223 ] Jacques Fomerand , a professor in political sciences, writes that the "accomplishments of the United Nations in the last 60 years are impressive in their own terms. Progress in human development during the 20th century has been dramatic, and the UN and its agencies have certainly helped the world become a more hospitable and livable place for millions".

[ 224 ] Reviewing the first 50 years of the UN's history, the author Stanley Meisler writes that "the United Nations never fulfilled the hopes of its founders, but it accomplished a great deal nevertheless", citing its role in decolonization and its many successful peacekeeping efforts.

[ 225 ] Awards A number of agencies and individuals associated with the UN have won the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of their work. Two secretaries-general, Dag Hammarskjöld and Kofi Annan, were each awarded the prize; as were Ralph Bunche, a UN negotiator, René Cassin, a contributor to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the American Secretary of State Cordell Hull for his role in the organization's founding.

Lester B. Pearson , the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs , was awarded the prize in 1957 for his role in organizing the UN's first peacekeeping force to resolve the Suez Crisis.

UNICEF won the prize in 1965, the International Labour Organization in 1969, the UN Peacekeeping Forces in 1988, the International Atomic Energy Agency (which reports to the UN) in 2005, and the UN-supported Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in 2013. The UN High Commissioner for Refugees was awarded the prize in 1954 and 1981, becoming one of only two recipients to win the prize twice. The UN as a whole was awarded the prize in 2001, sharing it with Annan.

[ 226 ] In 2007, the IPCC received the prize "for their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change." [ 227 ] On March 21st 2025 the joint Universities of Leuven and Louvain (Belgium) awarded the UNO a Honorary degree which was given in the hands of António Guterres .

Criticism Main article: Criticism of the United Nations Role In a sometimes-misquoted statement, American President George W. Bush stated in February 2003—referring to UN uncertainty towards Iraqi provocations under the Saddam Hussein regime—that "free nations will not allow the UN to fade into history as an ineffective, irrelevant debating society." [ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] In 2020, former American President Barack Obama , in his memoir A Promised Land noted, "In the middle of the Cold War , the chances of reaching any consensus had been slim, which is why the UN had stood idle as Soviet tanks rolled into Hungary or U.S. planes dropped napalm on the Vietnamese countryside . Even after the Cold War, divisions within the Security Council continued to hamstring the UN's ability to tackle problems. Its member states lacked either the means or the collective will to reconstruct failing states like Somalia , or prevent an ethnic slaughter in places like Sri Lanka." [ 231 ] [ 232 ] Since its founding, there have been many calls for reform of the UN but little consensus on how to do so. Some want the UN to play a greater or more effective role in world affairs, while others want its role reduced to humanitarian work.

Representation and structure Core features of the UN apparatus, such as the veto privileges of some nations in the Security Council , are often described as fundamentally undemocratic, contrary to the UN mission, and a main cause of inaction on genocides and crimes against humanity .

[ 233 ] [ 234 ] Jacques Fomerand state that the most enduring divide in views of the UN is "the North–South split" between richer Northern nations and developing Southern nations . Southern nations tend to favour a more empowered UN with a stronger General Assembly, allowing them a greater voice in world affairs, while Northern nations prefer an economically laissez-faire UN that focuses on transnational threats such as terrorism.

[ 235 ] There have been numerous calls for the UN Security Council's membership to be increased , for different ways of electing the UN's secretary-general, and for a UN Parliamentary Assembly (UNPA).

[ 236 ] In the context of ongoing United Nations reform discussions, Noble World Foundation (NWF) proposes changing the structure of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) by shifting membership and veto power from individual states to regional organizations like the European Union . This proposed shift is in line with the UNSC's existing practice of basing the selection of non-permanent members on regional representation. Shifting to regional organization-based membership in the UNSC aims to reduce deadlock caused by individual state vetoes. A prime example of this issue was observed on 25 February 2022, when Russia used its veto power to block a resolution against its invasion of Ukraine, thereby underscoring a significant weakness in the UNSC's functioning. NWF's proposal is intended to improve the effectiveness and decision-making process within the UNSC.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] In response to concerns regarding the pace of progress under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), recent studies have suggested institutional reforms to enhance the integration of ecological concerns in UN decision-making processes.

[ 239 ] Scholars affiliated with the Planet Politics Institute and The Planetary Democrats have proposed the creation of an Earth System Council, modelled after the UNSC, and a Planetary Parliament, alongside the proposed UNPA, to provide formal representation for ecological interests within the UN system.

[ 240 ] [ 241 ] Exclusion of nations See also: United Nations list of non-self-governing territories and List of states with limited recognition After World War II , the French Committee of National Liberation was late to be recognized by the United States as the government of France, and so the country was initially excluded from the conferences that created the new organization. Future French president Charles de Gaulle criticized the UN, famously calling it a machin (contraption), and was not convinced that a global security alliance would help maintain world peace, preferring direct defence treaties between countries.

[ 242 ] Following the Chinese Civil War , the government of China was disputed between the Chinese Nationalist Party and the Chinese Communist Party . After the foundation of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 1 October 1949, the government of the Republic of China (ROC) retreated to the island of Taiwan, [ 243 ] continuing to claim that it was the sole government of China. After the civil war, the United Nations continued recognizing the ROC as the official government of China . In 1971, amid growing debate over the representation of the Chinese people on the mainland, [ 244 ] the General Assembly passed a resolution recognizing the PRC as "the only legitimate representatives of China to the United Nations." [ 245 ] Critics [ who?

] allege that this position reflects a failure of the organization's development goals and guidelines, [ 246 ] and it garnered renewed scrutiny during the COVID-19 pandemic , when Taiwan was denied membership into the World Health Organization despite its relatively effective response to the virus .

[ 247 ] Support for Taiwan's inclusion in the UN remains challenged by the People's Republic of China, which claims the territories controlled by Taiwan as their own territory .

[ 248 ] Independence Throughout the Cold War, both the United States and the Soviet Union repeatedly accused the UN of favouring the other. In 1950, the Soviet Union boycotted the organization in protest to China's seat at the UN Security Council being given to the anti-communist Republic of China . Three years later, the Soviets effectively forced the resignation of UN Secretary-General Trygve Lie by refusing to acknowledge his administration due to his support of the Korean War .

[ 249 ] Ironically, the United States had simultaneously scrutinized the UN for employing communists and Soviet sympathizers, following a high-profile accusation that Alger Hiss , an American who had taken part in the establishment of the UN, had been a Soviet spy. American Senator Joseph McCarthy claimed that the UN Secretariat under Secretary-General Lie harboured American communists, leading to further pressure that the UN chief resign.

[ 250 ] The United States saw nascent opposition to the UN in the 1960s, particularly amongst conservatives, with groups such as the John Birch Society stating that the organization was an instrument for communism.

[ 251 ] Popular opposition to the UN was expressed through bumper stickers and signs with slogans such as "Get the U.S. out of the U.N. and the U.N. out of the U.S.!" and "You can't spell communism without U.N." [ 252 ] National sovereignty In the United States, there were concerns about supposed threats to national sovereignty, most notably promoted by the John Birch Society , which mounted a nationwide campaign in opposition to the UN during the 1960s.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] [ 255 ] Beginning in the 1990s, the same concern appeared with the American Sovereignty Restoration Act , which has been introduced multiple times in the United States Congress . In 1997, an amendment containing the bill received a floor vote, with 54 representatives voting in favour.

[ 256 ] [ 257 ] The 2007 version of the bill ( H.R. 1146 ) was authored by U.S. Representative Ron Paul , to effect the United States' withdrawal from the United Nations. It would repeal various laws pertaining to the UN, terminate authorization for funds to be spent on the UN, terminate UN presence on American property, and withdraw diplomatic immunity for UN employees.

[ 258 ] It would provide up to two years for the United States to withdraw.

[ 259 ] The Yale Law Journal cited the Act as proof that "the United States's complaints against the United Nations have intensified." [ 260 ] The most recent iteration, As of 2022 [update] , is H.R.7806, introduced by Mike D. Rogers .

[ 261 ] Bias The UN's attention to Israel's treatment of Palestinians is considered excessive by Jewish critics, including Israeli diplomat Dore Gold , British scholar Robert S. Wistrich , American legal scholar Alan Dershowitz , Australian politician Mark Dreyfus , and the Anti-Defamation League .

[ 262 ] In September 2015, Saudi Arabia 's Faisal bin Hassan Trad was elected chair of an advisory committee in the UN Human Rights Council , [ 263 ] a move criticized by the UN Watch .

[ 264 ] The UNHRC has likewise been accused of anti-Israel bias by Ex-President of the United States George W. Bush , who complained that the Council focused too much attention on Israel and not enough on countries such as Cuba, Venezuela, North Korea and Iran.

[ 265 ] American state lawmakers have proposed legislation to block various UN programs deemed to threaten U.S. sovereignty.

[ 266 ] In 2023, Tennessee enacted legislation to block the implementation of programs "originating in, or traceable to, the United Nations or a subsidiary entity of the United Nations," including Agenda 21 and the 2030 Agenda .

[ 267 ] [ 268 ] In her confirmation hearing before the Senate panel to be the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Elise Stefanik , described the UN's attitude toward Israel as "anti-semitic" and affirmed the views of the right-wing Israeli ministers, Bezalel Smotrich and Ben Gvir , that Israel has a 'biblical right to the entire West Bank'.

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] [ 271 ] [ 272 ] Effectiveness According to international relations scholar Edward Luck , the United States has preferred a feeble United Nations in major projects undertaken by the organization to forestall UN interference with, or resistance to, American policies. "The last thing the U.S. wants is an independent UN throwing its weight around", Luck said. Similarly, former US Ambassador to the United Nations Daniel Patrick Moynihan explained that "The Department of State desired that the United Nations prove utterly ineffective in whatever measures it undertook. The task was given to me, and I carried it forward with not inconsiderable success." [ 273 ] In 1994, former special representative of the secretary-general of the UN to Somalia Mohamed Sahnoun published Somalia: The Missed Opportunities , [ 274 ] a book in which he analyses the reasons for the failure of the 1992 UN intervention in Somalia . Sahnoun claims that between the start of the Somali civil war in 1988 and the fall of the Siad Barre regime in January 1991, the UN missed at least three opportunities to prevent major human tragedies. When the UN tried to provide humanitarian assistance, they were totally outperformed by NGOs , whose competence and dedication sharply contrasted with the UN's excessive caution and bureaucratic inefficiencies. Sahnoun warned that if radical reform were not undertaken, then the UN would continue to respond to such crises with inept improvisation.

[ 275 ] Beyond specific instances or areas of alleged ineffectiveness, some scholars debate the overall effectiveness of the UN. Adherents to the realist school of international relations take a pessimistic position, arguing that the UN is not an effective organization because it is dominated and constrained by great powers.

Liberal scholars counter that it is an effective organization because it has proved capable of solving many problems by working around the restrictions imposed by powerful member states. The UN is generally considered by scholars to be more effective in realms such as public health, and humanitarian assistance.

[ 276 ] The ineffectiveness of enforcing territorial integrity in the 21st century [ 277 ] have led to debate on possible re-emergence of the right of conquest .

[ 278 ] Inefficiency and corruption Critics have also accused the UN of bureaucratic inefficiency, waste, and corruption. In 1976, the General Assembly established the Joint Inspection Unit to seek out inefficiencies within the UN system. During the 1990s, the United States withheld dues citing inefficiency and only started repayment on the condition that a major reforms initiative be introduced. In 1994, the Office of Internal Oversight Services (or the OIOS) was established by the General Assembly to serve as an efficiency watchdog.

[ 279 ] In 2004, the UN faced accusations that its recently ended Oil-for-Food Programme — in which Iraq had been allowed to trade oil for basic needs to relieve the pressure of sanctions — had suffered from widespread corruption, including billions of dollars of kickbacks . An independent inquiry created by the UN found that many of its officials had been involved in the scheme , and raised significant questions about the role of Kojo Annan , the son of Kofi Annan .

[ 280 ] Model United Nations Main article: Model United Nations The United Nations has inspired the extracurricular activity Model United Nations (or MUN). MUN is a simulation of United Nations activity based on the UN agenda and following UN procedure. It is usually attended by high school and university students who organize conferences to simulate the various UN committees to discuss important issues of the day.

[ 281 ] Today, MUN educates tens of thousands on the activities of the UN around the world. MUN has many famous and notable alumni, such as the former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon .

[ 282 ] Hymn to the United Nations Main article: Hymn to the United Nations On the request of then United Nations Secretary-General U Thant , a Hymn to the United Nations was performed on the occasion of its 26th anniversary, on 24 October 1971, by Pau Casals , the lyrics to which were penned by the poet W. H. Auden .

[ 283 ] Thant first approached Casals, who was a personal friend, looking to create a hymn to peace and hoping for the song to be based on the preamble of the Charter of the United Nations . Thant later commissioned Auden to write the poem after Casals requested one to set to music. Auden completed his work in three days time. The finished work, scored for chorus and orchestra, takes approximately seven minutes to play. However, there were never any plans to adopt the song as the organization's official anthem.

See also Countries portal Politics portal World portal International relations List of country groupings List of current permanent representatives to the United Nations List of multilateral free-trade agreements PassBlue Spying on the United Nations UNICEF United Nations Convention Against Torture United Nations in popular culture United Nations Memorial Cemetery United Nations television film series World Summit on the Information Society Notes ^ Poland had not been represented among the fifty nations at the San Francisco conference due to the reluctance of the Western superpowers to recognize its post-war communist government. However, the Charter was later amended to list Poland as a founding member, and Poland ratified the Charter on 16 October 1945.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] ^ Some sources identify seventeen specialized agencies, taking into account the three specialized agencies that make up the World Bank Group , which is now treated as one organization: the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the International Development Association (IDA), and the International Finance Corporation (IFC).

^ The Holy See is a sovereign entity with statehood over the territory of the Vatican City State . For details, see Holy See and the United Nations .

References Citations ^ "Official Languages" .

United Nations . Archived from the original on 13 July 2021 . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ "Red Cross-History-Objective" .

International Committee of the Red Cross . 11 September 2017.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2018 . Retrieved 28 November 2018 .

^ "League of Nations instituted" .

history.com . 9 February 2010.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2018 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "League of Nations and Manchuria invasion" .

www.johndclare.net .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2018 . Retrieved 30 November 2018 .

^ Nault, Derrick M., 'Haile Selassie, the League of Nations, and Human Rights Diplomacy', Africa and the Shaping of International Human Rights (Oxford, 2020; online edn, Oxford Academic, 21 January 2021), https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198859628.003.0004 , ^ "Why the League failed" .

johndclare.net .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ United Nations, Dept of Public Information (1986).

Everyone's United Nations . UN. p. 5.

ISBN 978-92-1-100273-7 .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ Tandon, Mahesh Prasad; Tandon, Rajesh (1989).

Public International Law . Allahabad Law Agency. p. 421.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ Lauren, Paul Gordon (2011).

The Evolution of International Human Rights: Visions Seen . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

140– 141.

ISBN 978-0-8122-2138-1 .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2020 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ "Inter-Allied Council Statement on the Principles of the Atlantic Charter" .

The Avalon Project . Lillian Goldman Law Library. 24 September 1941.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2011 . Retrieved 14 August 2013 .

^ "Press Conference On Franklin Delano Roosevelt Disability Award" . UN Press.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 17 July 2022 .

^ "Without Global Cooperation Between Great And Small Alike, No Progress And No Peace Can Last Forever, Secretary-General States" . UN Press.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2022 . Retrieved 17 July 2022 .

^ Ward, Geoffrey C.; Burns, Ken (2014).

"Nothing to Conceal" .

The Roosevelts: An Intimate History .

Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group . p. 397.

ISBN 978-0-385-35306-9 .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2020 .

^ "United Nations" .

Wordorigins.org . 3 February 2007.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 March 2016 .

^ Roll, David (2013).

The Hopkins Touch: Harry Hopkins and the Forging of the Alliance to Defeat Hitler .

Oxford University Press USA. pp.

172– 175.

ISBN 978-0-19-989195-5 .

^ Sherwood 1948 , pp. 447–453.

^ Urquhart, Brian (16 July 1998).

"Looking for the Sheriff" .

New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2018 . Retrieved 14 February 2007 .

^ "1942: Declaration of The United Nations" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2015 . Retrieved 1 July 2015 .

^ Schlesinger 2003 .

^ a b Bohlen, C.E. (1973).

Witness to History, 1929–1969 . New York: Norton. p.

159 .

ISBN 978-0-393-07476-5 .

^ Video: Allies Study Post-War Security Etc. (1944) .

Universal Newsreel . 1944.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2014 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ "Milestones 1941–1950: Dumbarton Oaks Conference" .

United Nations . Archived from the original on 3 November 2018 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ Osmańczyk 2004 , p. 2445.

^ "Charter of the United Nations" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .

^ "History of the United Nations" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2017 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .

^ "San Francisco – the birthplace of the United Nations" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .

^ "1945: The San Francisco Conference" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2017 . Retrieved 1 July 2015 .

^ Miller, Russell A.; Bratspies, Rebecca M., eds. (2008).

Progress in International Law . Leiden, the Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p.

837 .

^ "South Africa: Time Running Out", The Study Commission on U.S. Policy Toward Southern Africa , University of California Press, p.

31 , 1981, ISBN 978-0-520-04547-7 ^ a b c d e "Milestones 1941–1950" .

United Nations . Archived from the original on 27 October 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2017 .

^ "Charter of the United Nations and Statue of the International Court of Justice" (PDF) . San Francisco, United States: Treaty Section, United Nations Office of Legal Affairs . 1945. pp. 6, 20, 31 . Retrieved 29 October 2024 .

^ Grant 2009 , pp. 25–26.

^ "Poland and the United Nations" . Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 29 November 2013 .

^ Roberts, John Morris (1993).

History of the world . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 778.

ISBN 978-0-19-521043-9 .

OCLC 28378422 .

^ Meisler 1995 , p. 35.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 58–59.

^ "UN Milestones Korean War" .

United Nations . 4 August 2015. Archived from the original on 3 November 2018 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ Admin, D. S. U. (31 October 2024).

"General Assembly" .

Question of Palestine . Retrieved 14 October 2024 .

^ a b "Legal Consequences arising from the Policies and Practices of Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem" (PDF) .

INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (icj-cij.org) .

^ "Nov. 29, 1947 | U.N. Partitions Palestine, Allowing for Creation of Israel" .

The Learning Network . 29 November 2011.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2018 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 51–54.

^ a b "UN Milestones 1951–1960" .

United Nations . 6 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2017 .

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 114.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 115–134.

^ Meisler 1995 , p. 76.

^ Kennedy 2007 , p. 60.

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 17, 20.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 127–128, 134.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 156–157.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 195–197.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 208–210.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 204–226, 213, 220–221.

^ "A/RES/3379 (XXX) of 10 November 1975" . Archived from the original on 6 December 2012.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 167–168, 224–225.

^ Matanock, Aila M. (2020).

"How International Actors Help Enforce Domestic Deals" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

23 (1): 357– 383.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-050718-033504 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ "Is China contributing to the United Nations' mission?" . CSIS China Power. 7 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2016 . Retrieved 25 August 2016 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 43.

^ a b Meisler 1995 , p. 334.

^ Renner, Michael.

"Peacekeeping Operations Expenditures: 1947–2005" (PDF) .

Global Policy Forum .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 March 2017 . Retrieved 4 January 2014 .

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 252–256.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 264–277.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 226–227.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 234–237.

^ Lewis, Paul (6 August 1996).

"Jean Gerard, 58, Reagan Envoy Who Led U.S. to Leave Unesco" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2014 . Retrieved 6 January 2014 .

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 285–286.

^ a b "Are UN reforms just reshuffling of the deck?" .

New Straits Times . 16 January 1998.

Archived from the original on 6 September 2015 . Retrieved 5 November 2013 .

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 66–67.

^ For quotation "worldwide ridicule", see Meisler 1995 , p. 293; for a description of UN missions in Somalia and Bosnia, see Meisler 1995 , pp. 312–329.

^ Kennedy 2007 , p. 104.

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 110–111.

^ Kennedy 2007 , p. 111.

^ Smith-Spark, Laura (8 October 2013).

"Syria: Chemical weapons team faces many dangers, says UN chief Ban" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ "UN failed during final days of Lankan ethnic war: Ban Ki-moon" .

FirstPost . Press Trust of India. 25 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 November 2013 .

^ "UN Milestones 2001–2010" .

United Nations . 21 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 6 November 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2017 .

^ "UN summit agenda; The largest gathering of world leaders in history meets in New York to discuss the role of the United Nations in the 21st century" .

BBC News . 7 December 2000.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2007 . Retrieved 22 November 2006 .

^ "2005 World Summit Outcome" (PDF) . United Nations.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 November 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2017 .

^ a b "Sustainable Development Goals" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 2 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Communicating to a global constituency: UN Day in Paris" . United Nations University. 7 November 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016 . Retrieved 24 November 2016 .

^ Falk, Pamela (13 July 2016).

"Can U.N. regain trust with an experiment in transparency?" . CBS News.

Archived from the original on 25 November 2016 . Retrieved 24 November 2016 .

^ Guterres, António (9 January 2017).

"U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres: My Vision for Revitalizing the United Nations" . Newsweek.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2017 .

^ Tedeneke, Alem (13 June 2019).

"World Economic Forum and UN Sign Strategic Partnership Framework" .

World Economic Forum .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2023 . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .

^ a b c "UN faces deepening financial crisis, urges members to pay up | UN News" .

news.un.org . 19 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ Chen, Eugene (August 2024).

"The Liquidity Crisis at the United Nations How We Got Here and Possible Ways Out" (PDF) .

New York University Center on International Cooperation . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ Stoddard, Jill (29 April 2025).

"The World Is Changing Rapidly: Can the United Nations Restructure to Stay Relevant?" .

IPI Global Observatory . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 3–4.

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 8.

^ "United Nations Visitors Centre" . United Nations. 2017.

Archived from the original on 6 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "United Nations Office at Geneva" . United Nations Office at Geneva.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2013 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ "Welcome to the United Nations Office at Vienna!" . United Nations Office at Vienna.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2013 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ "Welcome to the United Nations Office at Nairobi" . United Nations Office at Nairobi. Archived from the original on 25 February 2011 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ "General Assembly of the United Nations – Rules of Procedure" . UN Department for General Assembly.

Archived from the original on 19 December 2010 . Retrieved 15 December 2010 .

^ "Jerusalem Court: No Immunity for UN Employee for Private Acts—Diplomatic/Consular Law and Sovereign Immunity in Israel" . Diplomaticlaw.com. 23 March 2009. Archived from the original on 28 June 2012 . Retrieved 27 April 2010 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 4.

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 4–7.

^ a b Salaries Archived 3 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine , United Nations website ^ ILO: Noblemaire principle Archived 14 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Judgement 986, consideration 7, and Judgment 831, Consideration 1.

^ The Noblemaire principle Archived 17 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine , ICSC ^ Americans Working at the U.N Archived 22 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine , World, The New York Times , 28 September 2009 ^ "United Nations Charter, Chapter III: Organs" .

United Nations . Retrieved 6 March 2023 .

^ a b Fomerand 2009 , pp. 131–133.

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 69–70.

^ "Main Organs" . 18 November 2014.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2018 . Retrieved 21 November 2018 .

^ "General Assembly of the United Nations: Rules of Procedure: XII – Plenary Meetings" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2012 . Retrieved 4 December 2013 .

Decisions of the General Assembly on important questions shall be made by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting. These questions shall include: recommendations with respect to the maintenance of international peace and security, the election of the non-permanent members of the Security Council, the election of the members of the Economic and Social Council, the election of members of the Trusteeship Council in accordance with paragraph 1 c of Article 86 of the Charter, the admission of new Members to the United Nations, the suspension of the rights and privileges of membership, the expulsion of Members, questions relating to the operation of the trusteeship system, and budgetary questions.

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 70–73.

^ a b "United Nations Charter: Chapter V" . United Nations. 17 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 3 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 39–43.

^ "Current Members | United Nations Security Council" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 6 February 2024 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 40–41.

^ "Security Council Presidency in 2017" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2013 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Secretariat" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 21.

^ Fomerand 2009 , p. 285.

^ "United Nations Charter: Chapter XV" . United Nations. 17 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 31–32.

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 59–62.

^ "Appointment Process" . United Nations. 22 April 2015.

Archived from the original on 15 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Former Secretaries-General" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2013 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ a b "International Court of Justice | Definition, Cases, Purpose, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

^ "The Court" .

International Court of Justice . Archived from the original on 9 September 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ a b Fomerand 2009 , p. 183.

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 100–101.

^ a b "Economic and Social Council | UN" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

^ a b Fomerand 2009 , pp. 103–104.

^ "About ECOSOC" .

ECOSOC .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 November 2013 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 156.

^ "Welcome to csonet.org | Website of the UN DESA NGO Branch. At your service" .

csonet.org .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2016 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

^ a b "United Nations Charter: Chapter IX" . United Nations. 17 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 9 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "The UN System, Chief Executives Board for Coordination" . Unsceb.org . Retrieved 22 January 2013 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "What are UN specialized agencies, and how many are there? – Ask DAG!" .

ask.un.org .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 November 2020 .

^ "Structure and Organization" . Un.org.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 January 2013 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 171–177.

^ "UN welcomes South Sudan as 193rd Member State" . UN News Centre. 28 June 2006. Archived from the original on 3 August 2015 . Retrieved 4 November 2011 .

^ "United Nations Member States" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Charter of the United Nations: Chapter II" . United Nations. 17 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Non-member States" . United Nations. 7 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Repertory of Practice" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ Gutierrez, Natashya (22 August 2016).

"What happened when Indonesia 'withdrew' from the United Nations" .

Rappler .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2016 . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "The Member States of the Group of 77" . Group of 77.

Archived from the original on 6 June 2012 . Retrieved 7 November 2013 .

^ "About the G77" . Group of 77.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2013 . Retrieved 5 November 2013 .

^ Nicholls, Samuel Thomas (2019).

A Moment of Possibility: The Rise and Fall of the New International Economic Order (Thesis thesis).

Archived from the original on 13 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 December 2023 .

^ "Group of 24 (G-24): Meaning, Benefits, Criticisms" .

Investopedia .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2023 . Retrieved 13 December 2023 .

^ Nations, United.

"Our Common Agenda" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ "The UN75 Declaration, Our Common Agenda and the development of international law" .

International Review of the Red Cross . 15 November 2022.

Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 52.

^ Coulon 1998 , p. ix.

^ Nobel Prize.

"The Nobel Peace Prize 1988" .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2011 . Retrieved 3 April 2011 .

^ "Where we operate" .

United Nations Peacekeeping .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2022 . Retrieved 26 June 2021 .

^ "UNMISS" .

United Nations Peacekeeping .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 26 June 2021 .

^ "United Nations Peacekeeping Operations" . United Nations. 29 February 2016.

Archived from the original on 23 March 2016 . Retrieved 24 March 2016 .

^ "The UN's Role in Nation Building: From the Congo to Iraq" (PDF) . RAND Corporation.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 December 2008 . Retrieved 30 December 2008 .

^ "The Human Security Report 2005" . Human Security Centre. Archived from the original on 28 July 2009 . Retrieved 8 February 2007 .

^ Kennedy 2007 , p. 56.

^ a b "A U.N. Peacekeeping Mission Is Afghanistan's Best Hope" .

World Politics Review . 7 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2022 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ Ball 2011 , p. 46.

^ Kennedy 2007 , p. 187.

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 102–105.

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 294–311.

^ Lynch, Colum (16 December 2004).

"U.N. Sexual Abuse Alleged in Congo" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ "UN troops face child abuse claims" .

BBC News . 30 November 2006.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ "Aid workers in Liberia accused of sex abuse" .

The New York Times . 8 May 2006.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 November 2013 .

^ Holt, Kate (4 January 2007).

"UN staff accused of raping children in Sudan" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ "Peacekeepers 'abusing children' " .

BBC News . 28 May 2007.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ Watson, Ivan; Vaccarello, Joe (10 October 2013).

"U.N. sued for 'bringing cholera to Haiti,' causing an outbreak that killed thousands" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ "Resolutions Adopted by the General Assembly During its First Session" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2008 . Retrieved 24 March 2008 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 188–189.

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 189–190.

^ "Mano River Basin, 25 years of peacekeeping" .

United Nations Peacekeeping .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2022 . Retrieved 26 June 2021 .

^ a b "United Nations Charter: Chapter I" . United Nations. 17 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 178–182.

^ Fomerand 2009 , p. 377.

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 185, 188.

^ Fomerand 2009 , pp. 70, 73.

^ Kennedy 2007 , p. 192.

^ Fomerand 2009 , p. 347.

^ "UN creates new human rights body" .

BBC News . 15 March 2006.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ "Frequently Asked Questions: Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples" (PDF) . United Nations.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Jordans, Frank (17 June 2011).

"U.N. Gay Rights Protection Resolution Passes, Hailed As 'Historic Moment' " .

The Huffington Post .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Fomerand 2009 , pp. 57, 194, 341.

^ "United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ "We Can End Poverty" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 143–144.

^ "The UN Millennium Development Goals" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2007 . Retrieved 4 May 2007 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 169–170, 172.

^ Fomerand 2009 , pp. 341–342.

^ Fomerand 2009 , p. 126.

^ "About UNICEF: Who we are: Our History" . UNICEF.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ "About UNICEF: Who We Are" .

UNICEF .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ "Factsheet – The IMF and the World Bank" . 3 June 2004. Archived from the original on 3 June 2004 . Retrieved 8 August 2022 .

^ "About Us–United Nations" . The World Bank. 30 June 2003. Archived from the original on 24 March 2007 . Retrieved 2 August 2007 .

^ Fomerand 2009 , pp. 175, 191–192.

^ Fasulo 2004 , pp. 176–177.

^ Fomerand 2009 , pp. 199–200.

^ Fomerand 2009 , p. 368.

^ a b Fasulo 2004 , p. 183.

^ "Our Work" . World Food Programme. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013 . Retrieved 22 November 2013 .

^ "About Us" .

Unhcr . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2013 . Retrieved 22 November 2013 .

^ Fomerand 2009 , pp. 348, 398.

^ Kennedy 2007 , pp. 160–162.

^ "Organizations" . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 179.

^ "The United Nations and Decolonization" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ "non-self-governing territories" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 27 February 2014 . Retrieved 7 February 2014 .

^ "United Nations Observances" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 17 November 2013 .

^ "UN Open Source Week 2025 | Office for Digital and Emerging Technologies" .

www.un.org . Retrieved 16 June 2025 .

^ "A/Res/73/271: Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations" .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ "General Assembly approves $3.59 billion UN budget for 2024" .

UN News .

United States . 24 December 2023.

Archived from the original on 23 February 2024 . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ "Financial Statistics" . UN System Chief Executives Board for Coordination. 2023.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Financial Statistics: Total Expenses" . UN System Chief Executives Board for Coordination. 2023.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ a b "Fifth Committee Approves Assessment Scale for Regular, Peacekeeping Budgets, Texts on Common System, Pension Fund, as it Concludes Session (Press Release)" . United Nations. 22 December 2006. Archived from the original on 9 December 2013 . Retrieved 8 November 2013 .

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 117.

^ "Regular budget and working capital fund – Committee on Contributions – UN General Assembly" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2022 . Retrieved 19 December 2022 .

^ Weiss & Daws 2009 , p. 682.

^ Fasulo 2004 , p. 115.

^ Contributions to UN Peacekeeping Operations by Country and Post Archived 24 February 2024 at the Wayback Machine (As of 30 November 2023 [update] ), United Nations Peacekeeping Archived 30 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Implementation of General Assembly resolutions 55/235 and 55/236: Report of the Secretary-General .

United Nations General Assembly . 28 December 2021 . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ "Where Your Money Goes" . World Food Programme. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013 . Retrieved 9 November 2013 .

^ "Overall funding trends" .

UNICEF . 21 January 2013.

Archived from the original on 9 November 2013 . Retrieved 9 November 2013 .

^ Lundgren, Magnus; Klamberg, Mark (2022).

"Selective Attention: The United Security Council and Armed Conflict" .

British Journal of Political Science .

doi : 10.1017/S0007123422000461 .

ISSN 0007-1234 .

^ Fortna, Virginia Page (2008).

Does Peacekeeping Work?: Shaping Belligerents' Choices After Civil War .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-0-691-13671-4 . Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ Howard, Lise Morjé (2019).

Power in Peacekeeping .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-108-45718-7 . Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ Kennedy 2007 , p. 290.

^ "France's role at the UN" . Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 November 2013 .

^ "Remarks to the Members of the United States Committee for United Nations Day" .

The American Presidency Project .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ Fomerand 2009 , pp. cviii.

^ Meisler 1995 , p. 339.

^ "All Nobel Peace Prizes" .

Nobel Prize .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2013 . Retrieved 5 November 2013 .

^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 2007" .

Nobel Prize .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2018 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 .

^ Greene, David L. (14 February 2003).

"Bush implores U.N. to show 'backbone' " .

The Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2014 . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ Singh, Jasvir (2008).

Problem of Ethnicity: Role of United Nations in Kosovo Crisis . Unistar Books. p. 150.

ISBN 978-81-7142-701-7 .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ Normand, Roger; Zaidi, Sarah (2003).

Human Rights at the UN: The Political History of Universal Justice .

Indiana University Press . p. 455.

ISBN 978-0-253-00011-8 .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "UN failed to prevent 'ethnic slaughter in Sri Lanka' – Barack Obama" .

Tamil Guardian . 22 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ "Obama's best seller refers to 'ethnic slaughter in SL' " .

The Sunday Times (Sri Lanka) . 29 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2022 . Retrieved 29 November 2020 .

^ Oliphant, Roland.

"'End Security Council veto' to halt Syria violence, UN human rights chief says amid deadlock" Archived 28 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine , The Daily Telegraph , Dated 4 October 2016. Retrieved 10 May 2020.

^ "Amnesty calls on UN powers to lose veto on genocide votes" .

BBC News . 25 February 2015. Archived from the original on 6 March 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ Fomerand 2009 , p. civ.

^ Brauer, M., & Bummel, A. (2020). A United Nations Parliamentary Assembly: A Policy Review of Democracy Without 18 Borders.

^ "The urgent need for UNSC reform: A path to global peace" .

India Post . 15 December 2023.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2023 . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ "The European Union: The World's Biggest Sovereignty Experiment", CFR World 101" .

The European Union . 14 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2023 . Retrieved 24 December 2023 .

^ Constantinou, C. M., & Christodoulou, E. (2024). On making peace with nature: Visions and challenges towards an ecological diplomacy.

Review of International Studies , 50 (3), 579–599. doi:10.1017/S0260210524000172 ^ Burke, Anthony; Fishel, Stefanie (2020), Pereira, Joana Castro; Saramago, André (eds.), "Across Species and Borders: Political Representation, Ecological Democracy and the Non-Human" , Non-Human Nature in World Politics: Theory and Practice , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

33– 52, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-49496-4_3 , ISBN 978-3-030-49496-4 , retrieved 9 January 2025 ^ Winters, Joseph.

"What if nature had a voice in legislation? A 'planetary parliament' could give it one" .

Grist . Retrieved 9 January 2025 .

^ Gerbet, Pierre (1995).

"Naissance des Nations Unies" [Birth of the United Nations].

Espoir (in French). No. 102. Archived from the original on 10 July 2009.

^ Kubek, Anthony (1963).

How the Far East was lost: American policy and the creation of Communist China . Intercontex Publishers (England) Limited.

ISBN 978-0-85622-000-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hale, Erin (25 October 2021).

"Taiwan taps on United Nations' door, 50 years after departure" .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2025 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 .

^ "Restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations" .

United Nations Digital Library . United Nations General Assembly (26th sess.: 1971). 25 October 1971 . Retrieved 30 May 2025 .

^ "Taiwan Challenges UN Exclusion on Sidelines of COP26 Summit" .

Bloomberg.com . 6 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

^ "Why Taiwan has become a problem for WHO" .

BBC News . 30 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

^ Lee, David Tawei (11 September 2017).

"The United Nations Needs to Treat Taiwan Fairly" .

The National Interest .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2017 . Retrieved 14 September 2017 .

^ Husen, Van (2010).

The Encyclopedia of the Korean War: A Political, Social, and Military History .

ABC-CLIO . pp.

504– 506.

ISBN 978-1-85109-849-1 .

^ "Character Sketches: Trygve Lie by Brian Urquhart" .

UN News . United Nations. 13 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 29 July 2022 . Retrieved 29 July 2022 .

^ "Sponsor Shrugs at Criticism of U.N. TV Series" .

Lincoln Star . Lincoln, Nebraska. 20 September 1964. p. 5F.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 27 September 2022 – via Newspapers.com .

^ Meisler 1995 , pp. 72–73, 82.

^ Lyons, Matthew; Berlet, Chip (2000).

Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort . New York: The Guilford Press. p.

179 .

ISBN 978-1-57230-562-5 .

^ Spangler, Jerry D.; Bernick, Bob Jr. (16 June 2003).

"John Birch Society forges on in Utah" .

Deseret News .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2022 . Retrieved 26 July 2022 .

^ Stewart, Charles J. (2002).

"The Master Conspiracy of the John Birch Society: From Communism to the New World Order" .

Western Journal of Communication .

66 (4): 437– 438.

doi : 10.1080/10570310209374748 .

S2CID 145081268 .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2022 . Retrieved 20 May 2021 .

^ "Roll Call 163 Roll Call 163, Bill Number: H. R. 1757, 105th Congress, 1st Session" .

Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives . 4 June 1997.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2022 .

^ "H.Amdt.138 to H.R.1757" .

Congress.gov .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2022 .

^ "Rep. Paul Introduces American Sovereignty Restoration Act" . US Fed News Service. 1 March 1997. Archived from the original (subscription) on 5 November 2012 . Retrieved 10 April 2008 .

^ Lamb, Henry (16 May 2005).

"Showdown at the U.N. corral" .

Enter Stage Right .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2022 . Retrieved 11 April 2008 .

^ Resnik, Judith (May 2006).

"Law's Migration: American Exceptionalism, Silent Dialogues, and Federalism's Multiple Ports of Entry" (PDF) .

Yale Law Journal .

115 (7): 1659.

doi : 10.2307/20455664 .

JSTOR 20455664 .

S2CID 153301537 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 December 2011 . Retrieved 11 April 2008 .

^ "H.R.7806 – 117th Congress (2019–2020): American Sovereignty Restoration Act of 2022 | Congress.gov | Library of Congress" . govtrack.us. 17 May 2022.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 .

^ For Gold, see Gold, p. 20 For Wistrich, see Wistrich, p. 487 For Dershowitz, see Dershowitz, Alan .

The Case for Peace : How the Arab-Israeli Conflict Can Be Resolved . Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005.

For Dreyfus, see "Don't be lynch mob, lawyers urge U.N.." Archived 10 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine JTA . 8 July 2009.

For Anti-Defamation League, see "ADL: UN Human Rights Council Resolution Reveals 'Cancerous Bias' Against Israel." Archived 2 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine ADL. 7 July 2009.

^ Osborne, Samuel (30 September 2015), "UK helped Saudi Arabia get UN human rights role through 'secret deal' to exchange votes, leaked documents suggest" .

The Independent .

Archived 3 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Moore, Jack (21 September 2915), "U.N. Watchdog Slams 'Scandalous' Choice of Saudi Arabia to Head Human Rights Panel" . Yahoo News.

Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Human Rights Council president wants reform" , SwissInfo, 29 September 2007.

Archived 11 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Satija, Neena; McCrimmon, Ryan (26 February 2015).

"Conservative Lawmakers Target United Nations" .

The Texas Tribune .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2024 . Retrieved 17 January 2024 .

^ "State of Tennessee Public Chapter No. 479" (PDF) .

Tennessee Secretary of State .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2024 . Retrieved 17 January 2024 .

^ Sullivan, Kevin (15 May 2023).

"Inside the Tennessee legislature, where a GOP supermajority reigns" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 17 January 2024 .

^ Gedeon, Joseph (21 January 2025).

"Trump UN nominee backs Israeli claims of biblical rights to West Bank" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 25 January 2025 .

^ Demirjian, Karoun (21 January 2025).

"Elise Stefanik Pledges to Back Trump's Vision of a 'Reformed' U.N." The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 January 2025 .

^ Samuels, Ben.

" 'Antisemitic Rot': Trump's UN Pick Stefanik Backs Defunding UNRWA, Citing 'Terrorist Ties' to Hamas" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2025 . Retrieved 21 January 2025 .

^ Al Jazeera Staff.

"Trump's UN ambassador pick says Israel has 'biblical right' to West Bank" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 26 January 2025 .

^ Los Angeles Times , 17 October 2002 "U.N. Resolutions Frequently Violated" Archived 17 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ USIP Press Books, 1994, ISBN 978-1-878379-35-1 ^ Book Review by Gail M. Gerhart in Foreign Affairs , March/April 1995 [1] Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ Norley, Matthew John Ribeiro (2013).

"Is the United Nations an Effective Institution?" .

E-International Relations .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

^ Jeria, Michelle Bachelet (2016).

"The Challenges to International Law in the 21st Century" .

Proceedings of the ASIL Annual Meeting .

110 : 3– 11.

doi : 10.1017/S0272503700102435 .

ISSN 0272-5037 .

^ Mulligan, Michael (2020).

"The Re-Emergence of Conquest: International Law and the Legitimate Use of Force" .

Liverpool Law Review .

41 (3): 293– 313.

doi : 10.1007/s10991-020-09250-3 .

^ Reddy, Shravanti (29 October 2002).

"Watchdog Organization Struggles to Decrease UN Bureaucracy" . Global Policy Forum.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2006 . Retrieved 21 September 2006 .

^ "Q&A: Oil-for-food scandal" .

BBC News . 7 September 2005.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 27 November 2013 .

^ "What is MUN" . WiseMee. 9 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ "Global Model UN (Program No. 1207)" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ " "Hymn to the United Nations" a Poem by W.H. Auden" .

media.un.org . United Nations Audiovisual Library. 19 November 1971 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

Bibliography Ball, Howard (2011).

Genocide: A Reference Handbook . Contemporary World Issues. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-59884-488-7 .

Coulon, Jocelyn (1998).

Soldiers of Diplomacy: The United Nations, Peacekeeping, and the New World Order . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-0-8020-0899-2 .

Fasulo, Linda (2004).

An Insider's Guide to the UN . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-10155-3 .

Fomerand, Jacques (2009).

The A to Z of the United Nations . Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-5547-2 .

Gold, Dore (2004).

Tower of Babble: How the United Nations Has Fueled Global Chaos . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-1-4000-5475-6 .

Grant, Thomas D. (2009).

Admission to the United Nations: Charter Article 4 and the Rise of Universal Organization . Legal Aspects of International Organization. Vol. 50. Leiden, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 978-90-04-17363-7 .

ISSN 0924-4883 .

Hoopes, Townsend ; Brinkley, Douglas (2000) [1997].

FDR and the Creation of the U.N . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-08553-2 .

Kennedy, Paul (2007) [2006].

The Parliament of Man: The Past, Present, and Future of the United Nations . New York: Random House.

ISBN 978-0-375-70341-6 .

Manchester, William ; Reid, Paul (2012).

The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill Vol. 3: Defender of the Realm, 1940–1965 . New York: Little Brown and Company.

ISBN 978-0-316-54770-3 .

Meisler, Stanley (1995).

United Nations: The First Fifty Years . New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.

ISBN 978-0-87113-616-9 .

Mires, Charlene (2013).

Capital of the World: The Race to Host the United Nations . New York University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-0794-4 .

Osmańczyk, Edmund Jan (2004). Mango, Anthony (ed.).

Encyclopedia of the United Nations and International Agreements . Vol. 4. Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-415-93924-9 .

Schlesinger, Stephen C.

(2003).

Act of Creation: The Founding of the United Nations: A Story of Super Powers, Secret Agents, Wartime Allies and Enemies, and Their Quest for a Peaceful World . Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.

ISBN 978-0-8133-3324-3 .

Sherwood, Robert E.

(1948).

Roosevelt and Hopkins: An Intimate History . New York: Harper and Brothers.

Weiss, Thomas G.; Daws, Sam, eds. (2009) [2007].

The Oxford Handbook on the United Nations . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-956010-3 .

Wistrich, Robert S.

(2010).

A Lethal Obsession: Anti-Semitism from Antiquity to the Global Jihad . New York: Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6097-9 .

Further reading Lowe, Vaughan ; Roberts, Adam ; Welsh, Jennifer ; Zaum, Dominik, eds. (2008).

The United Nations Security Council and War: The Evolution of Thought and Practice since 1945 .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-953343-5 .

Mazower, Mark (2009).

No Enchanted Palace: The End of Empire and the Ideological Origins of the United Nations .

Princeton University Press .

Roberts, Adam ; Kingsbury, Benedict, eds. (1994).

United Nations, Divided World: The UN's Roles in International Relations (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-827926-6 .

External links This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) United Nations at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Records of the UN Registry Archived 31 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine at the United Nations Archives Official websites Official website (in English, French, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, and Russian) The United Nations Regional Information Centre (UNRIC) United Nations Volunteers United Nations Documentation Research Guide Official YouTube channel (English) Multilingualism at the United Nations Others Searchable archive of UN discussions and votes United Nations Association of the UK – independent policy authority on the UN Website of the Global Policy Forum – independent think tank on the UN UN Watch – NGO monitoring UN activities Works by or about United Nations at the Internet Archive Works by United Nations at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) United Nations on Nobelprize.org v t e United Nations Secretary-General : António Guterres Deputy Secretary-General : Amina J. Mohammed General Assembly President : Philemon Yang UN System Charter Preamble Principal organs Secretariat Secretary-General selections Deputy Secretary-General Under-Secretary-General General Assembly President International Court of Justice Statute Security Council Elections Members President Reform Veto power Economic and Social Council President Trusteeship Council Funds, programmes, and other bodies Culture of Peace IAEA IPCC ITC MINURSO OHCHR SCSL UNAIDS UNCDF UNCITRAL UNCTAD UNDGC UNDP UNDPO peacekeeping UNEP OzonAction UNEP/GRID-Arendal UNEP-WCMC UNFPA UN-HABITAT UNHCR UNHRC UNICEF UNICRI UNIDIR UNITAR UN-Oceans UNODC UNOPS UNOSAT UNRISD UNRWA UNSDG UNSSC UNU UNU-CRIS UNU-OP UNV UN Women WFP Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO IOM ITU UN Tourism UNESCO UNIDO UPU WFEO WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC Secretariat offices and departments Headquarters Conference Building General Assembly Building Secretariat Building Department of Economic and Social Affairs Department of Peace Operations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Dag Hammarskjöld Library Department for Safety and Security Division for Palestinian Rights Office at Geneva Palace of Nations Office at Nairobi Office at Vienna Office for Disarmament Affairs Office for Outer Space Affairs Office for Partnerships Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Office of Internal Oversight Services Office of Legal Affairs Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States Office of Counter-Terrorism Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General Office on Sport for Development and Peace UN organizations by location Members and observers Founding members Full members Security Council Permanent members Permanent representatives to the UN list General Assembly Observers European Union History Preceding years International Telegraph Union Universal Postal Union Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 Permanent Court of Arbitration International Office of Public Hygiene League of Nations archives covenant organization member states Preparatory years Declaration of St James's Palace (1941) Atlantic Charter (1941) Declaration by United Nations (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Tehran Conference (1943) Bretton Woods Conference (1944) Dumbarton Oaks Conference (1944) Yalta Conference (1945) Conference on International Organization (1945) Genocide Convention (1948) Activities Enlargement Peacekeeping missions timeline governed territories UNPOL Universal Declaration of Human Rights drafting Human Rights Day World Heritage Convention Convention on the Rights of the Child committee Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Sustainable Development Goals Declaration on the Rights of Peasants Resolutions Security Council vetoes General Assembly 66th 67th Security Council Cyprus Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Nagorno-Karabakh North Korea Palestine Syria Western Sahara Yemen Elections Secretary-General 2021 2016 International Court of Justice 2023 2022 2021 2020 2017 2014 2011 General Assembly President (2016) Security Council (2016) Related Outline Advisory Committee of Local Authorities Art Collection Security Council mural Block By Block Bretton Woods system Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial CCISUA Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Criticism Delivering as One Drug control treaties Expulsion from the United Nations Ex Tempore Federal Credit Union FICSA Flag Honour Flag Four Nations Initiative Global Compact International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons International Day of Peace International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World International Narcotics Control Board International School Hanoi Interpretation Service Laissez-passer Memorial Cemetery Korea Military Staff Committee Millennium Declaration Millennium Summit Model United Nations Official languages Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Postal Administration Ralph Bunche Park Reform SDG Publishers Compact Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners Treaty Series Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons UN Mandate UN Sacco UN Special UNICEF club United Nations Day United Nations in popular culture United Nations Medal United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights United Nations Radio United Nations television film series University for Peace Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge Withdrawal from the United Nations Women in peacekeeping World Federation of United Nations Associations World portal v t e Security Council of the United Nations Power Charter of the United Nations Chapter V Chapter VII Veto Resolution lists vetoed Organization Military Observer Peacebuilding Commission Counter-Terrorism Committee Peacekeeping Military Staff Committee Missions United Nations Command Unified Task Force UN Mandate Members Permanent China France Russia United Kingdom United States 2024–2025 Algeria Guyana South Korea Sierra Leone Slovenia 2025–2026 Denmark Greece Pakistan Panama Somalia Related Elections Presidency of the Security Council Chapter VI of the UN Charter Reform of the Security Council Security Council mural Arria formula meeting P5+1 Small Five Group Category v t e Relations of the United Nations with its member states Africa Algeria Ethiopia The Gambia Nigeria Americas Brazil Canada Costa Rica Mexico Peru Trinidad and Tobago United States Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh People's Republic of China India Indonesia Iraq Israel Japan Kazakhstan Korea Lebanon Malaysia Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus France Germany Kazakhstan Liechtenstein Luxembourg Poland Romania Russia Serbia Spain Sweden Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Oceania Australia Fiji Marshall Islands Micronesia New Zealand Tuvalu Vanuatu UNGA observers Holy See Palestine Former members Republic of China Taiwan German Democratic Republic Soviet Union Byelorussian SSR Ukrainian SSR Yugoslavia v t e Secretaries-general of the League of Nations and the United Nations League of Nations (1919–1945) Eric Drummond (United Kingdom) Joseph Avenol (France) Seán Lester (Ireland) United Nations (since 1945) Gladwyn Jebb 1 (United Kingdom) Trygve Lie (Norway) Dag Hammarskjöld (Sweden) U Thant (Burma) Kurt Waldheim (Austria) Javier Pérez de Cuéllar (Peru) Boutros Boutros-Ghali (Egypt) Kofi Annan (Ghana) Ban Ki-moon (South Korea) António Guterres (Portugal) Related Leaders of the League of Nations United Nations Secretariat Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations UN Secretary General memoirs 1 Provisional Secretary-General prior to the election of Trygve Lie.

Links to related articles v t e International organizations ( list ) Intergovernmental organizations ( list ) Non-cultural IGOs Bank for International Settlements International Criminal Court International Monetary Fund International Seabed Authority World Customs Organization Inter-Parliamentary Union Interpol New Development Bank Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons United Nations World Bank Group World Trade Organization Cultural IGOs ( list ) Commonwealth of Nations Community of Portuguese Language Countries International Organisation for the Russian Language Organisation internationale de la Francophonie v t e International years proclaimed by the United Nations World Refugee (1959-1960) Health and Medical Research (1961) Co-operation (1965) Rice (FAO) (1966) Tourist (1967) Human Rights (1968) Education (1970) Action to Combat Racism and Racial Prejudice (1971) Book (UNESCO) (1972) World Population (1974) Women (1975) Anti-Apartheid (1978-1979) The Child (1979) Disabled Persons (1981) Mobilization for Sanctions Against South Africa (1982) World Communications (1983) Youth (1985) United Nations (1985) Peace (1986) Shelter for the Homeless (1987) Literacy (1990) Space (1992) World's Indigenous People (1993) Sport and the Olympic Ideal (1994) Family (1994) Peoples’ Commemoration of the Victims of the Second World War (1995) Tolerance (1995) Eradication of Poverty (1996) Ocean (1998) Older Persons (1999) Culture of Peace (2000) Thanksgiving (2000) Mobilization against Racism (2001) Volunteers (2001) Dialogue among Civilizations (2001) Ecotourism (2002) Mountains (2002) Cultural Heritage (2002) Freshwater (2003) Kyrgyz Statehood (2003) Rice (2004) Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition (2004) Physics (2005) Sport and Physical Education (2005) Microcredit (2005) Deserts and Desertification (2006) Dolphin (UNEP) (2007–2008) Polar (2007–2008) The Potato (2008) Sanitation (2008) Languages (2008) Planet Earth (2008) Gorilla (2009) Astronomy (2009) Human Rights Learning (2009) Natural Fibres (2009) Reconciliation (2009) Seafarer (2010) Biodiversity (2010) Rapprochement of Cultures (2010) Youth (2010–2011) Forests (2011) Chemistry (2011) People of African Descent (2011) Sustainable Energy for All (2012) Cooperatives (2012) Quinoa (2013) Water Cooperation (2013) Family Farming (2014) Crystallography (2014) Small Island Developing States (2014) Solidarity with the Palestinian People (2014) Soil (2015) Light (2015) Pulses (2016) Sustainable Tourism for Development (2017) Periodic Table of Chemical Elements (2019) Moderation (2019) Indigenous Languages (2019) Nurse and the Midwife (2020) Plant Health (2020) Elimination of Child Labour (2021) Fruits and Vegetables (2021) Creative Economy for Sustainable Development (2021) Peace and Trust (2021) Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture (2022) Glass (2022) Basic Sciences for Sustainable Development (2022) Sustainable Mountain Development (2022) Millets (2023) Dialogue as a Guarantee of Peace (2023) Camelids (2024) Peace and Trust (2025) Glaciers' Preservation (2025) Cooperatives (2025) Quantum Science and Technology (2025) Rangelands and Pastoralists (2026) Volunteers for Sustainable Development (2026) Woman Farmer (2026) Sustainable and Resilient Tourism (2027) Asteroid Awareness and Planetary Defence (2029) v t e International relations Glossary Organizations Present BRICS Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) International Criminal Court (ICC) Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) United Nations (UN) Past League of Nations Warsaw Pact History 1648–1814 1814–1919 1919–1939 Diplomatic history of World War II Cold War International relations since 1989 Concepts Alliance Entente Coalition Military Appeasement Co-belligerence Collective security Colonialism / Colonization Crisis Deterrence theory Expansionism Grey-zone Hegemony Idealism Imperialism International community Internationalism Internationality Liberal Interventionism Isolationism National interest Neutral country Non-belligerent Non-state actor Peace Power Regionalism Right of conquest Sovereignty Sovereigntism Suzerainty Treaty Bilateral Friendship Multilateral Non-aggression Peace War Whole-of-society Theory Constructivism English school Feminism Liberalism Marxism Postcolonialism Realism Related fields and subfields Comparative politics Counterproliferation Diplomacy Foreign policy analysis Geopolitics International law International political economy International political sociology Peace and conflict studies Security studies v t e Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize 1901–1925 1901 : Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy 1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat 1903: Randal Cremer 1904: Institut de Droit International 1905: Bertha von Suttner 1906: Theodore Roosevelt 1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault 1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant 1910: International Peace Bureau 1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried 1912: Elihu Root 1913: Henri La Fontaine 1914 1915 1916 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross 1918 1919: Woodrow Wilson 1920: Léon Bourgeois 1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange 1922: Fridtjof Nansen 1923 1924 1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes 1926–1950 1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann 1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde 1928 1929: Frank B. Kellogg 1930: Nathan Söderblom 1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler 1932 1933: Norman Angell 1934: Arthur Henderson 1935: Carl von Ossietzky 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas 1937: Robert Cecil 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross 1945: Cordell Hull 1946: Emily Balch / John Mott 1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee 1948 1949: John Boyd Orr 1950: Ralph Bunche 1951–1975 1951: Léon Jouhaux 1952: Albert Schweitzer 1953: George C. Marshall 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1955 1956 1957: Lester B. Pearson 1958: Georges Pire 1959: Philip Noel-Baker 1960: Albert Luthuli 1961: Dag Hammarskjöld 1962: Linus Pauling 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies 1964 : Martin Luther King Jr.

1965 : UNICEF 1966 1967 1968 : René Cassin 1969 : International Labour Organization 1970 : Norman Borlaug 1971 : Willy Brandt 1972 1973 : Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger 1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō 1975: Andrei Sakharov 1976–2000 1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan 1977: Amnesty International 1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin 1979: Mother Teresa 1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles 1983: Lech Wałęsa 1984: Desmond Tutu 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 1986: Elie Wiesel 1987: Óscar Arias 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces 1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama) 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi 1992: Rigoberta Menchú 1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk 1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat 1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat 1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams 1998: John Hume / David Trimble 1999: Médecins Sans Frontières 2000: Kim Dae-jung 2001–present 2001 : United Nations / Kofi Annan 2002 : Jimmy Carter 2003 : Shirin Ebadi 2004 : Wangari Maathai 2005 : International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei 2006 : Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus 2007 : Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2008 : Martti Ahtisaari 2009 : Barack Obama 2010 : Liu Xiaobo 2011 : Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman 2012 : European Union 2013 : Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 2014 : Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai 2015 : Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet 2016 : Juan Manuel Santos 2017 : International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons 2018 : Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad 2019 : Abiy Ahmed 2020 : World Food Programme 2021 : Maria Ressa / Dmitry Muratov 2022 : Ales Bialiatski / Memorial / Center for Civil Liberties 2023 : Narges Mohammadi 2024 : Nihon Hidankyo Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wztl2
Cached time: 20250817043552
Cache expiry: 1279456
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.542 seconds
Real time usage: 4.027 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 37559/1000000
Revision size: 175696/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 828788/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 92702/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 25/100
Expensive parser function count: 45/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 870360/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.070/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20424664/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3320.551      1 -total
 41.88% 1390.567      2 Template:Reflist
 24.10%  800.412    124 Template:Cite_web
  9.82%  326.067     88 Template:Sfn
  9.71%  322.507      1 Template:Infobox_geopolitical_organization
  6.59%  218.835     33 Template:Cite_book
  6.19%  205.386     31 Template:Cite_news
  5.20%  172.535     49 Template:Flagicon
  4.73%  156.962      3 Template:Infobox
  4.54%  150.607      1 Template:Collapsible_list Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31769:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043552 and revision id 1305510360. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Nations&oldid=1305510360 " Categories : United Nations 1945 establishments in California Intergovernmental organizations established by treaty Organizations awarded Nobel Peace Prizes Organizations based in Manhattan Peace organizations Political organizations established in 1945 Sakharov Prize laureates Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from May 2022 Use Oxford spelling from February 2022 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2021 Interlanguage link template existing link All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 Wikipedia external links cleanup from February 2024 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with Arabic-language sources (ar) Articles with Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 13:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United Nations 291 languages Add topic

