Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Greek and Roman tradition Toggle Greek and Roman tradition subsection 1.1 Humorism and temperaments 1.2 Alchemy 2 Modern reception 3 Parallels in non-Western traditions 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Air (classical element) 17 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Català Español Français Italiano Jawa Kreyòl ayisyen Papiamentu Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of four primary substances in antiquity Classical elements Hellenistic Air Water Aether Fire Earth Hinduism / Jainism / Buddhism Vayu Ap Akasha Agni Prithvi Chinese Wood ( 木 ) Water ( 水 ) Fire ( 火 ) Metal ( 金 ) Earth ( 土 ) Japanese Wind ( 風 ) Water ( 水 ) Void ( 空 ) Fire ( 火 ) Earth ( 地 ) European alchemy Air Water Fire Aether Earth Sulphur Mercury Salt v t e This article is about the classical element. For other uses of the term, see Air (disambiguation) .

Air or Wind is one of the four classical elements along with water , earth and fire in ancient Greek philosophy and in Western alchemy .

Greek and Roman tradition [ edit ] The four humors and their qualities According to Plato , it is associated with the octahedron ; air is considered to be both hot and wet. The ancient Greeks used two words for air: aer meant the dim lower atmosphere, and aether meant the bright upper atmosphere above the clouds.

[ 1 ] Plato , for instance writes that "So it is with air: there is the brightest variety which we call aether , the muddiest which we call mist and darkness, and other kinds for which we have no name...." [ 2 ] Among the early Greek Pre-Socratic philosophers, Anaximenes (mid-6th century BCE) named air as the arche .

[ 3 ] A similar belief was attributed by some ancient sources to Diogenes Apolloniates (late 5th century BCE), who also linked air with intelligence and soul ( psyche ), but other sources claim that his arche was a substance between air and fire.

[ 4 ] Aristophanes parodied such teachings in his play The Clouds by putting a prayer to air in the mouth of Socrates .

Air was one of many archai proposed by the Pre-socratics, most of whom tried to reduce all things to a single substance. However, Empedocles of Acragas (c. 495-c. 435 BCE) selected four archai for his four roots: air, fire, water, and earth. Ancient and modern opinions differ as to whether he identified air by the divine name Hera , Aidoneus or even Zeus . Empedocles’ roots became the four classical elements of Greek philosophy.

[ 5 ] Plato (427–347 BCE) took over the four elements of Empedocles. In the Timaeus , his major cosmological dialogue, the Platonic solid associated with air is the octahedron which is formed from eight equilateral triangles. This places air between fire and water which Plato regarded as appropriate because it is intermediate in its mobility, sharpness, and ability to penetrate.  He also said of air that its minuscule components are so smooth that one can barely feel them.

[ 6 ] Plato's student Aristotle (384–322 BCE) developed a different explanation for the elements based on pairs of qualities. The four elements were arranged concentrically around the center of the universe to form the sublunary sphere . According to Aristotle, air is both hot and wet and occupies a place between fire and water among the elemental spheres. Aristotle definitively separated air from aether . For him, aether was an unchanging, almost divine substance that was found only in the heavens, where it formed celestial spheres .

[ 7 ] Humorism and temperaments [ edit ] Humour Season Ages Element Organ Qualities Temperament Blood spring infancy air liver moist and warm sanguine Yellow bile summer youth fire gallbladder warm and dry choleric Black bile autumn adulthood earth spleen dry and cold melancholic Phlegm winter old age water brain / lungs cold and moist phlegmatic In ancient Greek medicine , each of the four humours became associated with an element.

Blood was the humor identified with air, since both were hot and wet. Other things associated with air and blood in ancient and medieval medicine included the season of spring , since it increased the qualities of heat and moisture; the sanguine temperament (of a person dominated by the blood humour); hermaphrodite (combining the masculine quality of heat with the feminine quality of moisture); and the northern point of the compass.

[ 8 ] Alchemy [ edit ] 🜁, the alchemical symbol for air The alchemical symbol for air is an upward-pointing triangle, bisected by a horizontal line.

Modern reception [ edit ] The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , founded in 1888, incorporates air and the other Greek classical elements into its teachings.

[ 9 ] The elemental weapon of air is the dagger which must be painted yellow with magical names and sigils written upon it in violet.

[ 10 ] Each of the elements has several associated spiritual beings. The archangel of air is Raphael , the angel is Chassan, the ruler is Ariel, the king is Paralda, and the air elementals (following Paracelsus ) are called sylphs .

[ 11 ] Air is considerable and it is referred to the upper left point of the pentagram in the Supreme Invoking Ritual of the Pentagram.

[ 12 ] Many of these associations have since spread throughout the occult community.

In the Golden Dawn and many other magical systems, each element is associated with one of the cardinal points and is placed under the care of guardian Watchtowers. The Watchtowers derive from the Enochian system of magic founded by Dee. In the Golden Dawn, they are represented by the Enochian elemental tablets.

[ 13 ] Air is associated with the east, which is guarded by the First Watchtower.

[ 14 ] Air is one of the five elements that appear in most Wiccan and Pagan traditions.

Wicca in particular was influenced by the Golden Dawn system of magic and Aleister Crowley 's mysticism.

[ 15 ] Parallels in non-Western traditions [ edit ] Air is not one of the traditional five Chinese classical elements .  Nevertheless, the ancient Chinese concept of Qi or chi is believed to be close to that of air.

Qi is believed to be part of every living thing that exists, as a kind of " life force " or " spiritual energy ". It is frequently translated as "energy flow", or literally as "air" or "breath". (For example, tiānqì , literally "sky breath", is the Chinese word for " weather "). The concept of qi is often reified , however no scientific evidence supports its existence.

The element air also appears as a concept in the Buddhist philosophy which has an ancient history in China.

Some Western modern occultists equate the Chinese classical element of metal with air , [ 16 ] others with wood due to the elemental association of wind and wood in the bagua .

Enlil was the god of air in ancient Sumer .

Shu was the ancient Egyptian deity of air and the husband of Tefnut , goddess of moisture. He became an emblem of strength by virtue of his role in separating Nut from Geb . Shu played a primary role in the Coffin Texts , which were spells intended to help the deceased reach the realm of the afterlife safely. On the way to the sky, the spirit had to travel through the air as one spell indicates: "I have gone up in Shu, I have climbed on the sunbeams." [ 17 ] According to Jain beliefs, the element air is inhabited by one-sensed beings or spirits called vāyukāya ekendriya , sometimes said to inhabit various kinds of winds such as whirlwinds, cyclones, monsoons, west winds and trade winds. Prior to reincarnating into another lifeform, spirits can remain as vāyukāya ekendriya from anywhere between one instant to up to three-thousand years, depending on the karma of the spirits.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Atmosphere of Earth Sky deity Wind deity Gemini (astrology) Aquarius (astrology) Libra (astrology) Notes [ edit ] ^ W. K. C. Guthrie , A History of Greek Philosophy , vol. 1, pp. 466, 470–71.

^ Plato, Timaeus , ch. 27, p. 83.

^ Guthrie, History of Greek Philosophy , vol. 1, pp. 115–16, 120–32; Jonathan Barnes, Early Greek Philosophy , pp. 77–80.

^ Guthrie, vol. 2, pp. 362–81; Barnes, pp. 289–94.

^ Guthrie, vol. 2, pp. 138–46. Guthrie suggests that Hera is the safest identification for air.

^ Plato, Timaeus , chap. 22–23; Gregory Vlastos, Plato’s Universe , pp. 66–82.

^ G. E. R. Lloyd , Aristotle , chapters 7–8.

^ Londa Schiebinger, p. 162.

^ Israel Regardie, The Golden Dawn , pp. 154–65.

^ Regardie, Golden Dawn , p.322; Kraig, Modern Magick , pp. 149–53.

^ Regardie, Golden Dawn , p. 80.

^ Regardie, Golden Dawn , pp. 280–286; Kraig, Modern Magick , pp. 206–209.

^ Doreen Valiente, The Rebirth of Witchcraft , p. 64.

^ Regardie, Golden Dawn , p. 631.

^ Hutton, pp. 216–23; Valiente, Witchcraft for Tomorrow, p. 17.

^ Donald Michael Kraig, Modern Magick , p. 115.

^ Bob Brier, Ancient Egyptian Magic , p.128.

^ Webb, Mark.

"Jain Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ University of Calcutta: Department of Letters (1921).

"Journal of the Department of Letters" .

Journal of the Department of Letters .

5 . Calcutta University Press, originally from University of Chicago : 352.

References [ edit ] Barnes, Jonathan .

Early Greek Philosophy . London: Penguin, 1987.

Brier, Bob .

Ancient Egyptian Magic . New York: Quill, 1980.

Guthrie, W. K. C.

A History of Greek Philosophy . 6 volumes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962–81.

Hutton, Ronald .

Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern Pagan Witchcraft . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999, 2001.

Kraig, Donald Michael .

Modern Magick: Eleven Lessons in the High Magickal Arts . St. Paul: Llewellyn, 1994.

Lloyd, G. E. R.

Aristotle: The Growth and Structure of His Thought . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968.

Plato.

Timaeus and Critias . Translated by Desmond Lee. Revised edition. London: Penguin, 1977.

Regardie, Israel .

The Golden Dawn . 6th edition. St. Paul: Llewellyn, 1990.

Schiebinger, Londa .

The Mind Has No Sex? Women in the Origins of Modern Science . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989.

Valiente, Doreen .

Witchcraft for Tomorrow . Custer, Wash.: Phoenix Publishing, 1978.

Valiente, Doreen.

The Rebirth of Witchcraft . Custer, Wash.: Phoenix Publishing, 1989.

Vlastos, Gregory .

Plato’s Universe . Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1975.

Further reading [ edit ] Cunningham, Scott .

Earth, Air, Fire and Water: More Techniques of Natural Magic .

Starhawk .

The Spiral Dance : A Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great Goddess . 3rd edition. 1999.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Air .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Air_(classical_element)&oldid=1305908338 " Categories : Atmosphere of Earth Classical elements Esoteric cosmology History of astrology Technical factors of astrology Gases Concepts in ancient Greek metaphysics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Air (classical element) 17 languages Add topic

