Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content Toggle Content subsection 1.1 The potential of human achievement 1.2 Dignity of the liberal arts 1.3 Importance of human quest for knowledge 1.4 Introduction to Pico's 900 theses 1.5 Mystical vocation of humanity 2 Delivery 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Oration on the Dignity of Man 11 languages Català Dansk Español Esperanto Interlingue Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands Norsk bokmål Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Oratio de hominis dignitate Author Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Language Latin Genre Public discourse Publication date 1486 Publication place Duchy of Mirandola Public discourse by Giovanni Pico della Mirandola The Oration on the Dignity of Man ( Oratio de hominis dignitate in Latin ) is a public discourse composed in 1486 by Pico della Mirandola , an Italian scholar and philosopher of the Renaissance . It remained unpublished until 1496.

[ 1 ] The Pico Project– a collaboration between the University of Bologna and Brown University – and others have called it the " Manifesto of the Renaissance ".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Pico, who belonged to the family that had long dwelt in the Castle of Mirandola , left his share of the ancestral principality to his two brothers to devote himself wholly to study. When he was 14, in 1477, he went to Bologna accompanied by his mother to study canon law and fit himself for the ecclesiastical career. Following his mother's death in 1478, in 1479 Pico requested from the Marquess of Mantua a free passage to Ferrara , where he would devote himself to the study of philosophy and theology. He spent the following seven years variously in Ferrara, Padua , Florence and Paris , studying Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Syriac and Arabic at the chief universities of Italy and France.

[ 4 ] Content [ edit ] The potential of human achievement [ edit ] Pico's Oration attempted to remap the human landscape to center all attention on human capacity and human perspective. Arriving in a place near Florence, he taught the amazing capacity of human achievement. "Pico himself had a massive intellect and studied everything there was to be studied in the university curriculum of the Renaissance; the Oration in part is meant to be a preface to a massive compendium of all the intellectual achievements of humanity, a compendium that never appeared because of Pico's early death." [ citation needed ] Dignity of the liberal arts [ edit ] Pico intended to speak in front of an invited audience of scholars and clerics of the dignity of the liberal arts about the glory of angels. Of these angels, he spoke of three divisions in particular: the Seraphim , Cherubim and Thrones . These are the highest three choirs in the angelic hierarchy, each one embodying a different virtue. The Seraphim represent charity. In order to obtain the status of Seraphim, Pico declares that one must "burn with love for the Creator". The Cherubim represent intelligence. This status is obtained through contemplation and meditation. Finally, Thrones represent justice, which is obtained by being just in ruling over "inferior things". Of these three, the Thrones are the lowest, Cherubim the middle and Seraphim the highest. In this speech, Pico emphasizes the Cherubim and that by embodying the values of the Cherub, one can be equally prepared for "the fire of the Seraphim and the judgement of the Thrones". This deviation into the hierarchy of angels makes sense when Pico makes his point that a philosopher "is a creature of Heaven and not of earth" because a philosopher is capable of obtaining any one of the angelic statuses.

[ 5 ] Importance of human quest for knowledge [ edit ] In the Oration , Pico justified the importance of the human quest for knowledge within a Neoplatonic framework. He writes that after God had created all creatures, He conceived of the desire for another sentient being who would appreciate all His works, but there was no longer any room in the chain of being ; all the possible slots from angels to worms had been filled. So, God created man such that he had no specific slot in the chain. Instead, men were capable of learning from and imitating any existing creature. When man philosophizes, he ascends the chain of being towards the angels, and communion with God. When he fails to exercise his intellect, he vegetates. Pico did not fail to notice that this system made philosophers like himself among the most dignified human creatures.

[ citation needed ] The idea that men could ascend the chain of being through the exercise of their intellectual capacities was a profound endorsement of the dignity of human existence in this earthly life. The root of this dignity lay in his assertion that only human beings could change themselves through their own free will , whereas all other changes in nature were the result of some outside force acting on whatever it is that undergoes change. He observed from history that philosophies and institutions were always in change, making man's capacity for self-transformation the only constant. Coupled with his belief that all of creation constitutes a symbolic reflection of the divinity of God, Pico's philosophies had a profound influence on the arts, helping to elevate writers and painters from their medieval role as mere artisans to the Renaissance ideal of the artist as creative genius.

Introduction to Pico's 900 theses [ edit ] The Oration also served as an introduction to Pico's 900 theses, [ 6 ] which he believed would provide a complete and sufficient basis for the discovery of all knowledge, and hence a model for mankind's ascent of the chain of being. The 900 Theses are a good example of humanist syncretism, because Pico combined Platonism , Neoplatonism , Aristotelianism , Hermeticism and Kabbalah . They also included 72 theses describing what Pico believed to be a complete system of physics. Pico also argued in this oration that his youth should not discredit any of the content of his 900 theses (he was in his twenties).

Pico had "cosmic ambitions": in his letters and early texts, he hinted that debate of the 900 theses (the first printed book ever universally banned by the Church) might trigger Christ's Second Coming and the end of the world.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Innocent VIII condemned the theses in general but declared the author to be free from censure. This was written on 5 August 1487, but it was not issued until the following December. In a letter to Lorenzo dated 27 August 1489, Pico affirms among other things some of his theses refer purely to profane matters and were never intended for general reading, but instead for private debate among the learned.

[ 9 ] Mystical vocation of humanity [ edit ] In the Oration , Pico argues, in the words of Pier Cesare Bori , that "human vocation is a mystical vocation that has to be realized following a three-stage approach, which comprehends necessarily moral transformation, intellectual research and final perfection in identity with the absolute reality. This paradigm is universal because it can be retraced in every tradition." [ 10 ] Delivery [ edit ] Pico was prevented from holding his Oration. It was penned as the opening speech for a public disputation of his 900 theses, planned for early 1487, but Pope Innocent VIII suspended the event and instead set up a commission to examine the theses for heresy.

References [ edit ] ^ "Giovanni Pico della Mirandola" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2020.

^ "Introduction in English" .

www.brown.edu . Retrieved 4 December 2017 .

^ Brians, Paul.

"Pico Della Mirandola: Oration On the Dignity Of Man (15th C. CE)" . Retrieved 7 December 2017 .

^ "Cronologia" .

www.brown.edu . Retrieved 4 December 2017 .

^ "Oration on the Dignity of Man" .

^ "Pico's 900 Theses" .

calameo.com . Retrieved 9 July 2018 .

^ Farmer, Stephen A (1998).

Syncretism in the West: Pico's 900 Theses (1486): The Evolution of Traditional Religious and Philosophical Systems . Vol. Book 167. Tempe, Arizona: ACMRS Publications; 1 edition. pp.

39– 46.

ISBN 0866982094 .

^ Copenhaver, Brian (2016).

"Giovanni Pico della Mirandola" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 9 July 2018 .

^ "An Early Humanist" .

The Atlantic Monthly .

51 . Houghton, Mifflin and company – The Riverside Press: 500– 501. 1883.

^ Prof. Pier Cesare Bori. " The Italian Renaissance: An Unfinished Dawn?: Pico della Mirandola Archived 29 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine ". Accessed 5 December 2007.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Giovanni Pico della Mirandola .

Original in Latin English translated ( Archive ) v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oration_on_the_Dignity_of_Man&oldid=1299424150 " Categories : 1486 books 1496 books Human rights instruments Renaissance humanism Social philosophy literature Medieval philosophical literature Cherubim Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from July 2025 Books with missing cover No local image but image on Wikidata Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 09:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oration on the Dignity of Man 11 languages Add topic

