Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Golden Age in Europe: Greece Toggle The Golden Age in Europe: Greece subsection 1.1 Arcadia 2 The Golden Age in Rome: Virgil and Ovid 3 "Soft" and "hard" primitivism in Arcadia 4 Other Golden Ages Toggle Other Golden Ages subsection 4.1 Hebrew Bible 4.2 Hinduism 4.3 Germanic 4.4 Chinese mythology and religion 5 Popular culture Toggle Popular culture subsection 5.1 Fantasy 5.2 Present-day usage 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Golden Age 48 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Lietuvių Lombard Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Wayuunaiki 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Golden age ) Term denoting a period of primordial peace, harmony, stability, and prosperity This article is about a period in Greek mythology. For other uses, see Golden Age (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Golden Age" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This lead may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines .

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Golden Age by Pietro da Cortona ( Palazzo Pitti , Florence , Italy ) Part of a series on Utopias Mythical and religious Arcadia City of the Caesars Cloud cuckoo land Cockaigne Eden Elysium Fortunate Isles Garden of the gods Golden Age Great Unity Ketumati Kingdom of God Libertatia Mag Mell Mahoroba Merry England Mezzoramia Most Great Peace Mount Penglai New Jerusalem Opona Satya Yuga Shangri-La Valhalla Yvy marã e'ỹ Zion Literature Ideology and Utopia List The Republic Utopia Gulliver's Travels Dystopian literature Theory Communitas perfecta Communist society Heterotopia Ideal city Renaissance Sforzinda Pantisocracy Real utopian sociology Third International Theory Utopia for Realists Utopian studies Concepts Arcology Agriculturalism Escapism Millenarianism New Man Social harmony Technological Cyber-utopianism Post-scarcity economy Transhumanism Utopian socialism Practice Architecture Egalitarian community HosPex Open borders Pirate utopia UBI Intentional community Atarashiki-mura Huaxi Village Nanjie Sustainable Communities by country America Finland Germany Organizations Associationists Anthroposophs Lindisfarne Millennium WSF Zeitgeist v t e The term Golden Age comes from Greek mythology , particularly the Works and Days of Hesiod , and is part of the description of temporal decline of the state of peoples through five Ages , Gold being the first and the one during which the Golden Race of humanity ( Greek : χρύσεον γένος chrýseon génos ) [ 1 ] lived. After the end of the first age was the Silver , then the Bronze , after this the Heroic age, with the fifth and current age being Iron .

[ 2 ] By extension, "Golden Age" denotes a period of primordial peace , harmony , stability , and prosperity . During this age, peace and harmony prevailed in that people did not have to work to feed themselves for the earth provided food in abundance. They lived to a very old age with a youthful appearance, eventually dying peacefully, with spirits living on as "guardians".

Plato in Cratylus (397 e) recounts the golden race of humans who came first. He clarifies that Hesiod did not mean literally made of gold, but good and noble.

In classical Greek mythology, the Golden Age was presided over by the leading Titan Cronus ; [ 3 ] in Latin authors it was associated with the god Saturn .

[ 4 ] In some versions of the myth Astraea also ruled. She lived with men until the end of the Silver Age. But in the Bronze Age, when men became violent and greedy, she fled to the stars, where she appears as the constellation Virgo , holding the scales of Justice, or Libra .

[ 5 ] European pastoral literary tradition often depicted nymphs and shepherds as living a life of rustic innocence and peace, set in Arcadia , a region of Greece that was the abode and center of worship of their tutelary deity, goat-footed Pan , who dwelt among them.

[ 6 ] The Golden Age in Europe: Greece [ edit ] The earliest attested reference to the European myth of the Ages of Man 500 BCE–350 BCE appears in the late 6th century BCE works of the Greek poet Hesiod 's Works and Days (109–126). Hesiod, a deteriorationist, identifies the Golden Age, the Silver Age , the Bronze Age, the Heroic Age , and the Iron Age . With the exception of the Heroic Age, each succeeding age was worse than the one that went before. Hesiod maintains that during the Golden Age, before the invention of the arts, the earth produced food in such abundance that there was no need for agriculture: [Men] lived like gods without sorrow of heart, remote and free from toil and grief: miserable age rested not on them; but with legs and arms never failing they made merry with feasting beyond the reach of all devils. When they died, it was as though they were overcome with sleep, and they had all good things; for the fruitful earth unforced bare them fruit abundantly and without stint. They dwelt in ease and peace.

Plato in his Cratylus referred to an age of golden men and also at some length on Ages of Man from Hesiod's Works and Days . The Roman poet Ovid simplified the concept by reducing the number of Ages to four: Gold, Bronze, Silver, and Iron. Ovid's poetry was likely a prime source for the transmission of the myth of the Golden Age during the period when Western Europe had lost direct contact with Greek literature.

The Golden Age ( c.

1530 ) by Lucas Cranach the Elder In Hesiod's version, the Golden Age ended when the Titan Prometheus conferred on mankind the gift of fire and all the other arts. For this, Zeus punished Prometheus by chaining him to a rock in the Caucasus , where an eagle eternally ate at his liver. The gods sent the beautiful maiden Pandora to Prometheus's brother Epimetheus . The gods had entrusted Pandora with a box that she was forbidden to open; however, her uncontrollable curiosity got the better of her and she opened the box, thereby unleashing all manner of evil into the world.

Robert Willemsz de Baudous: Golden Age, etching, c.

1598 .

The Orphic school held similar beliefs about the early days of man, likewise denominating the ages with metals. In common with the many other mystery cults prevalent in the Graeco-Roman world (and their Indo-European religious antecedents), the world view of Orphism was cyclical. Initiation into its secret rites, together with ascetic practices, was supposed to guarantee the individual's soul eventual release from the grievous circle of mortality and also communion with the gods.

[ citation needed ] Orphics sometimes identified the Golden Age with the era of the god Phanes , who was regent over the Olympus before Cronus.

[ citation needed ] In classical mythology however, the Golden Age was associated with the reign of Saturn . In the 5th century BCE, the philosopher Empedocles , like Hesiod before him, emphasized the idea of primordial innocence and harmony in all of nature, including human society, from which he maintained there had been a steady deterioration until the present.

Arcadia [ edit ] A tradition arose in Greece that the site of the original Golden Age had been Arcadia , an impoverished rural area of Greece where the herdsmen still lived on acorns and where the goat-footed god Pan had his home among the poplars on Mount Maenalus . However, in the 3rd century BCE, the Greek poet, Theocritus , writing in Alexandria , set his pastoral poetry on the lushly fertile island of Sicily, where he had been born. The protagonist of Theocritus's first Idyll , the goat herder , Daphnis , is taught to play the Syrinx (panpipes) by Pan himself.

Sculpture of Pan teaching Daphnis to play the pipes; c.

100 BCE, found in Pompeii .

The Golden Age in Rome: Virgil and Ovid [ edit ] Writing in Latin during the turbulent period of revolutionary change at the end of the Roman Republic (roughly between 44 and 38 BCE), the poet Virgil moved the setting for his pastoral imitations of Theocritus back to an idealized Arcadia in Greece, thus initiating a rich and resonant tradition in subsequent European literature.

Virgil, moreover, introduced into his poetry the element of political allegory, which had been largely absent in Theocritus, even intimating in his fourth Eclogue that a new Golden Age of peace and justice was about to return: Ultima Cumaei venit iam carminis aetas; magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo: iam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna; iam nova progenies caelo demittitur alto.

Translation: Now the last age by Cumae's Sibyl sung Has come and gone, and the majestic roll Of circling centuries begins anew: Astraea returns, Returns old Saturn's reign, With a new breed of men sent down from heaven.

[ 7 ] Somewhat later, shortly before he wrote his epic poem the Aeneid , which dealt with the establishment of Roman Imperial rule, Virgil composed his Georgics (29 BCE), modeled directly on Hesiod's Works and Days and similar Greek works. Ostensibly about agriculture, the Georgics are in fact a complex allegory about how man's alterations of nature (through works) are related to good and bad government. Although Virgil does not mention the Golden Age by name in the Georgics , he does refer in them to a time where man was in harmony with nature before the reign of Jupiter , when: Fields knew no taming hand of husbandmen To mark the plain or mete with boundary-line.

Even this was impious; for the common stock They gathered, and the earth of her own will All things more freely, no man bidding, bore.

ante Iouem nulli subigebant arua coloni ne signare quidem aut partiri limite campum fas erat; in medium quaerebant, ipsaque tellus omnia liberius nullo poscente ferebat.

( Georgics , Book 1: 125–28 ) This view, which identifies a State of Nature with the celestial harmony of which man's nature is (or should be, if properly regulated) a microcosm , reflects the Hellenistic cosmology that prevailed among literate classes of Virgil's era. It is seen again in Ovid 's Metamorphoses (7 CE), in which the lost Golden Age is depicted as a place and time when, because nature and reason were harmoniously aligned, men were naturally good: The Golden Age was first; when Man, yet new, No rule but uncorrupted Reason knew: And, with a native bent, did good pursue.

Unforc'd by punishment, un-aw'd by fear.

His words were simple, and his soul sincere; Needless was written law, where none opprest: The law of Man was written in his breast.

[ 8 ] The Graeco-Roman concept of the "natural man" delineated by Ovid and many other classical writers, was especially popular during the Deistically inclined 18th century. It is often erroneously attributed to Rousseau , who did not share it.

[ 9 ] "Soft" and "hard" primitivism in Arcadia [ edit ] In his famous essay, " Et in Arcadia ego : Poussin and the Elegiac Tradition", [ 10 ] Erwin Panofsky remarks how in ancient times, "that particular not overly opulent, region of central Greece, Arcady, came to be universally accepted as an ideal realm of perfect bliss and beauty, a dream incarnate of ineffable happiness, surrounded nevertheless with a halo of 'sweetly sad' melancholy": There had been, from the beginning of classical speculation, two contrasting opinions about the natural state of man, each of them, of course, a "Gegen-Konstruktion" to the conditions under which it was formed. One view, termed "soft" primitivism in an illuminating book by Lovejoy and Boas [ 11 ] conceives of primitive life as a golden age of plenty, innocence, and happiness – in other words, as civilized life purged of its vices. The other, "hard" form of primitivism conceives of primitive life as an almost subhuman existence full of terrible hardships and devoid of all comforts – in other words, as civilized life stripped of its virtues.

Arcady, as we encounter it in all modern literature, and as we refer to it in our daily speech, falls under the heading of “soft" or golden-age primitivism. To be sure, this real Arcady was the domain of Pan, who could be heard playing the syrinx on Mount Maenalus ; and its inhabitants were famous for their musical accomplishments as well as for their ancient lineage, rugged virtue, and rustic hospitality.

Other Golden Ages [ edit ] There are analogous concepts in the religious and philosophical traditions of the Indian subcontinent . For example, the Vedic or ancient Hindu culture saw history as cyclical , each cycle composed of four yugas (ages) – Satya Yuga (Golden Age), Treta Yuga (Silver Age), Dvapara Yuga (Bronze Age) and Kali Yuga (Iron Age) – correspond to the four Greek ages. Similar beliefs occur in the ancient Middle East and throughout the ancient world, as well.

[ 12 ] Hebrew Bible [ edit ] There is a reference to a succession of kingdoms in Nebuchadnezzar 's dream in Daniel 2 , in decreasing order identified as gold, silver, bronze, iron and finally mixed iron and clay.

31 "Your Majesty looked, and there before you stood a large statue – an enormous, dazzling statue, awesome in appearance. 32 The head of the statue was made of pure gold, its chest and arms of silver, its belly and thighs of bronze, 33 its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and partly of baked clay. 34 While you were watching, a rock was cut out, but not by human hands. It struck the statue on its feet of iron and clay and smashed them. 35 Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver and the gold were all broken to pieces and became like chaff on a threshing floor in the summer. The wind swept them away without leaving a trace. But the rock that struck the statue became a huge mountain and filled the whole earth." [ 13 ] — Daniel 2: 31–35 The interpretation of the dream follows in verses 36–45.

Hinduism [ edit ] Main article: Satya Yuga The Indian teachings differentiate the four world ages ( yugas ) not according to metals, but according to dharmic qualities (virtues), where the first age starts with the most and the last age ends with the least. The end is followed by a new cycle ( Yuga Cycle ) of the same four ages: Satya Yuga (golden age), Treta Yuga , Dvapara Yuga , and Kali Yuga (dark age), of which we are currently in Kali Yuga .

[ 14 ] [ better source needed ] In Satya Yuga , knowledge, meditation, and communion with spirit hold special importance. Most people engage only in good, sublime deeds and mankind lives in harmony with the Earth.

Ashrams become devoid of wickedness and deceit.

Natyam (such as Bharatanatyam ), according to Natya Shastra , did not exist in the Satya Yuga "because it was the time when all people were happy".

[ citation needed ] Satya Yuga ( a.k.a.

Krita Yuga ) according to Mahabharata : [ citation needed ] Men neither bought nor sold; there were no poor and no rich; there was no need to labour, because all that men required was obtained by the power of will; the chief virtue was the abandonment of all worldly desires. The Krita Yuga was without disease; there was no lessening with the years; there was no hatred or vanity, or evil thought whatsoever; no sorrow, no fear. All mankind could attain to supreme blessedness.

Germanic [ edit ] Old Norse : Gullaldr ("Age of Gold") is used in Gylfaginning to describe the period after the creation of the world, and before the arrival of three women out of Jötunheimr , who have been proposed to be the Norns .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] A second ideal period is Fróði's Peace , a semi-legendary time during the rule of a Danish king in which peace and prosperity was seen throughout Northern Europe .

[ 18 ] Chinese mythology and religion [ edit ] Shennong , in the myth cycles that thought of him as a culture hero rather than a god, was thought to have maintained a Golden Age in the world by helping humans by doing things such as eating every single plant to see which ones were edible, as well as his own suffering because of various poisonings he survived with the help of his supernatural digestive system, that came to an end with his death.

[ 19 ] Popular culture [ edit ] Fantasy [ edit ] In modern fantasy worlds , whose background and setting sometimes draw heavily on real-world myths, similar or compatible concepts of a Golden Age exist in the said world's prehistory; when deities or elf -like creatures existed, before the coming of humans .

[ citation needed ] For example, in The Silmarillion by J. R. R. Tolkien , a Golden Age exists in Middle-earth legendarium.

Arda (the part of the world where The Lord of the Rings is set), was designed to be symmetrical and perfect. After the wars of the Gods, Arda lost its perfect shape (known as Arda Unmarred ) and was called Arda Marred . Another kind of 'Golden Age' follows later, after the Elves awoke; the Eldar stay on Valinor , live with the Valar and advance in arts and knowledge, until the rebellion and the fall of the Noldor , reminiscent of the Fall of Man. Eventually, after the end of the world, the Silmarilli will be recovered and the light of the Two Trees of Valinor rekindled. Arda will be remade again as Arda Healed .

[ citation needed ] In The Wheel of Time universe, the "Age of Legends" is the name given to the previous Age: In this society, channelers were common and Aes Sedai – trained channelers – were extremely powerful, able to make angreal , sa'angreal , and ter'angreal , and holding important civic positions. The Age of Legends is seen as a utopian society without war or crime, and devoted to culture and learning. Aes Sedai were frequently devoted to academic endeavours, one of which inadvertently resulted in a hole – The Bore – being drilled in the Dark One's prison. The immediate effects were not realised, but the Dark One gradually asserted power over humanity, swaying many to become his followers. This resulted in the War of Power and eventually the Breaking of the World.

[ citation needed ] Another example is in the background of the Lands of Lore classic computer game, where the history of the Lands is divided in Ages. One of them is also called the Golden Age, a time when the Lands were ruled by the 'Ancients', and there were no wars. This age ended with the 'War of the Heretics'.

[ citation needed ] The Golden Age may also refer to a state of early childhood. Herbert Spencer argued that young children progress through the cognitive stages of evolution of the human species and of human civilization, thereby linking pre-civilization and infancy.

[ 20 ] Kenneth Grahame called his evocation of early childhood ' The Golden Age ' [ 21 ] and J. M. Barrie 's fictional character Peter Pan , who first appeared in ' The Little White Bird ' [ 22 ] was named after Pan , a Greek god from the Golden Age. Barrie's further works about Peter Pan [ 23 ] [ 24 ] depict early childhood as a time of pre-civilised naturalness and happiness, which is destroyed by the subsequent process of education.

[ 25 ] Present-day usage [ edit ] See also: Golden age (metaphor) The term "Golden Age" is at present frequently used in the context of a specific time in the history of a particular country – such as the " Spanish Golden Age ", " Dutch Golden Age ", " Danish Golden Age ", " Golden Age of Flanders " – or the history of a specific field – " Golden age of alpinism ", " Golden Age of American animation ", " Golden Age of Comics ", " Golden Age of Science Fiction ", " Golden Age of Television ", " Golden Age of Hollywood ", " Golden age of arcade video games ", " Golden Age of Radio ", " Golden Age of Hip Hop ", " Golden Age of Kamishibai Theater" (in Japan) and even " Golden Age of Piracy " or " Golden Age of Porn ". Usually, the term "Golden Age" is bestowed retroactively, when the period in question has ended and is compared with what followed in the specific field discussed. The term has also been used prospectively. For example, on July 27, 2020, the President of the United States, Donald Trump , published a post on Twitter promising a future "golden age" once the country recovered from the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 26 ] The term Gilded Age , which refers to a period in the history of the United States, is a parody of this usage of "golden age" (suggesting that the period has the outward appearance of a golden age, but is in actuality much less desirable).

See also [ edit ] Age of Aquarius Golden ages of China Golden Age of India Belle Époque Pax Romana American Century 2012 phenomenon Ages of Man Arcadia (utopia) Eschatology Garden of Eden Golden Liberty (in Polish history) Great year Khalistan Merrie England Messianic Age Millennialism New world order (Baháʼí) Olympic medals Paradise Precession of the Equinoxes / African humid period Satya Yuga Utopia Islamic Golden Age World to Come References [ edit ] ^ Hesiod , "109", Works and Days .

^ Robin Hard - The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology" , p.69-70 , Psychology Press , 2004 ISBN 0415186366 , Accessed 2017-06-May ^ Gravity, Grass (1960).

The Greek Myths . London: Penguin Books. pp.

35– 37.

ISBN 9780140171990 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ See below.

^ "Hesiod calls [Astraea] the daughter of Jove and Themis. Aratus says that she is thought to be the daughter of Astraeus and Aurora, who lived at the time of the Golden Age of men and was their leader. On account of her carefulness and fairness she was called Justice, and at that time no foreign nations were attacked in war, nor did anyone sail over the seas, but they were wont to live their lives caring for their fields. But those born after their death began to be less observant of duty and more greedy, so that Justice associated more rarely with men. Finally the disease became so extreme that it was said the Brazen Race was born; then she could not endure more, and flew away to the stars." ( Gaius Julius Hyginus , Astronomica 2 ).

^ Bridget Ann Henish, The Medieval Calendar Year ( ISBN 0-271-01904-2 ), p. 96.

^ Eclogue (lines 5-8) ^ Ovid's Metamorphoses , Book the First, eighteenth century version , "Translated into English verse under the direction of Sir Samuel Garth by John Dryden , Alexander Pope , Joseph Addison , William Congreve , and other eminent hands.

^ See A. O. Lovejoy's essay on "The Supposed Primitivism of Rousseau's Discourse on Inequality" in Essays in the History of Ideas (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1948, 1960) ^ "Et in Arcadia ego: Poussin and the Elegiac Tradition," in Meaning in the Visual Arts (New York: Doubleday, 1955) pp. 297–98.

^ A.O. Lovejoy and G. Boas, Primitivism and Related Ideas in Antiquity (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1935).

^ Richard Heinberg (1989).

Memories and Visions of Paradise: Exploring the Universal Myth of a Lost Golden Age Los Angeles, Calif.: Tarcher. 282 pp.

ISBN 0-87477-515-9 .

^ "Daniel 2: 31–35" . Zondervon . Retrieved 15 December 2014 .

^ Matsya Purana ^ "Gylfaginning – heimskringla.no" .

heimskringla.no . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ Brodeur, Arthur Gilchrist (2018).

The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturlson . Franklin Classics Trade Press.

ISBN 978-0344335006 .

^ Bellows, Henry Adam.

"The Poetic Edda: Voluspo" .

www.sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ Simek, Rudolf (1993).

Dictionary of northern mythology . Cambridge [England]: D.S. Brewer.

ISBN 9780859915137 .

^ Armstrong, Karen (2005).

A Short History of Myth (First American ed.). Broadway, New York: Canongate Books . p. 90.

ISBN 9781841957166 .

^ Spencer, Herbert (1861).

Education . p. 5.

^ Grahame, Kenneth (1985).

The Golden Age . UK: The Bodley Head.

^ Barrie, James Matthew (1902).

The Little White Bird . UK: Hodder and Stoughton.

^ Barrie, James Matthew (1906).

Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens . Hodder and Stoughton.

^ Barrie, James Matthew (1911).

Peter and Wendy . Hodder and Stoughton.

^ Ridley, Rosalind (2016).

Peter Pan and the Mind of J M Barrie . Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

^ "Tweet from Donald J. Trump: We will beat the Virus, soon, and go on to the Golden Age - better than ever before!" .

Twitter . Archived from the original on 2020-07-28 . Retrieved 2020-07-28 .

v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Afterlife locations Abrahamic religions Judaism Gan Eden Gehinnom Sheol Christianity Heaven Seven heavens Third Heaven Throne of God Hell Limbo Kingdom of God Garden of Eden Paradise Purgatory New Jerusalem Pearly gates Hades Islam Araf As-Sirāt Barzakh Jahannam Jannah Malakut Sidrat al-Muntaha Mormonism Celestial Kingdom Terrestrial Kingdom Telestial Kingdom Spirit world Mandaeism World of Light World of Darkness European mythologies Celtic Otherworld Annwn Tír na nÓg Mag Mell Tech Duinn Finnic Tuonela Germanic Asgard Fólkvangr Valhalla Neorxnawang Gimlé Hel Greek / Italic Hades Elysium Erebus Orcus Asphodel Meadows Myth of Er Empyrean Tartarus Fortunate Isles Slavic Iriy Nav Vyraj Eastern/Asian religions Buddhism Desire Realm Hell Pretaloka Animal world Human world Asura Heaven Yāma Form Realm Brahmā worlds Formless Realm Nirvana Pure Land Sukhavati Hinduism 14 planetary systems Ādi Śeṣa Svarga Naraka Vaikuntha Kailash Goloka Akshardham Jainism Three Worlds Urdhva Loka Madhya Loka Adho Loka Sikhism Sach Khand Taoism Grotto-heavens Chinese Tian Diyu Youdu Japanese Yomi Zoroastrianism Chinvat Bridge Hamistagan Tengrism Uçmag Tamağ Others Mesoamerican Mictlān Tamoanchan Thirteen Heavens Tlālōcān Xibalba Plains Indians Happy hunting ground Tupi - Guarani Yvy marã e'ỹ Guajupiá Wicca The Summerland Theosophy Summerland Devachan Nirvana Ancient Egyptian Aaru Duat Avalon Existential planes Guf Heaven Millennialism Mythological places Otherworld Spirits in prison Underworld Utopianism Well of Souls Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐jxft9
Cached time: 20250814224521
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.996 seconds
Real time usage: 1.240 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5074/1000000
Revision size: 26712/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 439656/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19749/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 114702/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.554/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19041052/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  921.430      1 -total
 24.66%  227.204     26 Template:Navbox
 22.38%  206.244      1 Template:Reflist
 12.29%  113.229      2 Template:Langx
 11.02%  101.559      1 Template:Citation
  9.79%   90.249      1 Template:Utopia
  9.70%   89.419      1 Template:Greek_religion
  9.54%   87.860      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.52%   87.708      9 Template:Fix
  8.84%   81.436      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31497818:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224521 and revision id 1297054413. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Golden_Age&oldid=1297054413 " Categories : Historiography Mythical utopias Mythography Nostalgia Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2018 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from August 2018 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles containing Old Norse-language text This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 22:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Golden Age 48 languages Add topic

