Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Periodisation 1.2 Introduction of Buddhism in China (c. 200–500) 1.2.1 Sinification of Buddhism and Taoist influences 1.2.2 Divisions of training 1.3 Legendary or Proto-Chan (c. 500–600) 1.3.1 Mahākāśyapa and the Flower Sermon 1.3.2 First six patriarchs (c. 500 – early 8th century) 1.3.3 Lankavatara Sutra 1.3.4 Bodhidharma 1.3.5 Huike 1.4 Early Chan in Tang China (c. 600–900) 1.4.1 East Mountain Teachings 1.4.2 Southern School – Huineng and Shenhui 1.5 Tibetan Chan 1.6 Classical or Middle Chan – Tang dynasty (c. 750–1000) 1.6.1 An Lu-shan rebellion 1.6.2 Hung-chou School 1.6.3 Shitou Xiqian 1.6.4 The Great Persecution 1.6.5 Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period (907–960/979) 1.7 Literary Chan – Song dynasty (c. 960–1300) 1.7.1 Five Houses of Chan 1.7.2 Rise of the Linji-school 1.7.3 Dahui Zonggao 1.7.4 Koan-system 1.7.5 Silent illumination 1.8 Post-classical Chan (c. 1300–present) 1.8.1 Yuan dynasty (1279–1368) 1.8.2 Ming dynasty (1368–1644) 1.8.3 Qing dynasty (1644–1912) 1.9 Modernisation 1.9.1 19th century (late Qing dynasty) 1.9.2 Republic of China (1912–1949) – First Buddhist Revival 1.9.3 People's Republic of China (1949–present) – Second Buddhist Revival 1.9.4 Taiwan 2 Spread of Chan Buddhism in Asia Toggle Spread of Chan Buddhism in Asia subsection 2.1 Thiền in Vietnam 2.2 Seon in Korea 2.3 Zen in Japan 2.4 Chan in Indonesia 3 Chan in the Western world Toggle Chan in the Western world subsection 3.1 Western Chan lineages 4 Doctrinal background Toggle Doctrinal background subsection 4.1 Polarities 4.1.1 Absolute-relative 4.1.2 Buddha-nature and śūnyatā 4.1.3 Sudden and gradual enlightenment 4.1.4 Esoteric and exoteric transmission 4.2 Chan scripture 5 Teaching and practice Toggle Teaching and practice subsection 5.1 Bodhisattva ideal 5.2 Chan meditation 5.2.1 Sitting meditation 5.3 Koan practice 6 Chan monasticism Toggle Chan monasticism subsection 6.1 Emphasizing daily life 6.2 Sinification of Buddhism in China 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 10.1 Printed sources 10.2 Web-sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Chan Buddhism 26 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Eesti Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски मराठी Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenčina ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese school of Mahāyāna Buddhism This article is about Chan/Zen Buddhism in China. For an overview of the school, see Zen .

"Chan school" redirects here. For the Harvard University public health school, see Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health .

Chan Buddhism Chinese name Simplified Chinese 禅 Traditional Chinese 禪 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Chán Wade–Giles Ch'an 2 Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Sim4 Middle Chinese Middle Chinese Dzyen Vietnamese name Vietnamese alphabet Thiền Chữ Hán 禪 Korean name Hangul 선 Hanja 禪 Transcriptions Revised Romanization Seon Japanese name Kanji 禅 Hiragana ぜん Transcriptions Romanization Zen Part of a series on Zen Buddhism Main articles Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Zen in the United States Teachings The "essence" No-mind Original enlightenment Buddha-nature Turning the light around Kenshō Satori Sudden awakening The way Ten Ox-Herding Pictures Five ranks of Tozan Hakuin's Four ways of knowing One Vehicle The "goal" Bodhisattva ideal Buddhahood Background Zen and Sutras Doctrinal background of Zen Representation-only Emptiness Practices Zazen Six Perfections Bodhisattva vow Bodhisattva Precepts Shikantaza Sesshin Dhāraṇī Walking meditation Nianfo Koan Hua Tou Samu (Zen) Ōryōki No-mind Prostration (Buddhism) Buddhist chant Dharma combat Kyōgai Zen poetry Zen calligraphy Zen scripture Indian Mahayana texts Prajñaparamita sutras Lankavatara Sutra Śrīmālādevī Sūtra Lotus Sutra Vimalakirti Sutra Avatamsaka Sutra Mahaparinirvana Sutra Chinese texts Two Entrances and Four Practices Śūraṅgama Sūtra The Awakening of Faith Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment Platform Sutra Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall Transmission of the Lamp Zen Poetry Cantongqi The Gateless Barrier Blue Cliff Record Book of Equanimity Dōgen’s Shōbōgenzō (selected poetic passages) Cold Mountain Poems (Hanshan) Poems of Ryōkan Ikkyū’s Zen poetry Bashō’s Zen-influenced Haiku Other Zen-inspired poetry Traditions East Mountain Teaching Sanjiejiao Oxhead school Heze school Hongzhou school Five Houses of Chán Tibetan Chan Trúc Lâm Plum Village Tradition Order of Interbeing Jogye Order Kwan Um School of Zen Taego Order Rinzai school Sōtō school Ōbaku school Sanbo Kyodan White Plum Asanga Ordinary Mind Zen School Zen Peacemakers Persons Chán in China Classical Bodhidharma Hongren Shenxiu Huineng (Enō) Shenhui Mazu Daoyi (Baso) Shitou Xiqian (Kisen) Huangbo Dongshan Liangjie (Tozan) Xuefeng Yicun (Seppo) Linji Yixuan (Rinzai) Zongmi Yunmen Wenyan (Ummon Bun'en) Yongming Yanshou Dahui Zonggao (Tahui) Moheyan Post-classical Patriarch Ching Chwee Zhongfeng Mingben Hanshan Deqing Contemporary Taixu Xu Yun Sheng-yen Zen in Japan Eisai Bassui Ikkyū Bankei Hakuin Ekaku Dōgen Seon in Korea Taego Bou Jinul Daewon Seongcheol Thiền in Vietnam Trần Thái Tông Trần Nhân Tông Thích Thanh Từ Thích Nhất Hạnh Thích Thiên-Ân Western Zen D. T. Suzuki Hakuun Yasutani Taizan Maezumi Shunryū Suzuki Hsuan Hua Seungsahn Sokei-an Category: Zen Buddhists Institution Dharma transmission Zen lineage charts Zen ranks and hierarchy Zen organisation and institutions Zen Narratives Related schools Sānlùn Wéishí Huayan Tiantai Shingon Tendai Pure Land Buddhism v t e Part of a series on Chinese Buddhism Chinese: "Buddha" History Buddhism in Central Asia Dharmaguptaka Silk Road transmission Dunhuang manuscripts Four Buddhist Persecutions in China Religion in the Song dynasty Major Figures Han dynasty to Northern and Southern dynasties (202 BC – 589 AD) Lokakṣema Kumārajīva Sengzhao Dharmakṣema Tanluan Fu Dashi Paramartha Nanyue Huisi Jingying Huiyuan Zhiyi Guanding Bodhidharma Bodhiruci Budai Sui dynasty to Tang dynasty (581 - 907) Daochuo Jizang Daoxuan Daman Hongren Zhiyan Xuanzang Shandao Woncheuk Kuiji Li Tongxuan Huineng Fazang Śubhakarasiṃha Vajrabodhi Yi Xing Amoghavajra Mazu Daoyi Zhanran Huiguo Guifeng Zongmi Chengguan Linji Yixuan Daosui Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms to Song dynasty (907 - 1279) Yongming Yanshou Siming Zhili Dānapāla Devasantika Furong Daokai Yuanzhao Yuanwu Keqin Hongzhi Zhengjue Zhenxie Qingliao Dahui Zonggao Mao Ziyuan Wumen Huikai Yuan dynasty to Ming dynasty (1271 - 1644) Yao Guangxiao Yunqi Zhuhong Daguan Zhenke Hanshan Deqing Miyun Yuanwu Ouyi Zhixu Youxi Chuandeng Qing dynasty to Modern Period (1644 - present) Peng Shaosheng Yang Wenhui Xuyun Yinguang Tanxu Hong Yi Nenghai Taixu Hsuan Hua Nan Huai-Chin Hsing Yun Wei Chueh Sheng-yen Cheng Yen Traditions Chan Tiantai Huayan Pure Land Vinaya Weishi Sanlun Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Practices Nianfo Chan meditation Hua Tou Gong'an Walking meditation Repentance rites Dhāraṇī Transfer of merit Puja Offerings Prostration Music Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Refuge Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Samadhi tiyong Texts Chinese Buddhist canon Taishō Tripiṭaka Architecture Buddhist architecture in China Shanmen Mahavira Hall Guanyin Dian Dizang Dian Yaoshi Dian Tianwang Dian Zushi Dian Luohan Dian Zangjing Ge Fatang Sacred Sites Mount Wutai Mount Emei Mount Jiuhua Mount Putuo Mount Lu Tiantai Mountain White Horse Temple Mount Heng (Hunan) Culture Buddhist Association of China Cuisine Martial arts v t e Chan ( traditional Chinese : 禪 ; simplified Chinese : 禅 ; pinyin : Chán ; abbr.

of Chinese : 禪那 ; pinyin : chánnà ), from Sanskrit dhyāna [ 1 ] (meaning " meditation " or "meditative state" [ 2 ] ), is a Chinese school of Mahāyāna Buddhism . It developed in China from the 6th century CE onwards, becoming especially popular during the Tang and Song dynasties .

[ 3 ] Chinese Buddha Character Fo Chan is the originating tradition of Zen Buddhism (the Japanese pronunciation of the same character , which is the most commonly used English name for the school). Chan Buddhism spread from China south to Vietnam as Thiền and north to Korea as Seon , and, in the 13th century, east to Japan as Japanese Zen .

History [ edit ] See also: Silk Road transmission of Buddhism The historical records required for a complete, accurate account of early Chan history no longer exist.

[ 4 ] Periodisation [ edit ] The history of Chan in China can be divided into several periods. Zen, as we know it today, is the result of a long history, with many changes and contingent factors. Each period had different types of Zen, some of which remained influential, while others vanished.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Andy Ferguson distinguishes three periods from the 5th century into the 13th century: The Legendary period , from Bodhidharma in the late 5th century to the An Lushan Rebellion around 765 CE, in the middle of the Tang dynasty . Little written information is left from this period.

[ 7 ] It is the time of the Six Patriarchs, including Bodhidharma and Huineng , and the legendary "split" between the Northern and the Southern School of Chan.

[ 5 ] The Classical period , from the end of the An Lushan Rebellion around 765 CE to the beginning of the Song dynasty around 950 CE.

[ 7 ] This is the time of the great masters of Chan, such as Mazu Daoyi and Linji Yixuan , and the creation of the yü-lü genre, the recordings of the sayings and teachings of these great masters.

The Literary period , from around 950 to 1250, [ 7 ] which spans the era of the Song dynasty (960–1279). In this time the gong'an-collections were compiled, collections of sayings and deeds by the famous masters, appended with poetry and commentary. This genre reflects the influence of literati on the development of Chan. This period idealized the previous period as the "golden age" of Chan, producing the literature in which the spontaneity of the celebrated masters was portrayed.

Although John R. McRae has reservations about the division of Chan history in phases or periods, [ 8 ] he nevertheless distinguishes four phases in the history of Chan: [ 9 ] Proto-Chan (c. 500–600) ( Southern and Northern Dynasties (420 to 589) and Sui dynasty (589–618 CE)). In this phase, Chan developed in multiple locations in northern China. It was based on the practice of dhyana and is connected to the figures of Bodhidharma and Huike. Its principal text is the Two Entrances and Four Practices , attributed to Bodhidharma.

[ 10 ] Early Chan (c. 600–900) ( Tang dynasty (618–907 CE)). In this phase, Chan took its first clear contours. Prime figures are the fifth patriarch Daman Hongren (601–674), his dharma-heir Yuquan Shenxiu (606?–706), the sixth patriarch Huineng (638–713), protagonist of the quintessential Platform Sutra , and Shenhui (670–762), whose propaganda elevated Huineng to the status of sixth patriarch. Prime factions are the Northern School , Southern School and Oxhead School .

[ 11 ] Middle Chan (c. 750–1000) (from An Lushan Rebellion (755–763) until Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period (907–960/979)). In this phase developed the well-known Chan of the iconoclastic zen-masters. Prime figures are Mazu Daoyi (709–788), Shitou Xiqian (710–790), Linji Yixuan (died 867), and Xuefeng Yicun (822–908). Prime factions are the Hongzhou school and the Hubei faction.

[ note 1 ] An important text is the Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall (952), which contains many "encounter-stories" and the canon genealogy of the Chan-school.

[ 14 ] Song dynasty Chan (c. 950–1300). In this phase, Chan took its definitive shape including the picture of the "golden age" of the Chan of the Tang-dynasty, and the use of koans for individual study and meditation. Prime figures are Dahui Zonggao (1089–1163) who introduced the Hua Tou practice and Hongzhi Zhengjue (1091–1157) who emphasized Silent Illumination . Prime factions are the Linji school and the Caodong school . The classic koan-collections, such as the Blue Cliff Record were assembled in this period, [ 15 ] which reflect the influence of the "literati" on the development of Chan.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In this phase Chan is transported to Japan, and exerts a great influence on Korean Seon via Jinul .

Neither Ferguson nor McRae gives a periodisation for Chinese Chan following the Song-dynasty, though McRae mentions [5.] "at least a postclassical phase or perhaps multiple phases".

[ 18 ] [ note 2 ] Introduction of Buddhism in China (c. 200–500) [ edit ] See also: Han dynasty , Silk Road transmission of Buddhism , and Six Dynasties Sinification of Buddhism and Taoist influences [ edit ] When Buddhism came to China, it was adapted to the Chinese culture and understanding. Theories about the influence of other schools in the evolution of Chan vary widely and are heavily reliant upon speculative correlation rather than on written records or histories. Numerous scholars have argued that Chan developed from the interaction between Mahāyāna Buddhism and Taoism .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Buddhist meditation was practiced in China centuries before the rise of Chan, by people such as An Shigao (c. 148–180 CE) and his school, who translated various Dhyāna sutras (Chán-jing, 禪經, "meditation treatises"), which were influential early meditation texts mostly based on the meditation teachings of the Kashmiri Sarvāstivāda school (circa 1st–4th centuries CE).

[ 24 ] The five main types of meditation in the Dhyana sutras are anapanasati (mindfulness of breathing); paṭikūlamanasikāra meditation, mindfulness of the impurities of the body; loving-kindness maitrī meditation; the contemplation on the twelve links of pratītyasamutpāda ; and the contemplation on the Buddha's thirty-two Characteristics .

[ 25 ] Other important translators of meditation texts were Kumārajīva (334–413 CE), who translated The Sutra on the Concentration of Sitting Meditation , amongst many other texts; and Buddhabhadra . These Chinese translations of mostly Indian Sarvāstivāda Yogacara meditation manuals were the basis for the meditation techniques of Chinese Chan.

[ web 1 ] Buddhism was exposed to Confucian , [ 26 ] Taoist [ 27 ] [ 28 ] and local Folk religious [ 29 ] influences when it came to China. Goddard quotes D.T. Suzuki , [ note 3 ] calling Chan a "natural evolution of Buddhism under Taoist conditions".

[ 30 ] Buddhism was first identified to be "a barbarian variant of Taoism", and Taoist terminology was used to express Buddhist doctrines in the oldest translations of Buddhist texts, [ 28 ] a practice termed ko-i , "matching the concepts".

[ 31 ] Judging from the reception by the Han of the Hinayana works and from the early commentaries, it appears that Buddhism was being perceived and digested through the medium of religious Daoism (Taoism). Buddha was seen as a foreign immortal who had achieved some form of Daoist nondeath. The Buddhists' mindfulness of the breath was regarded as an extension of Daoist breathing exercises.

[ 32 ] The first Buddhist converts in China were Taoists.

[ 28 ] They developed high esteem for the newly introduced Buddhist meditational techniques, [ 33 ] and blended them with Taoist meditation .

[ 34 ] Representatives of early Chinese Buddhism like Sengzhao and Tao Sheng were deeply influenced by the Taoist keystone works of Laozi and Zhuangzi .

[ 35 ] Against this background, especially the Taoist concept of naturalness was inherited by the early Chan disciples: [ 36 ] they equated – to some extent – the ineffable Tao and Buddha-nature , [ 37 ] and thus, rather than feeling bound to the abstract "wisdom of the sūtras", emphasized Buddha-nature to be found in "everyday" human life, just as the Tao.

[ 37 ] Chinese Buddhism absorbed Neo-Daoist concepts as well.

[ 31 ] Concepts such as T'i-yung (體用 Essence and Function) and Li-shih (理事 Noumenon and Phenomenon, or Principle and Practice) first appeared in Hua-yen Buddhism, [ 31 ] which consequently influenced Chan deeply.

[ 38 ] On the other hand, Taoists at first misunderstood sunyata to be akin to the Taoist non-being .

[ 39 ] The emerging Chinese Buddhism nevertheless had to compete with Taoism and Confucianism: [ 26 ] Because Buddhism was a foreign influence, however, and everything "barbarian" was suspect, certain Chinese critics were jolted out of complacency by the spread of the dharma [...] In the first four centuries of the Christian Era, this barbarian influence was infiltrating China just when it was least politically stable and more vulnerable to sedition. As the philosophy and practice infiltrated society, many traditionalists banded together to stop the foreign influence, not so much out of intolerance (an attitude flatly rejected by both Taoism and Confucianism), but because they felt that the Chinese worldview was being turned upside down.

[ 26 ] One point of confusion for this new emerging Chinese Buddhism was the two truths doctrine . Chinese thinking took this to refer to two ontological truths : reality exists on two levels, a relative level and an absolute level.

[ 40 ] Taoists at first misunderstood sunyata to be akin to the Taoist non-being.

[ 41 ] In Indian Madhyamaka philosophy the two truths are two epistemological truths : two different ways to look at reality. Based on their understanding of the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra the Chinese supposed that the teaching of Buddha-nature was, as stated by that sutra, the final Buddhist teaching, and that there is an essential truth above sunyata and the two truths.

[ 42 ] Divisions of training [ edit ] When Buddhism came to China, there were three divisions of training: The training in virtue and discipline in the precepts (Skt.

śīla ), The training in mind through meditation (Skt.

dhyāna ) to attain a luminous and non-reactive state of mind, and The training in the recorded teachings (Skt.

Dharma ).

It was in this context that Buddhism entered into Chinese culture. Three types of teachers with expertise in each training practice developed: Vinaya masters specialized in all the rules of discipline for monks and nuns, Dhyāna masters specialized in the practice of meditation, and Dharma masters specialized in the mastery of the Buddhist texts.

Monasteries and practice centers were created that tended to focus on either the Vinaya and training of monks or the teachings focused on one scripture or a small group of texts. Dhyāna ( Chan ) masters tended to practice in solitary hermitages, or to be associated with Vinaya training monasteries or the dharma teaching centers. The later naming of the Zen school has its origins in this view of the threefold division of training.

McRae goes so far as to say: ... one important feature must not be overlooked: Chan was not nearly as separate from these other types of Buddhist activities as one might think [...] [T]he monasteries of which Chan monks became abbots were comprehensive institutions, "public monasteries" that supported various types of Buddhist activities other than Chan-style meditation. The reader should bear this point in mind: In contrast to the independent denominations of Soto and Rinzai that emerged (largely by government fiat) in seventeenth-century Japan, there was never any such thing as an institutionally separate Chan "school" at any time in Chinese Buddhist history (emphasis McRae).

[ 43 ] Legendary or Proto-Chan (c. 500–600) [ edit ] See also: Southern and Northern Dynasties and Sui dynasty Mahākāśyapa and the Flower Sermon [ edit ] The Chan tradition ascribes the origins of Chan in India to the Flower Sermon , the earliest source for which comes from the 14th century.

[ 44 ] It is said that Gautama Buddha gathered his disciples one day for a Dharma talk . When they gathered together, the Buddha was completely silent and some speculated that perhaps the Buddha was tired or ill. The Buddha silently held up and twirled a flower and his eyes twinkled; several of his disciples tried to interpret what this meant, though none of them were correct. One of the Buddha's disciples, Mahākāśyapa , gazed at the flower and smiled. The Buddha then acknowledged Mahākāśyapa's insight by saying the following: [ 45 ] I possess the true Dharma eye, the marvelous mind of Nirvāṇa, the true form of the formless, the subtle Dharma gate that does not rest on words or letters but is a special transmission outside of the scriptures. This I entrust to Mahākāśyapa.

First six patriarchs (c. 500 – early 8th century) [ edit ] Main article: Lineage (Buddhism) Traditionally the origin of Chan in China is credited to Bodhidharma , an Iranian-language speaking Central Asian monk [ 46 ] or an Indian monk.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] The story of his life, and of the Six Patriarchs, was constructed during the Tang dynasty to lend credibility to the growing Chan-school.

[ 5 ] Only scarce historical information is available about him, but his hagiography developed when the Chan tradition grew stronger and gained prominence in the early 8th century. By this time a lineage of the six ancestral founders of Chan in China was developed.

[ 49 ] The actual origins of Chan may lie in ascetic practitioners of Buddhism, who found refuge in forests and mountains.

[ 50 ] Huike , "a dhuta (extreme ascetic) who schooled others" [ 50 ] and used the Srimala Sutra , [ 51 ] one of the Tathāgatagarbha sūtras , [ 52 ] figures in the stories about Bodhidharma. Huike is regarded as the second Chan patriarch, appointed by Bodhidharma to succeed him. One of Huike's students, Sengcan , to whom is ascribed the Xinxin Ming , is regarded as the third patriarch.

By the late 8th century, under the influence of Huineng's student Shenhui , the traditional list of patriarchs of the Chan lineage had been established: [ 49 ] Bodhidharma ( 達摩 ) c. 440 – c. 528 Dazu Huike ( 慧可 ) 487–593 Sengcan ( 僧燦 ) ?–606 Dayi Daoxin ( 道信 ) 580–651 Daman Hongren ( 弘忍 ) 601–674 Huineng ( 惠能 ) 638–713 In later writings, this lineage was extended to include 28 Indian patriarchs. In the Song of Enlightenment (證道歌 Zhèngdào gē ) of Yongjia Xuanjue (永嘉玄覺, 665–713), one of the chief disciples of Huìnéng , it is written that Bodhidharma was the 28th patriarch in a line of descent from Mahākāśyapa, a disciple of Śākyamuni Buddha , and the first patriarch of Chan Buddhism.

[ 53 ] Mahākāśyapa was the first, leading the line of transmission; Twenty-eight Fathers followed him in the West; The Lamp was then brought over the sea to this country; And Bodhidharma became the First Father here: His mantle, as we all know, passed over six Fathers, And by them many minds came to see the Light.

[ 54 ] Lankavatara Sutra [ edit ] In its beginnings in China, Chan primarily referred to the Mahāyāna sūtras and especially to the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra .

[ 55 ] As a result, early masters of the Chan tradition were referred to as "Laṅkāvatāra masters". As the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra teaches the doctrine of the Ekayāna "One Vehicle", the early Chan school was sometimes referred to as the "One Vehicle School".

[ 56 ] In other early texts, the school that would later become known as Chan is sometimes even referred to as simply the "Laṅkāvatāra school" (Ch. 楞伽宗, Léngqié Zōng ).

[ 57 ] Accounts recording the history of this early period are to be found in the Records of the Laṅkāvatāra Masters ( Chinese : 楞伽師資記 ).

Bodhidharma [ edit ] Main article: Bodhidharma Bodhidharma with Dazu Huike. Painting by Sesshū Tōyō , 15th century.

Bodhidharma is recorded as having come into China during the time of Southern and Northern Dynasties to teach a "special transmission outside scriptures" which "did not stand upon words".

[ 58 ] Throughout Buddhist art , Bodhidharma is depicted as a rather ill-tempered, profusely bearded and wide-eyed barbarian. He is referred to as "The Blue-Eyed Barbarian " ( 碧眼胡 ; Bìyǎn hú ) in Chinese Chan texts.

[ web 2 ] Only scarce historical information is available about him but his hagiography developed when the Chan tradition grew stronger and gained prominence in the early 8th century. By this time a lineage of the six ancestral founders of Chan in China was developed.

[ 5 ] Little contemporary biographical information on Bodhidharma is extant, and subsequent accounts became layered with legend.

[ 49 ] There are three principal sources for Bodhidharma's biography: [ 59 ] The Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang by Yáng Xuànzhī's (楊衒之, 547), Tan Lin's preface to the Long Scroll of the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices (6th century CE), and Dayi Daoxin 's Further Biographies of Eminent Monks (7th century CE).

These sources vary in their account of Bodhidharma being either "from Persia" (547 CE), "a Brahman monk from South India" (645 CE), "the third son of a Brahman king of South India" (c. 715 CE).

[ 49 ] Some traditions specifically describe Bodhidharma to be the third son of a Pallava king from Kanchipuram .

[ web 3 ] [ 60 ] The Long Scroll of the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices written by Tan Lin (曇林; 506–574), contains teachings that are attributed to Bodhidharma. The text is known from the Dunhuang manuscripts . The two entrances to enlightenment are the entrance of principle and the entrance of practice: The entrance of principle is to become enlightened to the Truth on the basis of the teaching. One must have a profound faith in the fact that one and the same True Nature is possessed by all sentient beings, both ordinary and enlightened, and that this True Nature is only covered up and made imperceptible [in the case of ordinary people] by false sense impressions ".

[ 61 ] The entrance of practice includes the following four increments: Practice of the retribution of enmity: to accept all suffering as the fruition of past transgressions, without enmity or complaint Practice of the acceptance of circumstances: to remain unmoved even by good fortune, recognizing it as evanescent Practice of the absence of craving: to be without craving, which is the source of all suffering Practice of accordance with the Dharma: to eradicate wrong thoughts and practice the six perfections, without having any "practice".

[ 62 ] This text was used and studied by Huike and his students. The True Nature refers to the Buddha-nature .

[ 61 ] Huike [ edit ] Bodhidharma settled in Northern Wei China. Shortly before his death, Bodhidharma appointed his disciple Dazu Huike to succeed him, making Huike the first Chinese-born ancestral founder and the second ancestral founder of Chan in China. Bodhidharma is said to have passed three items to Huike as a sign of transmission of the Dharma: a robe, a bowl, and a copy of the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra . The transmission then passed to the second ancestral founder Dazu Huike, the third Sengcan, the fourth ancestral founder Dayi Daoxin, and the fifth ancestral founder Daman Hongren .

Early Chan in Tang China (c. 600–900) [ edit ] East Mountain Teachings [ edit ] With the fourth patriarch, Daoxin ( 道信 580–651), [ 63 ] Chan began to take shape as a distinct school. The link between Huike and Sengcan, and the fourth patriarch Daoxin "is far from clear and remains tenuous".

[ 50 ] With Daoxin and his successor, the fifth patriarch Hongren ( 弘忍 601–674), there emerged a new style of teaching, which was inspired by the Chinese text Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana .

[ 63 ] According to McRae, the "first explicit statement of the sudden and direct approach that was to become the hallmark of Ch'an religious practice" is associated with the East Mountain School .

[ 64 ] It is a method named "Maintaining the one without wavering" ( shou-i pu i, 守一不移), [ 64 ] the one being the nature of mind , which is equated with Buddha-nature.

[ 65 ] In this practice, one turns the attention from the objects of experience, to the perceiving subject itself.

[ 66 ] According to McRae, this type of meditation resembles the methods of "virtually all schools of Mahayana Buddhism," but differs in that "no preparatory requirements, no moral prerequisites or preliminary exercises are given," and is "without steps or gradations. One concentrates, understands, and is enlightened, all in one undifferentiated practice." [ 64 ] [ note 4 ] Sharf notes that the notion of "Mind" came to be criticised by radical subitists, and was replaced by "No Mind," to avoid any reifications.

[ 68 ] [ note 5 ] A large group of students gathered at a permanent residence, and extreme asceticism became outdated.

[ 50 ] The period of Daoxin and Hongren came to be called the East Mountain Teaching , due to the location of the residence of Hongren at Huangmei.

[ 70 ] [ 5 ] The term was used by Yuquan Shenxiu (神秀 606?–706), the most important successor to Hongren.

[ 71 ] By this time the group had grown into a matured congregation that became significant enough to be reckoned with by the ruling forces.

[ 63 ] The East Mountain community was a specialized meditation training centre. Hongren was a plain meditation teacher, who taught students of "various religious interests", including "practitioners of the Lotus Sutra, students of Madhyamaka philosophy, or specialists in the monastic regulations of Buddhist Vinaya ".

[ 72 ] The school was typified by a "loose practice," [ 73 ] aiming to make meditation accessible to a larger audience.

[ 73 ] Shenxiu used short formulas extracted from various sutras to package the teachings, [ 73 ] a style which is also used in the Platform Sutra.

[ 73 ] The establishment of a community in one location was a change from the wandering lives of Bodhidharma and Huike and their followers.

[ 72 ] It fitted better into the Chinese society, which highly valued community-oriented behaviour, instead of solitary practice.

[ 74 ] In 701 Shenxiu was invited to the Imperial Court by Zhou Empress Wu Zetian , who paid him due to imperial reverence. The first lineage documents were produced in this period: [T]he genealogical presentation of the Chan transmission was first recorded on paper in the early years of metropolitan Chan activity. The earliest recorded instance of this was in the epitaph for a certain Faru, a student of Hongren's who died in 689, and by the second decade of the 8th century, the later followers of Hongren had produced two separate texts describing the transmission from Bodhidharma to Shenxiu.

[ 75 ] The transition from the East Mountain to the two capitals changed the character of Chan: [I]t was only when Hongren's successors moved into the environment of the two capitals, with its literate society and incomparably larger urban scale, that well-written texts were required for disseminating the teaching.

[ 76 ] Members of the "East Mountain Teaching" shifted the alleged scriptural basis, realizing that the Awakening of Faith is not a sutra but a sastra , commentary, and fabricated a lineage of Lankavatara Sutra masters, as being the sutra that preluded the Awakening of Faith .

[ 51 ] Southern School – Huineng and Shenhui [ edit ] Huineng tearing sutras See also: Subitism According to tradition, the sixth and last ancestral founder, Huineng (惠能; 638–713), was one of the giants of Chan history, and all surviving schools regard him as their ancestor.

[ 77 ] The dramatic story of Huineng's life tells that there was a controversy over his claim to the title of patriarch. After being chosen by Hongren, the fifth ancestral founder, Huineng had to flee by night to Nanhua Temple in the south to avoid the wrath of Hongren's jealous senior disciples.

Modern scholarship, however, has questioned this narrative. Historic research reveals that this story was created around the middle of the 8th century, as part of a campaign to win influence at the Imperial Court in 731 by a successor to Huineng called Shenhui. He claimed Huineng to be the successor of Hongren instead of Shenxiu, the recognized successor.

[ 49 ] A dramatic story of Huineng's life was created, as narrated in the Platform Sutra , which tells that there was a contest for the transmission of the title of patriarch. After being chosen by Hongren , the fifth patriarch, Huineng had to flee by night to Nanhua Temple in the south to avoid the wrath of Hongren's jealous senior disciples.

[ 5 ] [ 70 ] Shenhui succeeded in his campaign, and Huineng eventually came to be regarded as the Sixth Patriarch.

[ 70 ] [ 5 ] In 745 Shenhui was invited to take up residence in the Heze Temple in the capital, Dongdu (modern Luoyang ) In 753, he fell out of grace and had to leave Dongdu to go into exile.

The most prominent of the successors of Shenhui's lineage was Guifeng Zongmi .

[ 78 ] According to Zongmi, Shenhui's approach was officially sanctioned in 796, when "an imperial commission determined that the Southern line of Ch'an represented the orthodox transmission and established Shen-hui as the seventh patriarch, placing an inscription to that effect in the Shen-lung temple".

[ 79 ] Doctrinally, Shenhui's "Southern School" is associated with the teaching that enlightenment is sudden while the "Northern" or East Mountain school is associated with the teaching that enlightenment is gradual. This was a polemical exaggeration since both schools were derived from the same tradition, and the so-called Southern School incorporated many teachings of the more influential Northern School.

[ 49 ] Eventually both schools died out, but the influence of Shenhui was so immense that all later Chan schools traced their origin to Huineng, and "sudden enlightenment" became a standard doctrine of Chan.

[ 49 ] Shenhui's influence is traceable in the Platform Sutra , which gives a popular account of the story of Huineng but also reconciles the antagonism created by Shenhui. Salient is that Shenhui himself does not figure in the Platform Sutra ; he was effectively written out of Chan history.

[ 80 ] The Platform Sutra also reflects the growing popularity of the Diamond Sūtra ( Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra ) in 8th-century Chinese Buddhism.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Thereafter, the essential texts of the Chan school were often considered to be both the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra and the Diamond Sūtra .

[ 83 ] The Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra , which endorses the Buddha-nature, emphasized purity of mind, which can be attained in gradations. The Diamond-sutra emphasizes sunyata, which "must be realized totally or not at all".

[ 82 ] David Kalupahana associates the later Caodong school (Japanese Sōtō , gradual) and Linji school (Japanese Rinzai school , sudden) schools with the Yogacara and Madhyamaka philosophies respectively.

[ 84 ] The same comparison has been made by McRae.

[ 85 ] The Madhyamaka school elaborated on the theme of śūnyatā , which was set forth in the prajnaparamita sutras, to which the Diamond Sutra also belongs.

[ 84 ] The shift from the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra to the Diamond Sutra also signifies a tension between Buddha-nature teachings, which imply a transcendental reality, versus śūnyatā, which denies such a transcendental reality.

Tibetan Chan [ edit ] Chinese Chan Buddhist teachers such as Moheyan first went to Tibet in the eighth century during the height of the Tibetan Empire .

[ 86 ] There seems to have been disputes between them and Indian Buddhists, as exemplified by the Samye debate . Many Tibetan Chan texts have been recovered from the caves at Dunhuang , where Chan and Tantric Buddhists lived side by side and this led to religious syncretism in some cases.

[ 87 ] Chan Buddhism survived in Tibet for several centuries, [ 88 ] but had mostly been replaced by the 10th century developments in Tibetan Buddhism . According to Sam Van Schaik: After the 'dark period', all visible influences of Chan were eliminated from Tibetan Buddhism, and Mahayoga and Chan were carefully distinguished from each other. This trend
can already be observed in the tenth-century Lamp for the Eyes in Contemplation by the great central Tibetan scholar Gnubs chen Sangs rgyas ye shes . This influential work represented a crucial step in the codification of Chan, Mahayoga and the Great Perfection as distinct vehicles to enlightenment. In comparison, our group of [Dunhuang] manuscripts exhibits remarkable freedom, blurring the lines between meditation systems that were elsewhere kept quite distinct. The system of practice set out in these manuscripts did not survive into the later Tibetan tradition. Indeed, this creative integration of meditation practices derived from both Indic and Chinese traditions could only have been possible during the earliest years of Tibetan Buddhism, when doctrinal categories were still forming, and in this sense, it represents an important stage in the Tibetan assimilation of Buddhism.

[ 87 ] Classical or Middle Chan – Tang dynasty (c. 750–1000) [ edit ] Daoxin, Hongren, Shenxiu, Huineng and Shenhui all lived during the early Tang. The later period of the Tang dynasty is traditionally regarded as the "golden age" of Chan. This proliferation is described in a famous saying: [ 89 ] Look at the territory of the house of Tang — The whole of it is the realm of the Chan school.

An Lu-shan rebellion [ edit ] The An Lushan Rebellion (755–763) led to a loss of control by the Tang dynasty, and changed the Chan scene again. Metropolitan Chan began to lose its status, while "other schools were arising in outlying areas controlled by warlords. These are the forerunners of the Chan we know today. Their origins are obscure; the power of Shen-hui's preaching is shown by the fact that they all trace themselves to Hui-neng." [ 90 ] Hung-chou School [ edit ] Main article: Hongzhou school Linji The most important of these schools is the Hongzhou school (洪州宗) of Mazu , to which also belong Dazhu Huihai , Baizhang Huaihai , Huangbo and Linji (Rinzai). Linji is also regarded as the founder of one of the Five Houses.

This school developed "shock techniques such as shouting, beating, and using irrational retorts to startle their students into realization".

[ 91 ] [ 53 ] Some of these are common today, while others are found mostly in anecdotes. It is common in many Chan traditions today for Chan teachers to have a stick with them during formal ceremonies which is a symbol of authority and which can be also used to strike on the table during a talk.

These shock techniques became part of the traditional and still popular image of Chan masters displaying irrational and strange behaviour to aid their students.

[ 49 ] [ 92 ] Part of this image was due to later misinterpretations and translation errors, such as the loud belly shout known as katsu . "Katsu" means "to shout", which has traditionally been translated as "yelled 'katsu'" – which should mean "yelled a yell".

[ web 4 ] A well-known story depicts Mazu practicing dhyana, but being rebuked by his teacher Nanyue Huairang , comparing seated meditation with polishing a tile.

[ 93 ] According to Faure, the criticism is not about dhyana as such, but "the idea of "becoming a Buddha" by means of any practice, lowered to the standing of a "means" to achieve an "end"".

[ 93 ] The criticism of seated dhyana reflects a change in the role and position of monks in Tang society, who "undertook only pious works, reciting sacred texts and remaining seated in dhyana ".

[ 94 ] Nevertheless, seated dhyana remained an important part of the Chan tradition, also due to the influence of Guifeng Zongmi , who tried to balance dhyana and insight.

[ 94 ] The Hung-chou school has been criticised for its radical subitism . Guifeng Zongmi (圭峰 宗密) (780–841), an influential teacher-scholar and patriarch of both the Chan and the Huayan school , claimed that the Hongzhou school teaching led to a radical nondualism that denies the need for spiritual cultivation and moral discipline. While Zongmi acknowledged that the essence of Buddha-nature and its functioning in the day-to-day reality are but different aspects of the same reality, he insisted that there is a difference.

[ 95 ] Shitou Xiqian [ edit ] Traditionally Shítóu Xīqiān (Ch. 石頭希遷, c. 700 – c.790) is seen as the other great figure of this period. In the Chan lineages he is regarded as the predecessor of the Caodong ( Sōtō ) school.

[ 96 ] He is also regarded as the author of the Sandokai , a poem which formed the basis for the Song of the Precious Mirror Samadhi of Dongshan Liangjie (Jp. Tōzan Ryōkan) and the teaching of the Five Ranks .

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] The Great Persecution [ edit ] During 845–846 Emperor Wuzong persecuted the Buddhist schools in China: It was a desperate attempt on the part of the hard-pressed central government, which had been in disarray since the An Lu-shan rebellion of 756, to gain some measure of political, economic, and military relief by preying on the Buddhist temples with their immense wealth and extensive lands.

[ 99 ] This persecution was devastating for metropolitan Chan, but the Chan school of Ma-tsu and his likes had survived, and took a leading role in the Chan of the later Tang.

[ 99 ] Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period (907–960/979) [ edit ] See also: Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period After the fall of the Tang dynasty , China was without effective central control during the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period. China was divided into several autonomous regions. Support for Buddhism was limited to a few areas. The Hua-yen and T'ient-tai schools suffered from the changing circumstances, since they had depended on imperial support. The collapse of T'ang society also deprived the aristocratic classes of wealth and influence, which meant a further drawback for Buddhism. Shenxiu's Northern School and Henshui's Southern School didn't survive the changing circumstances. Nevertheless, Chan emerged as the dominant stream within Chinese Buddhism, but with various schools developing various emphasises in their teachings, due to the regional orientation of the period. The Fayan school , named after Fa-yen Wen-i (885–958) became the dominant school in the southern kingdoms of Nan-T'ang ( Jiangxi , Chiang-hsi) and Wuyue (Che-chiang).

[ 100 ] Literary Chan – Song dynasty (c. 960–1300) [ edit ] See also: Song dynasty The Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period was followed by the Song dynasty, which established a strong central government. During the Song dynasty, Chan (禪) was used by the government to strengthen its control over the country, and Chan grew to become the largest sect in Chinese Buddhism . An ideal picture of the Chan of the Tang period was produced, which served the legacy of this newly acquired status: In the Song dynasty (960–1279), Chinese Chan Buddhism reached something of a climax paradigm. By "climax paradigm", I mean a conceptual configuration by which Chan was described in written texts, practiced by its adherents, and by extension understood as a religious entity by the Chinese population as a whole ... Previous events in Chan were interpreted through the lens of the Song dynasty configuration, and subsequent developments in China, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam were evaluated, even as they occurred, against what was known of the standards established during the Song. Thus the romanticized image of the great Tang dynasty masters – Mazu and his students, Caoshan, Dongshan, and their students, and of course Linji – was generated by Song dynasty authors and functioned within Song dynasty texts. Similarly, even where subsequent figures throughout East Asia – Hakuin Ekaku (1685–1769), the famous reviver of Japanese Rinzai, is the best example – evoke the examples of Bodhidharma, the Sixth Patriarch Huineng, Mazu, and the others, they do so through the conceptual filter of Song-dynasty Chan.

[ 101 ] Five Houses of Chan [ edit ] See also: Five Houses of Chan During the Song the Five Houses (Ch. 五家) of Chan , or five "schools", were recognized. These were not originally regarded as "schools" or "sects", but based on the various Chan-genealogies. Historically they have come to be understood as "schools".

The Five Houses of Chan are: [ 4 ] Guiyang school (潙仰宗), named after masters Guishan Lingyou (771–854) and Yangshan Huiji (813–890), dharma-descendants of Mazu Daoyi ; [ 102 ] Linji school (臨濟宗), named after master Linji Yixuan (died 866), whose lineage came to be traced to Mazu, establishing him as the archetypal iconoclastic Chan-master; [ 103 ] Caodong school (曹洞宗), named after masters Dongshan Liangjie (807–869) and Caoshan Benji (840–901); Yunmen school (雲門宗), named after master Yunmen Wenyan (died 949), a student of Xuefeng Yicun (822–908), whose lineage was traced to Shitou Xiqian : [ 104 ] Fayan school (法眼宗), named after master Fayan Wenyi (885–958), a "grand-student" of Xuefeng Yicun .

Rise of the Linji-school [ edit ] Main article: Linji school The Linji-school became the dominant school within Chan, due to support from the literati and the court.

[ 103 ] Before the Song dynasty, the Linji-school is rather obscure, and very little is known about its early history.

[ 70 ] The first mention of Linji is in the Zutang ji , compiled in 952, 86 years after Linji's death.

[ 103 ] But the Zutang ji pictures the Xuefeng Yicun lineage as heir to the legacy of Mazu and the Hongzhou-school.

[ 103 ] According to Welter, the real founder of the Linji-school was Shoushan (or Baoying) Shengnian (首山省念) (926–993), a fourth generation dharma-heir of Linji. The Tiansheng Guangdeng lu (天聖廣燈錄), "Tiansheng Era Expanded Lamp Record", compiled by the official Li Zunxu (李遵勗) (988–1038) confirms the status of Shoushan Shengnian, but also pictures Linji as a major Chan patriarch and heir to the Mazu, displacing the prominence of the Fayan-lineage.

[ 103 ] It also established the slogan of "a special transmission outside the teaching", supporting the Linji-school claim of "Chan as separate from and superior to all other Buddhist teachings".

[ 105 ] Dahui Zonggao [ edit ] Over the course of Song dynasty (960–1279), the Guiyang, Fayan, and Yunmen schools were gradually absorbed into the Linji. Song Chan was dominated by the Linji school of Dahui Zonggao , which in turn became strongly affiliated to the Imperial Court: ... the Ta-hui school of Sung Chan had become closely associated with the Sung court, high officials, and the literati [...] With the establishment of the Wu-shan (Gozan) system during the Southern Sung the school of Ta-hui took precedence. The Chinese bureaucratic system entered into Chan temples throughout the country, and a highly organized system of temple rank and administration developed.

[ 106 ] The Wu-shan system was a system of state-controlled temples, which were established by the Song government in all provinces.

[ 107 ] Koan-system [ edit ] The teaching styles and words of the classical masters were recorded in the so-called "encounter dialogues".

[ 49 ] Snippets of these encounter dialogues were collected in texts as the Blue Cliff Record (1125) of Yuanwu, The Gateless Gate (1228) of Wumen , both of the Linji lineage, and the Book of Equanimity (1223) by Wansong Xingxiu of the Caodong lineage.

These texts became classic gōng'àn cases, together with verse and prose commentaries, which crystallized into the systematized gōng'àn (koan) practice. According to Miura and Sasaki, "[I]t was during the lifetime of Yüan-wu 's successor, Dahui Zonggao (大慧宗杲; 1089–1163) that Koan Chan entered its determinative stage." [ 108 ] Gōng'àn practice was prevalent in the Linji school, to which Yuanwu and Dahui belonged, but it was also employed on a more limited basis by the Caodong school.

The recorded encounter dialogues, and the koan collections which derived from this genre, mark a shift from solitary practice to the interaction between master and student: The essence of enlightenment came to be identified with the interaction between masters and students. Whatever insight dhyana might bring, its verification was always interpersonal. In effect, enlightenment came to be understood not so much as an insight, but as a way of acting in the world with other people [ 109 ] This mutual enquiry of the meaning of the encounters of masters and students of the past gave students a role model: One looked at the enlightened activities of one's lineal forebears in order to understand one's own identity [...] taking the role of the participants and engaging in their dialogues instead [ 110 ] [ note 6 ] Koan practice was a literary practice, styling snippets of encounter-dialogue into well-edited stories. It arose in interaction with "educated literati".

[ 111 ] There were dangers involved in such a literary approach, such as fixing specific meanings to the cases.

[ 111 ] Dahui Zonggao is even said to have burned the woodblocks of the Blue Cliff Record , for the hindrance it had become to study of Chan by his students [ 112 ] Silent illumination [ edit ] The Caodong was the other school to survive into the Song period. Its main protagonist was Hung-chih Cheng-chueh, a contemporary of Dahui Zonggao. It put emphasis on "silent illumination", or "just sitting". This approach was attacked by Dahui as being mere passivity, and lacking emphasis on gaining insight into one's true nature. Cheng-chueh in his turn criticized the emphasis on koan study.

[ 113 ] Post-classical Chan (c. 1300–present) [ edit ] Yuan dynasty (1279–1368) [ edit ] The Yuan dynasty was the empire established by Kublai Khan , the leader of the Borjigin clan, after the Mongol Empire conquered the Jin dynasty (1115–1234) and the Southern Song dynasty . Chan began to be mixed with Pure Land Buddhism as in the teachings of Zhongfeng Mingben (1263–1323). During this period, other Chan lineages, not necessarily connected with the original lineage, began to emerge with the 108th Chan Patriarch, Dhyānabhadra active in both China and Korea.

[ 114 ] Ming dynasty (1368–1644) [ edit ] Chan Buddhism enjoyed something of a revival in the Ming dynasty , with teachers such as Hanshan Deqing (憨山德清), who wrote and taught extensively on both Chan and Pure Land Buddhism; Miyun Yuanwu (密雲圓悟), who came to be seen posthumously as the first patriarch of the Ōbaku school of Zen ; and as Yunqi Zhuhong (雲棲祩宏) and Ouyi Zhixu (蕅益智旭).

Chan was taught alongside other Buddhist traditions such as Pure Land , Huayan , Tiantai and Chinese Esoteric Buddhism in many monasteries. In continuity with Buddhism in the previous dynasties, Buddhist masters taught integrated teachings from the various traditions as opposed to advocating for any sectarian delineation between the various schools of thought.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] With the downfall of the Ming, several Chan masters fled to Japan, founding the Ōbaku school .

[ 118 ] Qing dynasty (1644–1912) [ edit ] At the beginning of the Qing dynasty , Chan was "reinvented", by the "revival of beating and shouting practices" by Miyun Yuanwu (1566–1642), and the publication of the Wudeng yantong ("The strict transmission of the five Chan schools") by Feiyin Tongrong's (1593–1662), a dharma heir of Miyun Yuanwu. The book placed self-proclaimed Chan monks without proper Dharma transmission in the category of "lineage unknown" ( sifa weixiang ), thereby excluding several prominent Caodong monks.

[ 119 ] Modernisation [ edit ] 19th century (late Qing dynasty) [ edit ] Around 1900, Buddhists from other Asian countries showed a growing interest in Chinese Buddhism.

Anagarika Dharmapala visited Shanghai in 1893, [ web 5 ] intending "to make a tour of China, to arouse the Chinese Buddhists to send missionaries to India to restore Buddhism there, and then to start a propaganda throughout the whole world", but eventually limiting his stay to Shanghai.

[ web 5 ] Japanese Buddhist missionaries were active in China in the beginning of the 20th century.

[ web 5 ] Republic of China (1912–1949) – First Buddhist Revival [ edit ] See also: Republic of China (1912–49) Traditional Chan Buddhist Grand Master Wei Chueh in Taiwan , sitting in meditation The modernisation of China led to the end of the Chinese Empire, and the installation of the Republic of China, which lasted on the mainland until the Communist Revolution and the installation of the People's Republic of China in 1949.

After further centuries of decline during the Qing, Chan was revived again in the early 20th century by Hsu Yun (虛雲), a well-known figure of 20th-century Chinese Buddhism. Many Chan teachers today trace their lineage to Hsu Yun, including Sheng Yen (聖嚴) and Hsuan Hua (宣化), who have propagated Chan in the West where it has grown steadily through the 20th and 21st century.

The Buddhist reformist Taixu propagated a Chan-influenced humanistic Buddhism , which is endorsed by Jing Hui, former abbot of Bailin Monastery .

[ 120 ] Until 1949, monasteries were built in the Southeast Asian countries, for example by monks of Guanghua Monastery , to spread Chinese Buddhism. Presently, Guanghua Monastery has seven branches in the Malay Peninsula and Indonesia.

[ web 6 ] People's Republic of China (1949–present) – Second Buddhist Revival [ edit ] See also: China Chan was repressed in China during the recent modern era in the early periods of the People's Republic, but subsequently has been re-asserting itself on the mainland, and has a significant following in Taiwan and Hong Kong as well as among Overseas Chinese .

Since the Chinese economic reform of the 1970s, a new revival of Chinese Buddhism has been ongoing.

[ 121 ] [ 42 ] [ web 7 ] [ web 8 ] Ancient Buddhist temples, such as Bailin Monastery and Guanghua Monastery have been refurbished.

Bailin Monastery was ruined long before 1949.

[ 120 ] In 1988, Jing Hui was persuaded to take over the Hebei Buddhist Association, and start rebuilding the Monastery.

[ 120 ] Jing Hui is a student [ 120 ] and dharma successor [ web 9 ] of Hsu Yun , but has also adopted the Humanistic Buddhism of Taixu .

[ 120 ] [ note 7 ] [ note 8 ] Guanghua Monastery was restored beginning in 1979, when a six-year restoration program began under the supervision of then 70-year-old Venerable Master Yuanzhou (圆拙老法师). In 1983 the temple became one of the Chinese Buddhism Regional Temples (汉族地区全国重点寺院) whilst 36-year-old Master Yiran (毅然法師) became abbot. The same year, Venerable Master Yuanzhou funded the establishment of the new Fujian Buddhism Academy (福建佛学院) on the site.

Taiwan [ edit ] See also: Taiwan and Buddhism in Taiwan Several Chinese Buddhist teachers left China during the Communist Revolution, and settled in Hong Kong and Taiwan.

Sheng Yen (1930–2009) was the founder of the Dharma Drum Mountain , a Buddhist organization based in Taiwan . During his time in Taiwan, Sheng Yen was well known as one of the progressive Buddhist teachers who sought to teach Buddhism in a modern and Western-influenced world. Sheng yen published over 30 Chan texts in English.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Wei Chueh (1928–2016) was born in Sichuan , China, and ordained in Taiwan. In 1982, he founded Lin Quan Temple in Taipei County and became known for his teaching on Ch'an practices by offering many lectures and seven-day Ch'an retreats. His order is called Chung Tai Shan .

Two additional traditions emerged in the 1960s, based their teaching on Ch'an practices.

Cheng Yen (born 1937), a Buddhist nun , founded the Tzu Chi Foundation as a charity organization with Buddhist ethics on May 14, 1966 in Hualien , Taiwan.

[ 125 ] She was inspired by her master and mentor, the late Venerable Master Yin Shun ( 印順導師 ; Yìn Shùn dǎoshī ) a proponent of Humanistic Buddhism , who exhorted her to "work for Buddhism and for all sentient beings". The organisation began with a motto of "instructing the rich and saving the poor" as a group of thirty housewives who donated a small amount of money each day to care for needy families.

[ 126 ] Hsing Yun (1927-2023), founded the Fo Guang Shan an international Chinese Buddhist new religious movement based in Taiwan in 1967. The order promotes Humanistic Buddhism . Fo Guang Shan also calls itself the International Buddhist Progress Society.  The headquarters of Fo Guang Shan, located in Dashu District , Kaohsiung , is the largest Buddhist monastery in Taiwan. Hsing Yun's stated position within Fo Guang Shan is that it is an "amalgam of all Eight Schools of Chinese Buddhism" ( 八宗兼弘 ), including Chan. Fo Guang Shan is the most comprehensive of the major Buddhist organizations of Taiwan, focusing extensively on both social works and religious engagement.

[ 127 ] In Taiwan, these four masters are popularly referred to as the " Four Heavenly Kings " of Taiwanese Buddhism, with their respective organizations Dharma Drum Mountain , Chung Tai Shan , Tzu Chi , and Fo Guang Shan being referred to as the " Four Great Mountains ".

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Spread of Chan Buddhism in Asia [ edit ] See also: Spread of Chan Buddhism in Asia Thiền in Vietnam [ edit ] See also: Vietnamese Thiền and Buddhism in Vietnam According to traditional accounts of Vietnam, in 580 an Indian monk named Vinītaruci ( Vietnamese : Tì-ni-đa-lưu-chi ) traveled to Vietnam after completing his studies with Sengcan , the third patriarch of Chinese Chan. This, then, would be the first appearance of Thiền Buddhism . Other early Thiền schools included that of Wu Yantong ( Chinese : 無言通 ; Vietnamese : Vô Ngôn Thông ), which was associated with the teachings of Mazu Daoyi, and the Thảo Đường (Caodong), which incorporated nianfo chanting techniques; both were founded by Chinese monks.

Seon in Korea [ edit ] See also: Korean Seon and Korean Buddhism Seon was gradually transmitted into Korea during the late Silla period (7th through 9th centuries) as Korean monks of predominantly Hwaeom ( Korean : 화엄종 ; Hanja : 華嚴宗 ) and East Asian Yogācāra ( Korean : 유식종 ; Hanja : 唯識宗 ) background began to travel to China to learn the newly developing tradition. Seon received its most significant impetus and consolidation from the Goryeo monk Jinul (知訥) (1158–1210), who established a reform movement and introduced kōan practice to Korea. Jinul established the Songgwangsa (松廣寺) as a new center of pure practice.

Zen in Japan [ edit ] See also: Japanese Zen Zen was not introduced as a separate school in Japan until the 12th century when Eisai traveled to China and returned to establish a Linji lineage, which is known in Japan as the Rinzai. In 1215, Dōgen , a younger contemporary of Eisai's, journeyed to China himself, where he became a disciple of the Caodong master Rujing . After his return, Dōgen established the Sōtō school, the Japanese branch of Caodong.

The schools of Zen that currently exist in Japan are the Sōtō, Rinzai and Ōbaku . Of these, Sōtō is the largest and Ōbaku the smallest. Rinzai is itself divided into several subschools based on temple affiliation, including Myōshin-ji , Nanzen-ji , Tenryū-ji , Daitoku-ji , and Tōfuku-ji .

Chan in Indonesia [ edit ] See also: Buddhism in Indonesia and Ashin Jinarakkhita In the 20th century, during the First Buddhist revival, missionaries were sent to Indonesia and Malaysia.

Ashin Jinarakkhita , who played a central role in the revival of Indonesian Buddhism, received ordination as a Chan śrāmaṇera on July 29, 1953 [ web 14 ] and received the name Ti Zheng (Te Cheng) from bhikṣu Ben Qing.

Chan in the Western world [ edit ] See also: Buddhism in the West and Japanese Zen § Zen in the Western world Chan has become especially popular in its Japanese form. Although it is difficult to trace when the West first became aware of Chan as a distinct form of Buddhism, the visit of Soyen Shaku , a Japanese Zen monk, to Chicago during the 1893 Parliament of the World's Religions is often pointed to as an event that enhanced its profile in the Western world. It was during the late 1950s and the early 1960s that the number of Westerners pursuing a serious interest in Zen, other than the descendants of Asian immigrants, reached a significant level.

Western Chan lineages [ edit ] See also: Western Zen lineages Covering over 480 acres of land and located in Talmage, California , the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas was founded by Hsuan Hua.

The first Chinese master to teach Westerners in North America was Hsuan Hua , who taught Chan and other traditions of Chinese Buddhism in San Francisco during the early 1960s. He went on to found the City Of Ten Thousand Buddhas , a monastery and retreat center located on a 237-acre (959,000 m 2 ) property near Ukiah, California , and thus founding the Dharma Realm Buddhist Association and the Dharma Realm Buddhist University . Another Chinese Chan teacher with a Western following was Sheng Yen , a master trained in both the Caodong and Linji schools. He first visited the United States in 1978 under the sponsorship of the Buddhist Association of the United States , and subsequently founded the CMC Chan Meditation Center in Queens, New York and the Dharma Drum Retreat Center in Pine Bush, New York .

[ web 15 ] Doctrinal background [ edit ] Main article: Doctrinal background of Zen Though Zen-narrative states that it is a "special transmission outside scriptures" which "did not stand upon words", [ 130 ] Zen does have a rich doctrinal background.

Polarities [ edit ] Classical Chinese Chan is characterised by a set of polarities: [ 131 ] absolute-relative, [ 132 ] Buddha-nature – sunyata, [ 133 ] sudden and gradual enlightenment, [ 134 ] esoteric and exoteric transmission.

[ 135 ] Absolute-relative [ edit ] The Prajnaparamita sutras and Madhyamaka emphasize the non-duality of form and emptiness: "form is emptiness, emptiness is form", as the Heart sutra says.

[ 132 ] This was understood to mean that ultimate reality is not a transcendental realm, but equal to the daily world of relative reality. This idea is consistent  with Chinese culture, which emphasized the mundane world and society. But this does not fully explain how the absolute is present in the relative world. This question is answered in such schemata as the Five Ranks of Tozan, [ 136 ] the Ten Bulls ("the Oxherding Pictures"), and Hakuin's Four ways of knowing .

[ 137 ] The Madhyamaka two truths doctrine and the Yogacara three natures and Trikaya doctrines also give depictions of the interplay between the absolute and the relative.

Buddha-nature and śūnyatā [ edit ] When Buddhism was introduced in China it was understood in native terms. Various sects struggled to attain an understanding of the Indian texts. The Tathāgatagarbha sūtras and the idea of the Buddha-nature were endorsed because of the perceived similarities with the Tao , which was understood as a transcendental reality underlying the world of appearances.

Śūnyatā at first was understood as pointing to the Taoist wu .

[ 32 ] [ 138 ] The doctrine of the Buddha-nature asserts that all sentient beings have Buddha-nature (Skt.

Buddhadhātu , "Buddha Element", "Buddha-Principle"), the element from which awakening springs. The Tathāgatagarbha sutras state that every living being has the potential to realize awakening.

[ 139 ] Hence Buddhism offers salvation to everyone, not only to monks or those who have freed themselves almost completely from karma in previous lives.

[ citation needed ] The Yogacara theory of the Eight Consciousnesses explains how sensory input and the mind create the world we experience, and obscure the alaya-jnana, which is equated to the Buddha-nature.

[ 140 ] When this potential is realized, and the defilements have been eliminated, the Buddha-nature manifests as the Dharmakaya , the absolute reality which pervades everything in the world.

[ 139 ] In this way, it is also the primordial reality from which phenomenal reality springs. When this understanding is idealized, it becomes a transcendental reality beneath the world of appearances.

[ 141 ] Sunyata points to the "emptiness" or no-"thing"-ness of all "things". Though we perceive a world of concrete and discrete objects, designated by names, on close analysis the "thingness" dissolves, leaving them "empty" of inherent existence.

[ 142 ] The Heart sutra , a text from the prajñaparamita sutras, articulates this in the following saying in which the five skandhas are said to be "empty": Yogacara explains this "emptiness" in an analysis of the way we perceive "things". Everything we conceive of is the result of the working of the five skandhas—results of perception, feeling, volition, and discrimination.

[ note 9 ] The five skandhas together compose consciousness. The "things" we are conscious of are "mere concepts", not noumenon .

[ 140 ] It took Chinese Buddhism several centuries to recognize that śūnyatā is not identical to "wu", [ 32 ] [ 143 ] nor does Buddhism postulate a permanent soul.

[ 32 ] The influence of those various doctrinal and textual backgrounds is still discernible in Zen. Zen teachers still refer to Buddha-nature, but the Zen tradition also emphasizes that Buddha-nature is śūnyatā, the absence of an independent and substantial self.

[ 32 ] Sudden and gradual enlightenment [ edit ] Avalokiteśvara sitting in meditation In Zen Buddhism two main views on the way to enlightenment are discernible, namely sudden and gradual enlightenment.

Early Chan recognized the "transcendence of the body and mind", followed by "non-defilement [of] knowledge and perception", or sudden insight into the true nature ( jiànxìng ) followed by gradual purification of intentions.

[ 144 ] In the 8th century, Chan history was effectively refashioned by Shenhui , who created a dichotomy between the so-called East Mountain Teaching or "Northern School", led by Yuquan Shenxiu , and his own line of teaching, which he called the "Southern school".

[ 145 ] Shenhui placed Huineng into prominence as the sixth Chan-patriarch, and emphasized sudden enlightenment , as opposed to the concurrent Northern School's alleged gradual enlightenment .

[ 145 ] According to the sudden enlightenment propagated by Shenhui, insight into true nature is sudden; thereafter there can be no misunderstanding anymore about this true nature.

In the Platform Sutra , the dichotomy between sudden and gradual is reconciled.

[ 146 ] Guifeng Zongmi , fifth-generation successor to Shenhui, also softened the edge between sudden and gradual. In his analysis, sudden awakening points to seeing into one's true nature, but is to be followed by a gradual cultivation to attain Buddhahood .

[ 147 ] This gradual cultivation is also recognized by Dongshan Liangjie (Japanese Tōzan ), who described the five ranks of enlightenment.

[ web 16 ] Esoteric and exoteric transmission [ edit ] According to Borup the emphasis on 'mind to mind transmission' is a form of esoteric transmission, in which "the tradition and the enlightened mind is transmitted face to face".

[ 135 ] Metaphorically this can be described as the transmission from a flame from one candle to another candle, [ 135 ] or the transmission from one vein to another.

[ 148 ] Exoteric transmission requires "direct access to the teaching through a personal discovery of one's self. This type of transmission and identification is symbolized by the discovery of a shining lantern, or a mirror." [ 135 ] Chan scripture [ edit ] Main article: Zen and Sutras Chan is deeply rooted in the teachings and doctrines of Mahāyāna Buddhism. What the Chan tradition emphasizes is that the enlightenment of the Buddha came not through intellectual reasoning, but rather through self-realization in Dharma practice and meditation. Therefore, it is held that it is primarily through Dharma practice and meditation that others may attain enlightenment and become Buddhas as well.

A review of the early historical documents and literature of early Chan masters clearly reveals that they were all well-versed in numerous Mahāyāna Buddhist sūtras. For example, in the Platform Sūtra of the Sixth Patriarch , Huineng cites and explains the Diamond Sūtra , the Lotus Sūtra ( Saddharma Puṇḍarīka Sūtra ), the Vimalakīrti Nirdeśa Sūtra , the Śūraṅgama Sūtra , and the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra .

The Chan school had to develop a doctrinal tradition of its own to establish its position.

[ citation needed ] Subsequently, the Chan tradition produced a rich corpus of written literature which has become a part of its practice and teaching. Among the earliest and most widely studied of the specifically Chan texts, dating to at least the 9th century CE, is the Platform Sūtra of the Sixth Patriarch , attributed to Huineng. The most important Chan texts belong to the "encounter dialogue" genre, which developed into various collections of kōans .

Teaching and practice [ edit ] See also: Zen practice Bodhisattva ideal [ edit ] As a school of Mahāyāna Buddhism, Chan draws many of its basic driving concepts from that tradition, such as the Bodhisattva ideal.

Karuṇā is the counterpart of prajna .

Avalokiteśvara embodies the striving for Karuna , compassion.

[ 149 ] [ note 10 ] Central to Chan practice is dhyana or meditation. In the Lin-ji (Rinzai) school this is supplemented with koan study.

Chan meditation [ edit ] In meditation practice, the Chan tradition holds that the very notions of doctrine and teachings create various other notions and appearances (Skt.

saṃjñā ; Ch. 相, xiāng ) that obscure the transcendent wisdom of each being's Buddha-nature. Thus, Chan encourages its practitioners to distrust the very scripture or text being taught to them.

[ 150 ] The process of rediscovery goes under various terms such as "introspection", "a backward step", "turning-about" or "turning the eye inward".

Sitting meditation [ edit ] Main article: Zazen Sitting meditation is called zuòchán (坐禅), zazen in Japanese, both simply meaning "sitting dhyāna ". During this sitting meditation, practitioners usually assume a position such as the lotus position , half-lotus, Burmese, or seiza postures. To regulate the mind, awareness is directed towards counting or watching the breath, or put in the energy center below the navel (see also anapanasati ).

[ web 17 ] Often, a square or round cushion placed on a padded mat is used to sit on; in some other cases, a chair may be used.

At the beginning of the Song dynasty, practice with the koan method became popular, whereas others practiced "silent illumination." [ 151 ] This became the source of some differences in practice between the Linji and Caodong traditions.

Koan practice [ edit ] Main article: Koan A koan (literally "public case") is a story or dialogue, generally related to Chan or other Buddhist histories; the most typical form is an anecdote involving early Chinese Chan masters. These anecdotes involving famous Chan teachers are a practical demonstration of their wisdom, and can be used to test a student's progress in Chan practice. Koans often appear to be paradoxical or linguistically meaningless dialogues or questions. But to Chan Buddhists, the koan is "the place and the time and the event where truth reveals itself" [ 152 ] unobstructed by the oppositions and differentiation of language. Answering a koan requires a student to let go of conceptual thinking and of the logical way we order the world, so that, like creativity in art, the appropriate insight and response arises naturally and spontaneously in the mind.

Chan monasticism [ edit ] Chan developed a distinct monastic system.

Emphasizing daily life [ edit ] As the Chan school grew in China, the monastic discipline also became distinct, focusing on practice through all aspects of life. Temples began emphasizing labor and humility, expanding the training of Chan to include the mundane tasks of daily life. The Chinese Chan master Baizhang (720–814 CE ) left behind a famous saying which had been the guiding principle of his life, "A day without work is a day without food".

[ web 18 ] Sinification of Buddhism in China [ edit ] It was scholar D.T. Suzuki 's contention that a spiritual awakening was always the goal of Chan's training, but that part of what distinguished the tradition as it developed through the centuries in China was a way of life radically different from that of Indian Buddhists. In Indian Buddhism, the tradition of the mendicant prevailed, but Suzuki explained that in China social circumstances led to the development of a temple and training-center system in which the abbot and the monks all performed mundane tasks. These included food gardening or farming, carpentry, architecture, housekeeping, administration (or community direction), and the practice of Traditional Chinese medicine . Consequently, the enlightenment sought in Chan had to stand up well to the demands and potential frustrations of everyday life.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] See also [ edit ] Blue Cliff Record Hua Tou Buddhism Outline of Buddhism Timeline of Buddhism List of Buddhists Chinese Buddhism Japanese Zen Yiduan Putong Temple Notes [ edit ] ^ McRae gives no further information on this "Hubei faction". It may be the continuation of Shenxiu's "Northern School". See Nadeau 2012 p.89.

[ 12 ] Hebei was also the place where the Linji branch of chan arose.

[ 13 ] ^ During the Ming dynasty (1368–1644) and the Qing dynasty (1644–1912) Chan was part of a larger, syncretic Buddhist culture. A final phase can be distinguished from the 19th century onward, when western imperialism had a growing influence in South-East Asia, including China. A side effect of this imperial influence was the modernisation of Asian religions, adapting them to western ideas and rhetorical strategies.

[ 19 ] ^ Godard does not provide a source for this quote ^ It first appears in a Chinese text named the Ju-tao an-hsin yao-fang-pien fa-men (JTFM, Instructions on essential expedients for calming the mind and accessing the path), itself a part of the Leng Ch'ieh Shih Tzu Chi (Records of the Masters of the Lankavatara).

[ 64 ] The Records of the Masters of the Lankavatara is associated with the early Chan tradition known as the " East Mountain School " and has been dated to around 713.

[ 67 ] ^ Compare Mazu's "Mind is Buddha" versus "No mind, no Buddha": "When Ch'an Master Fa-ch'ang of Ta-mei Mountain went to see the Patriarch for the first time, he asked, "What is Buddha?" The Patriarch replied, "Mind is Buddha." [On hearing this] Fa-ch'ang had great awakening.

Later he went to live on Ta-mei mountain. When the Patriarch heard that he was residing on the mountain, he sent one of his monks to go there and ask Fa-ch'ang, "What did the Venerable obtain when he saw Ma-tsu, so that he has come to live on this mountain?" Fach'ang said, "Ma-tsu told me that mind is Buddha; so I came to live here." The monk said, "Ma-tsu's teaching has changed recently." Fa-ch'ang asked, "What is the difference?" The monk said, "Nowadays he also says, 'Neither mind nor Buddha."' Fa-ch'ang said, "That old man still hasn't stopped confusing people. You can have 'neither mind nor Buddha,' I only care for 'mind is Buddha."' The monk returned to the Patriarch and reported what has happened. "The plum is ripe." said the Patriarch." [ 69 ] ^ This role-taking is described by the Swedish psychologist of religion Hjalmar Sundén , though McRae does not seem to be aware of this ^ See [ web 10 ] for more information on Jinghui.

^ At least two westerners are, or claim, to be dharma successors to Jing Hui: Lily-Marie Johnson (Ming Qi) [ web 9 ] [ web 11 ] and Daniel Odier .

[ web 12 ] [ web 13 ] ^ Translations do differ, which makes a difference.

Vijñāna can be translated as "consciousness", but also as "discernment".

[ 140 ] ^ Lathouwers 2000 :221 mentions: Blofeld, John (1988), Bodhisattva of compassion - the mystical tradition of kuan Yin . Boston: Shanbhala References [ edit ] ^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. xvii.

^ Kasulis 2003 , p. 24.

^ Hershock, Peter (2019), "Chan Buddhism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-01-17 .

^ a b Cleary 2005 ^ a b c d e f g McRae 2003 .

^ Ferguson 2000 .

^ a b c Ferguson 2000 , p. 3.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 11-15.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 11-21.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 13, 15–17.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 13, 17–18.

^ Nadeau 2012 , p. 89.

^ Yanagida 2009 , p. 63.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 13, 18–19.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 13, 19–21.

^ Gimello 1994 .

^ Welter 2000 .

^ McRae 2003 , p. 13.

^ McMahan 2008 .

^ Maspero 1981 , p. 46.

^ Grigg 1999 .

^ Gu, Guo (2020).

The Essence of Chan . Shambala Publications. pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 9781611808711 .

^ Hinton, David (2020). "Ch1-Tao".

China Root:Taoism, Ch'an, and Original Zen . Shambala Publications. pp.

21– 26.

ISBN 9781611807134 .

^ Deleanu, Florin (1992); Mindfulness of Breathing in the Dhyāna Sūtras . Transactions of the International Conference of Orientalists in Japan (TICOJ) 37, 42-57.

^ Ven. Dr. Yuanci, A Study of the Meditation Methods in the DESM and Other Early Chinese Texts Archived 2013-05-08 at the Wayback Machine , The Buddhist Academy of China.

^ a b c Brown Holt 1995 .

^ Goddard 2007 , p. 10.

^ a b c Fowler 2005 , p. 79.

^ Zhang, Chunni; Lu, Yunfeng; Sheng, He (2021).

"Exploring Chinese folk religion: Popularity, diffuseness, and diversities" .

Chinese Journal of Sociology .

7 (4): 575– 592.

doi : 10.1177/2057150X211042687 .

^ Goddard 2007 , p. 11.

^ a b c Oh 2000 .

^ a b c d e Lai 2003a .

^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. 65.

^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. 64.

^ Dumoulin 2005a , pp. 70&74.

^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. 167.

^ a b Dumoulin 2005a , p. 168.

^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. 45–49.

^ Lai 2003a , p. 8.

^ Lai 2003b , p. 11.

^ Lai 2003b , p. 8.

^ a b Lai 2003b .

^ McRae 2003 :122 ^ Dumoulin 2005a ^ Dumoulin 2005a :8–9, 68, 166–167, 169–172 ^ Broughton 1999 , p. 54-55.

^ Broughton 1999 , p. 8.

^ Queen II, Edward L.; Prothero, Stephen R.

; Shattuck Jr., Gardiner H. (1996).

The Encyclopedia of American Religious History . Vol. 2. New York: Proseworks. p. 749.

ISBN 0-8160-3545-8 .

^ a b c d e f g h i McRae 2003 ^ a b c d Lai 1985 .

^ a b Lai 2003b , p. 17.

^ McRae 2004 .

^ a b Chang 1967 .

^ Suzuki 1935 .

^ Yampolski 2003b :6 ^ Yampolski 1967 , p. 29, note 87.

^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. 52.

^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. 85-94.

^ Dumoulin 2005a :85–90 ^ Zvelebil 1987 , p. 125–126.

^ a b McRae 2003 :29 ^ McRae 2003 :32 ^ a b c Lai 2003a , p. 17.

^ a b c d McRae 1986 , p. 143.

^ Sharf 2014 , p. 939, 951.

^ Sharf 2014 , p. 939.

^ Robert E. Buswell Jr. (2017).

The Formation of Ch'an Ideology in China and Korea: The Vajrasamadhi-Sutra, a Buddhist Apocryphon.

Princeton University Press, p. 141.

^ Sharf 2014 , p. 945-950.

^ Cheng Chien Bhikshu 1992 .

^ a b c d Dumoulin 2005a .

^ McRae 2003 :33–36 ^ a b McRae 2003 :34 ^ a b c d Lai 2003b , p. 18.

^ Kasulis 2003 :25–26 ^ McRae 2003 :48 ^ McRae 2003 :49 ^ 禅宗研究一百年 Archived 2013-09-16 at the Wayback Machine ^ Yampolski 2003a :9 ^ Gregory 1991 , p. 279.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 63.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 62.

^ a b Kasulis 2003 , p. 26–28.

^ Huaijin 1997 , p. 92.

^ a b Kalupahana 1992 , p. 228–236.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 123.

^ Van Schaik, Tibetan Zen, page 1.

^ a b Sam van Schaik, Where Chan and Tantra Meet: Buddhist Syncretism in Dunhuang ^ Zigmond, The Lost Tradition of Tibetan Zen
Dan Zigmond reviews Sam van Schaik’s The Lost Tradition of Tibetan Zen, https://tricycle.org/magazine/lost-tradition-tibetan-zen/ ^ Huaijin 1997 , p. 95.

^ Yampolski 2003a :11 ^ Kasulis 2003 , pp. 28–29.

^ Heine 2008 ^ a b Faure 1997 , p. 73.

^ a b Faure 1997 , p. 74.

^ Gregory 2002 .

^ Dumoulin 2005a , pp. 165–166.

^ Wegner 2001 .

^ Leighton 2000 .

^ a b Yampolski 2003a :15 ^ Welter 2000 , p. 86–87.

^ McRae 2003 :119–120 ^ Yampolski 2003a .

^ a b c d e Welter 2006 .

^ Jones 2010 .

^ Young 2009 .

^ Yampolski 2003b :266 ^ Yampolski 2003b :267 ^ Isshū & Sasaki 1993 :13 ^ Kasulis 2003 :30 ^ McRae 2003 , p. 130.

^ a b McRae 2003 :131 ^ Yampolski 2003a :20 ^ Dumoulin 2005a :256–257 ^ Buswell, Robert; Lopez, Donald (2014).

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism . Princeton University Press. p. 1056.

ISBN 9780691157863 .

^ Sharf 2002 ^ Ma, Yung-fen (2011).

The Revival of Tiantai Buddhism in the Late Ming: On the Thought of Youxi Chuandeng (1554-1628) (Thesis). Columbia University.

doi : 10.7916/d81g0t8p .

^ Sharf 2002 .

^ Dumoulin 2005b , p. 299.

^ Meng-Tat Chia 2011 .

^ a b c d e Feuchtwang 2010 , p. 189.

^ Laliberte 2011 .

^ "Chan Newsletter No. 106, February 1995" .

^ "The Mind Dharma of the Sixth Patriarch" (PDF) .

chancenter.org . 2024-08-16.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-09-28 . Retrieved 2025-05-12 .

^ Kraft, Kenneth (1988).

Zen: Tradition and Transition . Grove Press.

ISBN 080213162X .

^ "The Origin of Tzu Chi: Work for Buddhism and for All Living Beings" . Tzu Chi Merit . Retrieved July 5, 2024 .

^ "Biography of Dharma Master Cheng Yen" .

tw.tzuchi.org . Archived from the original on 23 August 2016 . Retrieved 15 September 2016 .

^ Schak, David; Hsiao, Hsin-Huang Michael (2005-06-01).

"Taiwan's Socially Engaged Buddhist Groups" .

China Perspectives (in French).

2005 (59).

doi : 10.4000/chinaperspectives.2803 .

ISSN 1996-4617 .

^ "Come to Taiwan,Return with good memories" . Info.taiwan.net.tw. Archived from the original on 2012-02-27 . Retrieved 2012-02-15 .

^ Shuai, J. J.; Chen, H. C.; Chang, C. H. (2010-12-01). "Visualization of the Taiwaness Buddhism web based on social network analysis".

2010 International Computer Symposium (ICS2010) . pp.

187– 191.

doi : 10.1109/COMPSYM.2010.5685523 .

ISBN 978-1-4244-7639-8 .

S2CID 18858823 .

^ Dumoulin 2005a , p. 85–94.

^ McRae 2003 , pp. 138–142.

^ a b Liang-Chieh 1986 :9 ^ Kasulis 2003 , pp. 26–29.

^ McRae 2003 , pp. 123–138.

^ a b c d Borup 2008 , p. 9.

^ Kasulis 2003 :29 ^ Low 2006 .

^ Swanson 1993 , p. 373.

^ a b Wayman & Wayman 1990 .

^ a b c Kalupahana 1992 .

^ Kalupahana 1994 .

^ Kalupahana 1994 , p. 160–169.

^ Swanson 1993 .

^ McRae 2003 , p. 88–92.

^ a b McRae 2003 , p. 54–56.

^ McRae 2003 , p. 60-67.

^ Gregory 1991 .

^ Faure 2000 , p. 58.

^ Lathouwers 2000 .

^ Dumoulin, Heisig & Knitter (2005) , pp. 68, 70–73, 167–168 ^ Blyth 1966 .

^ Shimano 1991 , p. 152.

^ Suzuki 1955 , p. 155–156.

^ Suzuki 1970 .

Sources [ edit ] Printed sources [ edit ] Blyth, R. H. (1966), Zen and Zen Classics, Volume 4 , Tokyo: Hokuseido Press Borup, Jørn (2008), Japanese Rinzai Zen Buddhism: Myōshinji, a Living Religion , Brill Broughton, Jeffrey L. (1999), The Bodhidharma Anthology: The Earliest Records of Zen , Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-21972-4 Brown Holt, Linda (1995), "From India to China: Transformations in Buddhist Philosophy" , Qi: The Journal of Traditional Eastern Health & Fitness Buswell, Robert E. (1991), "The "Short-cut" Approach of K'an-hua Meditation: The Evolution of a Practical Subitism in Chinese Ch'an Buddhism", in Peter N. Gregory (ed.), Sudden and Gradual. Approaches to Enlightenment in Chinese Thought , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited Buswell, Robert E (1993), Ch'an Hermeneutics: A Korean View. In: Donald S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.)(1993), Buddhist Hermeneutics , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Chang, Chung-Yuan (1967).

"Ch'an Buddhism: Logical and Illogical" .

Philosophy East and West .

17 (1/4): 37– 49.

doi : 10.2307/1397043 .

JSTOR 1397043 . Archived from the original on 2011-05-24 . Retrieved 2011-12-13 .

Cheng Chien Bhikshu (1992), "Introduction", Sun-Face Buddha. The Teachings of Ma-tsu and the Hung-chou School of Ch'an , Asian Humanities Press Cleary, Thomas (2005), Classics of Buddhism and Zen: Volume One , Boston, MA: Shambhala publications, ISBN 978-1-57062-831-3 Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005a), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 1: India and China , World Wisdom Books, ISBN 978-0-941532-89-1 Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005b), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 2: Japan , World Wisdom Books, ISBN 978-0-941532-90-7 Dumoulin, Heinrich; Heisig, James W.; Knitter, Paul (2005).

Zen Buddhism: A History (India and China) . World Wisdom.

ISBN 0-941532-89-5 .

Faure, Bernard (1997), The Will to Orthodoxy: A Critical Genealogy of Northern Chan Buddhism , Stanford University Press Faure, Bernard (2000), Visions of Power. Imaging Medieval Japanese Buddhism , Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press Ferguson, Andy (2000), Zen's Chinese Heritage , Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications, ISBN 978-0-86171-163-5 Feuchtwang, Stephen (2010), The Anthropology of Religion, Charisma and Ghosts: Chinese Lessons for Adequate Theory , Walter de Gruyter Fowler, Merv (2005), Zen Buddhism: Beliefs and Practices , Sussex Academic Press Gimello, Robert M. (1994), "Marga and Culture: Learning, Letters, and Liberation in Northern Sung Ch'an.", in Buswell; Gimello (eds.), Paths to Liberation , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, pp.

475– 505 Goddard, Dwight (2007), History of Ch'an Buddhism previous to the times of Hui-neng (Wie-lang). In: A Buddhist Bible , Forgotten Books, ISBN 9781605061047 Gregory, Peter N. (1991), "Sudden Enlightenment Followed by Gradual Cultivation: Tsung-mi's Analysis of mind", in Peter N. Gregory (ed.), Sudden and Gradual. Approaches to Enlightenment in Chinese Thought , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited Gregory, Peter N. (2002), Tsung-mi and the Sinification of Buddhism , University of Hawai’i Press, Kuroda Institute, (originally published Princeton University Press, 1991, Princeton, N.J.), ISBN 978-0-8248-2623-9 Grigg, Ray (1999), The Ta of Zen , Edison, NJ: Alva Press Heine, Steven (2008), Zen Skin, Zen Marrow Isshū, Miura; Sasaki, Ruth F. (1993), The Zen Koan , New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, ISBN 978-0-15-699981-6 Huaijin, Nan (1997), Basic Buddhism: exploring Buddhism and Zen , Samuel Weiser Jones, Charles B. (2010), "Review of Monks, Rulers and Literati: The Political Ascendancy of Chan Buddhism" (PDF) , Journal of Buddhist Ethics Kalupahana, David J. (1992), The Principles of Buddhist Psychology , Delhi: ri Satguru Publications Kalupahana, David J. (1994), A history of Buddhist philosophy , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited Kasulis, Thomas P. (2003), Ch'an Spirituality. In: Buddhist Spirituality. Later China, Korea, Japan and the Modern World; edited by Takeuchi Yoshinori , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Lai, Whalen (1985), "Ma-Tsu Tao-I And The Unfolding Of Southern Zen" , Japanese Journal of Religious Studies , 12 (2/3): 173– 192, doi : 10.18874/jjrs.12.2-3.1985.173-192 Lai, Whalen (2003a), "Buddhism in China: A Historical Survey" (PDF) , in Cua, Antonio S. (ed.), Encyclopedia of Chinese Philosophy , New York: Routledge, archived from the original (PDF) on November 12, 2014 Lai, Hongyi Harry (2003b), The Religious Revival in China. In: Copenhagen Journal of Asian Studies 18 Laliberte, Andre (2011), Buddhist Revival under State Watch, in: Journal of Current Chinese Affairs, 40, 2,107-134 , archived from the original on 2019-12-25 , retrieved 2013-03-29 Lathouwers, Ton (2000), Meer dan een mens kan doen. Zentoespraken , Rotterdam: Asoka Leighton, Taigen Daniel (2000), Cultivating the Empty Field: The Silent Illumination of Zen Master Hongzhi , Tuttle Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8048-3240-3 Liang-Chieh (1986), The Record of Tung-shan , Kuroda Institute (translator: William F. Powell) Low, Albert (2006), Hakuin on Kensho. The Four Ways of Knowing , Boston & London: Shambhala Maspero, Henri (1981), Taoism and Chinese Religion , University of Massachusetts Press , ISBN 978-0-87023-308-1 McMahan, David L. (2008), The Making of Buddhist Modernism , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-518327-6 McRae, John (1986), The Northern School and the Formation of Early Chʻan Buddhism , University of Hawaii Press McRae, John (2003), Seeing Through Zen , The University Press Group Ltd McRae, John (2004), Seeing through Zen. Encounter, Transformation, and Genealogy in Chinese Chan Buddhism , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-23798-8 Meng-Tat Chia, Jack (2011), "A Review of Enlightenment in Dispute: The Reinvention of Chan Buddhism in Seventeenth-Century China" (PDF) , Journal of Buddhist Ethics , 18 Nadeau, Randall L. (2012), The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Chinese Religions , John Wiley & Sons Oh, Kang-nam (2000), "The Taoist Influence on Hua-yen Buddhism: A Case of the Scinicization of Buddhism in China" , Chung-Hwa Buddhist Journal , 13 Sharf, Robert H. (2002), "On Pure Land Buddhism and Ch'an/Pure Land Syncretism in Medieval China" , T'oung Pao , 88 (4/5): 282– 331, doi : 10.1163/156853202100368398 , ISSN 0082-5433 , JSTOR 4528903 Sharf, Robert (October 2014), "Mindfullness and Mindlessness in Early Chan" (PDF) , Philosophy East & West , 64 (4): 933– 964, doi : 10.1353/pew.2014.0074 , S2CID 144208166 [ permanent dead link ] Shimano, Eido T. (1991), Points of Departure: Zen Buddhism with a Rinzai View , Livingston Manor, NY: The Zen Studies Society Press, ISBN 978-0-9629246-0-6 Suzuki, D.T.

(1935), Manual of Zen Buddhism Suzuki, D.T. (1955), Studies in Zen , New York: Delta Suzuki, D.T. (1970), Zen and Japanese Culture , New York: Bollingen/Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-09849-4 Suzuki, D.T. (2004), The Training of the Zen Buddhist Monk , Tokyo: Cosimo, inc., ISBN 978-1-59605-041-9 Swanson, Paul L. (1993), "The Spirituality of Emptiness in Early Chinese Buddhism", in Takeuchi Yoshinori (ed.), Buddhist Spirituality. Indian, Southeast Asian, Tibetan, Early Chinese , New York: Crossroad Torei (2010), The Undying Lamp of Zen. The Testament of Zen Master Torei , Boston & London: Shambhala (translator: Thomas Cleary) Verboven, Lucette (1992), Je kunt er niet uitvallen. Interview met Ton Lathouwers. In: Zen, jaargang 13, januari 1992, nummer 48 Wayman, Alex; Wayman, Hideko (1990).

The Lion's Roar of Queen Śrīmālā: A Buddhist Scripture on the Tathāgatagarbha Theory . Motilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 9788120807310 .

Wegner, Michael (2001), Introduction to "Branching streams flow in the darkness: Zen talks on the Sandokai"by Shunryū Suzuki , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-23212-9 Welter, Albert (2006), The Formation of the Linji lu: An Examination of the Guangdeng lu/Sijia yulu and Linji Huizhao Chanshi yulu. Versions of the Linji lu in Historical Context (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-03-16 Welter, Albert (2000), Mahakasyapa's smile. Silent Transmission and the Kung-an (Koan) Tradition. In: Steven Heine and Dale S. Wright (eds)(2000): "The Koan. Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism , Oxford: Oxford University Press Yampolski, Philip B. (1967), The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. Translated with notes by Philip B. Yampolski , Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-08361-4 Yampolski, Philip (2003a), Chan. A Historical Sketch. In: Buddhist Spirituality. Later China, Korea, Japan and the Modern World; edited by Takeuchi Yoshinori , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Yampolski, Philip (2003b), Zen. A Historical Sketch. In: Buddhist Spirituality. Later China, Korea, Japan and the Modern World; edited by Takeuchi Yoshinori , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Yanagida, Seizan (2009), Historical Introduction to The Record of Linji. In: The record of Linji, translated by Ruth Fuller Sasakia e.a. Pages 59–115 (PDF) , University of Hawaii Press, archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-06-22 , retrieved 2021-05-29 Yen, Chan Master Sheng (1996), Dharma Drum: The Life and Heart of Ch'an Practice , Boston & London: Shambhala Young, Stuart (2009), Linji Lu and Chinese Orthodoxy. Review of "Albert Welter. The Linji lu and the Creation of Chan Orthodoxy: The Development of Chan's Records of Sayings Literature.

Zeuschner, Robert B. (1976), A Selected Bibliography on Chan Buddhism in China, Journal of Chinese Philosophy V. 3, (1976) pp. 299-311 Zhu, Caifang (2003), Buddhism in China Today: The Example of the Bai Lin Chan Monastery. In: Perspectives, Volume 4, No.2, June 2003 (PDF) , archived from the original on 2010-09-29 , retrieved 2013-03-29 Zvelebil, K.V. (1987), "The Sound of the One Hand", Journal of the American Oriental Society , 107 (1): 125– 126, doi : 10.2307/602960 , JSTOR 602960 Web-sources [ edit ] ^ "Thich Hang Dat, A REAPPRAISAL OF KUMĀRAJĪVA'S ROLE IN MEDIEVAL CHINESE BUDDHISM: AN EXAMINATION OF KUMĀRAJĪVA'S TRANSLATION TEXT ON "THE ESSENTIAL EXPLANATION OF THE METHOD OF DHYANA" " (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 18, 2015.

^ Soothill, William Edward; Hodous, Lewis (1995), A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms , London: RoutledgeCurzon ^ "Tstuomu Kambe: Bodhidharma (around 440? - 528?). A collection of stories from Chinese literature" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-11-06 . Retrieved 2011-12-13 .

^ See James D. Sellmann & Hans Julius Schneider (2003), Liberating Language in Linji and Wittgenstein . Asian Philosophy, Vol. 13, Nos. 2/3, 2003. Notes 26 and 41 ^ a b c "Buddhism and Buddhists in China - IX. Present-Day Buddhism (by Lewis Hodus)" .

www.authorama.com .

^ "Voice of Longquan, Guanghua Monastery " . Archived from the original on December 18, 2012.

^ "RELIGION-CHINA: Buddhism Enjoys A Revival" .

Inter Press Service . November 30, 2010.

^ "Erica B. Mitchell (201), A Revival of Buddhism?

" . Archived from the original on July 14, 2014.

^ a b "Dharma" .

www.jaysquare.com .

^ "Modern Chan: A short biography of Chan Master Jinghui" . December 8, 2008.

^ "intro" .

www.jaysquare.com .

^ Biography (at bottom of the page) ^ "zhaozhou-chan, Biography of Daniel Odier " . Archived from the original on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2013-03-27 .

^ "Buddhism in Indonesia, Past and Present Ven. Ditthisampanno" .

www.buddhismandaustralia.com . Archived from the original on March 9, 2013.

^ Dharma Drum Mountain.

Who Is Master Sheng-yen .

^ Says, Anonymous.

"Tozan Ryokai's Verses on the Five Ranks" .

^ Sheng, Yen.

"Fundamentals of Meditation" . Archived from the original on 13 June 2010.

^ "Digital Dictionary of Buddhism" . Retrieved 2008-03-26 , entry "Baizhang Huaihai".

Further reading [ edit ] Modern classics D.T. Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, 3 vols Thomas Cleary, Zen Mind, Buddha Mind J. C. Cleary, Swampland Flowers: The Letters and Lectures of Zen Master Ta Hui Classic history Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 1: India and China . World Wisdom Books.

ISBN 978-0-941532-89-1 Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 2: Japan . World Wisdom Books.

ISBN 978-0-941532-90-7 Critical Zen-studies Jeffrey Broughton, Zongmi on Chan .

Sung Bae Park, Buddhist Faith and Sudden Enlightenment .

External links [ edit ] Look up 禪 in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up 禅 in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Zen proverbs .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chán Buddhism .

Look up zen in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Oversight Zen Buddhism WWW Virtual Library The Zen Site Overview of Chan centers Zen centers of the world Zen centers Specific Chan centers Western Ch'an Fellowship Official Website Dharma Drum Retreat Center (New York) Official Website. Established by Chan Master Sheng Yen.

Texts Sacred-text.com's collection of Zen texts Buddhanet's collection of Zen texts Shambhala Sun Zen Articles Archived 2008-09-24 at the Wayback Machine Booklets from Fo Guang Shan History Buddhism and Confucianism in Chan Sudden Approach: A Cunning Cultural Paradigm History of Zen Buddhism Zen history Zen Quick Facts Critical Chan Research Steven Heine (2007), A Critical Survey of Works on Zen since Yampolsky Homepage of Robert H. Sharf Zhi, Chuan (2019).

Exploring Chán: An Introduction to the Religious and Mystical Tradition of Chinese Buddhism . Songlark Publishing. p. 472.

ISBN 978-1-73331-430-5 .

v t e Zen Main articles Zen Chan Buddhism Korean Seon Japanese Zen Vietnamese Thiền Zen in the United States Doctrinal background Buddha-nature East Asian Yogācāra Śūnyatā Influential Sutras Zen scriptures Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra Diamond Sutra Heart Sūtra Vimalakirti Sutra Avatamsaka Sutra Śūraṅgama Sūtra Teachings Ten Bulls Shikantaza Five Ranks Sudden Enlightenment Kenshō Satori Three Mysterious Gates Four Ways of Knowing Practice Zazen Shikantaza Koan practice " Who is the master that sees and hears?

" Sesshin Stopping thought Zazenkai Ango Persons Classical Chan Bodhidharma Dazu Huike Jianzhi Sengcan Dayi Daoxin Hongren Nanyue Huairang Mazu Daoyi Baizhang Huaihai Huangbo Xiyun Linji Yixuan Dongshan Liangjie Huineng Baizhang Huaihai Nanyang Huizhong Dahui Zonggao Xuefeng Yicun Yunmen Wenyan Dongshan Shouchu Yuanwu Keqin Qingyuan Xingsi Shitou Xiqian Yaoshan Weiyan Yunyan Tansheng Yunju Daoying Tongan Daopi Tongan Guanzhi Liangshan Yuanguan Dayang Jingxuan Touzi Yiqing Furong Daokai Danxia Zichun Hongzhi Zhengjue Wansong Xingxiu Zhenxie Qingliao Tiantong Zongjue Xuedou Zhijian Tiantong Rujing Xueting Fuyu Modern Lingji Xuyun Taixu Nan Huai-Chin Yuanying Benhuan Sheng-yen Hsing Yun Cheng Yen Wei Chueh Yicheng Shi Yinshun Modern Caodong Xuyun Dongchu Sheng-yen Modern Guiyang Xuyun Hsuan Hua Yicheng Chuanyin Traditional Zen Dōgen Hakuin Ekaku Modern Rinzai Imakita Kosen Soyen Shaku Sokei-an D. T. Suzuki Soen Nakagawa Keido Fukushima Modern Sōtō Kōdō Sawaki Shunryū Suzuki Sanbo Kyodan Hakuun Yasutani Hugo Enomiya-Lassalle Robert Aitken Philip Kapleau White Plum Asanga Taizan Maezumi Dennis Merzel German Zen Karlfried Graf Dürckheim Muhō Noelke Korean Seon Jinul Seungsahn Seongcheol Daewon Vietnamese Thiền Pháp Hiền Vạn Hạnh Trần Nhân Tông Pháp Loa Thích Nhất Hạnh Thích Thanh Từ Chinese Chán Historical sects Five Houses of Chán East Mountain Teaching Hongzhou school Fayan school Yunmen school Extant sects Linji school Caodong school Guiyang school Contemperory Organizations Buddha's Light International Association Four Heavenly Kings (Taiwan) Dharma Drum Mountain Fo Guang Shan Tzu Chi Foundation Chung Tai Shan Dharma Realm Buddhist Association City of Ten Thousand Buddhas Academic organizations Dharma Realm Buddhist University Japanese Zen Historical sects Nōnin Fuke-shū Niō Zen Extant sects Sōtō Rinzai Ōbaku Lay organizations Sanbo Kyodan Ningen Zen Kyodan Academic organizations Kyoto School Korean Seon Historical sects Nine mountain schools Contemporary sects Taego Order Jogye Order Vietnamese Thiền Extant sects Trúc Lâm Wu Yantong Temple Vạn Hạnh Monastery Trúc Lâm Monastery of Da Lat USA Zen Shunryū Suzuki lineage Shunryū Suzuki Zentatsu Richard Baker Mel Weitsman San Francisco Zen Center Tassajara Zen Mountain Center Kōdō Sawaki lineage Kōdō Sawaki Antai-ji Kōshō Uchiyama Shōhaku Okumura Yasutani lineage Hakuun Yasutani Sanbo Kyodan Robert Baker Aitken John Tarrant Taizan Maezumi Zen Center of Los Angeles White Plum Asanga Bernie Glassman John Daido Loori Geoffrey Shugen Arnold Zen Peacemakers Joko Beck Dennis Merzel Kanzeon Zen Center Philip Kapleau lineage Philip Kapleau Rochester Zen Center Toni Packer Other Sōtō lineages Sōyū Matsuoka Dainin Katagiri Kōbun Chino Otogawa Gyokuko Carlson Gudō Wafu Nishijima Brad Warner Soen Nakagawa lineage Soen Nakagawa Eido Tai Shimano Zen Studies Society Dai Bosatsu Zendo Kongo-ji Other Rinzai or Linji lineages Kyozan Joshu Sasaki Omori Sogen Shodo Harada Keido Fukushima Pan-lineage Soto Zen Buddhist Association European Zen Sanbo Kyodan Hugo Enomiya-Lassalle Kōdō Sawaki lineage Taisen Deshimaru Other Sōtō lineages Houn Jiyu-Kennett Throssel Hole Buddhist Abbey Norwich Zen Buddhist Priory Zendo Kyodan Shinzan Miyamae Roshi Other Rinzai or Linji lineages Kaishin Inshu Hierarchy and titles Novice Unsui Buddhist initiation ritual Attendants Jikijitsu Jisha Priest Oshō Teacher Sensei Rōshi Zen master Institutional organisation Zen ranks and hierarchy Dharma transmission Zen lineage charts Temples Main Sōtō Temples Eihei-ji Sōji-ji Antai-ji Main Rinzai Temples Myōshin-ji Daitoku-ji Tōfuku-ji Zen literature Classic Long Scroll of the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices Platform Sutra Xinxin Ming Cantongqi Denkoroku The Gateless Barrier Shōbōgenzō Modern Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind The Way of Zen Three Pillars of Zen Critical Zen at War Cultural influence Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance Related schools Huayan Tiantai Pure Land Buddhism Academic research Heinrich Dumoulin Masao Abe Steven Heine William Bodiford Zen Buddhism Zen Buddhists Zen texts v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chan_Buddhism&oldid=1300883582 " Categories : Chan Buddhism Yogacara Buddhism in China Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 22:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chan Buddhism 26 languages Add topic

