Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot Toggle Plot subsection 1.1 Continuity 2 Production Toggle Production subsection 2.1 Casting 3 Broadcast and reception Toggle Broadcast and reception subsection 3.1 Critical reception 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents World Enough and Time ( Doctor Who ) 6 languages Español Français 日本語 Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2017 Doctor Who episode 275a – "World Enough and Time" Doctor Who episode Cast Doctor Peter Capaldi – Twelfth Doctor Companions Pearl Mackie – Bill Potts Matt Lucas – Nardole Others Michelle Gomez – Missy John Simm – The Master Oliver Lansley – Jorj Paul Brightwell – Surgeon Alison Lintott – Nurse Nicholas Briggs – Voice of the Cybermen Production Directed by Rachel Talalay Written by Steven Moffat Produced by Peter Bennett Executive producer(s) Steven Moffat Brian Minchin Music by Murray Gold Series Series 10 Running time 1st of 2-part story, 46 minutes First broadcast 24 June 2017 ( 2017-06-24 ) Chronology ← Preceded by " The Eaters of Light " Followed by → " The Doctor Falls " List of episodes (2005–present) " World Enough and Time " is the eleventh and penultimate episode of the tenth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was written by Steven Moffat , directed by Rachel Talalay , and was broadcast on 24 June 2017 on BBC One . The episode was the first part of a two-part story, concluding with " The Doctor Falls ".

In the episode, the Doctor , Bill , Nardole , and Missy answer a distress call from a gigantic ship trying to escape a black hole . "World Enough and Time" is the first multi- Master episode in the show's televised history, as it features both Missy and an earlier incarnation last seen in the 2009–2010 serial " The End of Time ". It also features the return of the original Mondasian Cybermen , first seen on-screen in the 1966 serial The Tenth Planet , which was the Cybermen's debut.

The episode was watched by 5.00 million viewers and received much critical praise, with many claiming it as the best of the tenth series. Aspects that were met with praise were the performances and the characterisation of Missy. However, many criticised the BBC for revealing the cliffhanger early on.

Plot [ edit ] The Doctor proposed to test Missy 's atonement by having her, alongside Bill and Nardole , answer a distress call. They arrive via the TARDIS on a giant colony ship reversing away from a black hole . They are held at gunpoint by the solitary crew member, Jorj, who demands to know which of them is human, fearing creatures that are arriving by the lift. Bill admits to being human and Jorj shoots her out of fear. Humanoid figures, wearing cloth masks and hospital gowns, take Bill's body away claiming they can restore her.

The Doctor, Missy, and Nardole learn from Jorj that, two days previously, some of the human bridge crew had gone down to the lower level of the ship to start the engine reversal, but they never returned. Jorj claims the ship only had 50 people two days ago, but Nardole shows there are actually thousands of life forms below. They are the descendants of the crew: due to time dilation from the black hole, time moves faster at the ship's lower levels than the bridge 400 miles away, and years have already passed for Bill. The Doctor incapacitates Jorj and, along with Missy and Nardole, departs below in a lift.

Another of the patients waiting to be "upgraded", on display at a Doctor Who exhibition.

Bill awakens in a hospital, where she finds that she has been fitted with a mechanical device that serves as her replacement heart. Razor, one of the hospital's employees, shows her around and explains that some of the patients are waiting to be "upgraded" for "Operation Exodus", to escape the polluted air of the ship's lower levels due to contamination from the fuel. Years later, they see footage from the bridge of the Doctor coming down the lift. However, Razor then tricks Bill into becoming the next "upgrade" subject.

Upon arriving, the Doctor and Nardole explore the hospital while Missy tries to determine the origin of the colony ship. She finds the vessel is from a "twin" of Earth, Mondas . Razor approaches her and insists she has been here before, and that the Doctor will never forgive her for what has happened to Bill. When she denies it, Razor removes his disguise revealing himself to be the Saxon Master , Missy's earlier incarnation. The Doctor and Nardole find an operating theatre where a "Mondasian" Cyberman , from when the Doctor first encountered them, emerges from a closet. The Cyberman identifies itself as formerly being Bill Potts.

This episode featured the return of the original Mondasian Cybermen, not seen since 1966 in The Tenth Planet . They are shown here at a Doctor Who exhibition.

Continuity [ edit ] The Master says that he loves disguises, a fondness which dates back to his debut appearance in Terror of the Autons when he posed as a telephone engineer.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He also mentions being "someone's former Prime Minister"; the Master was elected Prime Minister during " The Sound of Drums " / " Last of the Time Lords ", under the alias Harold Saxon.

[ 1 ] Production [ edit ] The read-through for this episode took place on 21 February 2017, and the main shooting was from 24 February through 28 March.

[ 3 ] On 6 March 2017, it was announced the original Mondasian Cybermen from The Tenth Planet would be returning for the finale of the tenth series.

[ 4 ] Bill is converted into a Cyberman matching the Mondasian design.

[ 5 ] The episode's title comes from the Andrew Marvell poem " To His Coy Mistress ": "Had we but world enough and time, / This coyness, lady, were no crime." [ 3 ] Casting [ edit ] On 6 April 2017, the BBC confirmed that John Simm would be returning as the Master in the tenth series , appearing alongside his successor in the role, Michelle Gomez , for the first story in the programme's history with more than one incarnation of the Master at the same time.

[ 6 ] Broadcast and reception [ edit ] The episode was watched by 3.37 million viewers overnight, one of the lowest ratings for the series. Compared to other programmes that aired on the same night, Doctor Who had an audience share of 22%.

[ 7 ] The episode received 5.00 million views overall, and it received an Appreciation Index of 85, the joint highest score of Twelfth Doctor episodes along with " Dark Water " from the eighth series .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Professional ratings Aggregate scores Source Rating Rotten Tomatoes (Average Score) 9.4/10 [ 10 ] Rotten Tomatoes (Tomatometer) 100% [ 10 ] Review scores Source Rating The A.V. Club A− [ 11 ] Entertainment Weekly B+ [ 12 ] SFX Magazine [ 13 ] TV Fanatic [ 14 ] IndieWire A− [ 15 ] IGN 9.0 [ 16 ] Vulture [ 17 ] Radio Times [ 18 ] Daily Mirror [ 19 ] "World Enough and Time" received overwhelmingly positive reviews from television critics, with many of them hailing it the best episode of the tenth series, but also criticizing the BBC for spoiling the cliffhanger early on.

[ 20 ] On Rotten Tomatoes , 100% of 17 reviews are positive for the episode. The website's consensus reads, "'World Enough and Time' sets up the conclusion of Doctor Who ' s tenth season with a cliffhanger episode that deftly blends many of the show's most important ingredients." [ 10 ] Bradley Russell from SFX Magazine gave the episode a rating of 4 stars out of 5. Stating that the episode was about "playing with expectation", he stated that the episode was the regular mix of science-fiction scares and horror, but that everything felt very slightly out of place. He did, however, compliment the ending of the episode and how it gave more ample motivation to watch the finale episode. He stated that the opening scene of the regeneration was a "cheap tactic" with no answers given, but the idea of Missy filling the Doctor's shoes was far more interesting. He also stated that some scenes were "bordering on unwatchable for young children" and "too slow and filled with exposition".

[ 13 ] Scott Collura of IGN gave the episode a 9.0, admiring the character development of Missy through the episode, as she is finally depicted as "out and about as the Mistress ", and how Steven Moffat does a good job of deconstructing the name and meaning of the show. He went on to praise "World Enough and Time" as a great buildup for the season finale, noting that "like the Master and Missy themselves, this episode is sort of a two-faced monster – but a good one that seems to be bringing the tenth season to a strong finish". He stated that the episode was full of great science-fiction concepts, high stakes for all of the main and supporting characters, and how the episode was full of "humor, scares, and more".

[ 16 ] Ross Ruediger of New York magazine was also extremely positive about the episode, praising Steven Moffat's writing and the script's cleverness, but also indicating that it was easy to see through the disguise of John Simm since the appearance of the Master had been spoiled early on: "Who'd have guessed Simm was returning after all these years? Imagine how much more powerful that reveal could've been!" He stated that the episode aimed to grab the viewer's attention even before the credits, with the regeneration scene, stating that it was a far better "regeneration" than the one that had previously appeared in "The Lie of the Land". He also complimented Rachel Talalay's direction of the episode, after having a track record with Peter Capaldi's series finales.

[ 17 ] Giving the episode a perfect score, Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times called it "macabre and riveting", stating that the conversion of Bill Potts into the Mondasian Cyberman and the revelation at the end of the episode "packed more punch" than Jackie Tyler's Cyber-conversion in the second series or Oswin Oswald being revealed as a Dalek in the " Asylum of the Daleks ". Mulkern ended his review with praise towards the cliffhanger ending: "The close of World Enough and Time is sublime. Steven Moffat’s script deftly cuts between two scenes of revelation, expertly shot by director Rachel Talalay." [ 18 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Doctor Who series 10: World Enough And Time geeky spots and Easter eggs" . 24 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ Martin, Dan (25 June 2017).

"Doctor Who recap: series 36, episode 11 – World Enough and Time" .

theguardian.com .

Archived from the original on 27 June 2017 . Retrieved 24 June 2017 .

^ a b "Series 10, Doctor Who – World Enough and Time: The Fact File – BBC One" .

BBC .

^ The Doctor Who Team (6 March 2017).

"Original Mondasian Cybermen return to Doctor Who!" .

BBC Latest News – Doctor Who .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2017 . Retrieved 8 May 2017 .

^ Hogan, Michael (24 June 2017).

"Doctor Who: World Enough and Time, series 10 episode 11: What. An. Episode" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 24 June 2017 .

^ "John Simm to return as the Master in Doctor Who" . BBC. 6 April 2017.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2017 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ "World Enough and Time – Overnight Viewing Figures" .

Doctor Who News . 25 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ Marcus (2 July 2017).

"World Enough and Time – Official Ratings" .

Doctor Who News .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2017 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Marcus (26 June 2017).

"World Enough and Time – Audience Appreciation:85" .

Doctor Who News .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 .

^ a b c "Doctor Who, Series 10, Episode 11, World Enough and Time" .

Rotten Tomatoes .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2017 . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Wilkins, Alasdair (24 June 2017).

"Doctor Who makes multiple Masters and old-school Cybermen more than a nostalgia tour" .

The A.V. Club .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ Serrao, Nivea (24 June 2017).

"Doctor Who recap: 'World Enough and Time' " .

Entertainment Weekly .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ a b Russell, Bradley (24 June 2017).

"DOCTOR WHO S10.11 REVIEW: "A GLORIOUS LOOK AT DOCTOR WHO'S POSSIBLE FUTURE" " .

SFX Magazine .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 – via GamesRadar+ .

^ Wiedel, Kathleen (25 June 2017).

"Doctor Who Season 10 Episode 12 Review: World Enough and Time" .

TV Fanatic .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ Nguyen, Hanh (1 July 2017).

" 'Doctor Who' Review: Killer Finale Hints at a Female Doctor and Delivers Some Major Time Lord Plot Twists" .

IndieWire . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ a b Collura, Scott (24 June 2017).

"Doctor Who: "World Enough and Time" Review" .

IGN .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2019 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ a b Ruediger, Ross (24 June 2017).

"Doctor Who Recap: Genesis of the Cybermen" .

New York .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ a b Mulkern, Patrick (24 June 2017).

"Doctor Who World Enough and Time review: "macabre and riveting, it coldly metes out a fate worse than death" " .

Radio Times .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ Jackson, Daniel (24 June 2017).

"Doctor Who Series 10 Episode 11 World Enough And Time Review: An emotional, dark and daring foundation to the series finale" .

Daily Mirror .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

^ "World Enough and Time – Reaction" .

Doctor Who News . 25 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Twelfth Doctor .

"World Enough and Time" at the BBC Doctor Who homepage "World Enough and Time" on Tardis Wiki , the Doctor Who Wiki "World Enough and Time" at IMDb v t e Doctor Who episodes Original series Season 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 Film Missing episodes Revived series Series 1 2 3 4 2008–2010 specials 5 6 7 2013 specials 8 9 10 11 12 13 2022 specials 2023 specials 14 15 Series 10 Special " The Return of Doctor Mysterio " " The Pilot " " Smile " " Thin Ice " " Knock Knock " " Oxygen " " Extremis " " The Pyramid at the End of the World " " The Lie of the Land " " Empress of Mars " " The Eaters of Light " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Special " Twice Upon a Time " Christmas and New Year's specials Supplementary episodes Missing episodes v t e Doctor Who episodes by Steven Moffat Ninth Doctor " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " Tenth Doctor " The Girl in the Fireplace " " Blink " " Silence in the Library " / " Forest of the Dead " Eleventh Doctor Series 5 " The Eleventh Hour " " The Beast Below " " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " Series 6 Special " A Christmas Carol " " The Impossible Astronaut " / " Day of the Moon " " A Good Man Goes to War " " Let's Kill Hitler " " The Wedding of River Song " Series 7 Special " The Doctor, the Widow and the Wardrobe " " Asylum of the Daleks " " The Angels Take Manhattan " Special " The Snowmen " " The Bells of Saint John " " The Name of the Doctor " Specials " The Day of the Doctor " " The Time of the Doctor " Twelfth Doctor Series 8 " Deep Breath " " Into the Dalek " " Listen " " Time Heist " " The Caretaker " " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " Series 9 Special " Last Christmas " " The Magician's Apprentice " / " The Witch's Familiar " " The Girl Who Died " " The Zygon Inversion " " Heaven Sent " " Hell Bent " Special " The Husbands of River Song " Series 10 Special " The Return of Doctor Mysterio " " The Pilot " " Extremis " " The Pyramid at the End of the World " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Special " Twice Upon a Time " Fifteenth Doctor " Boom " " Joy to the World " Mini episodes " Time Crash " " Space" / "Time " Night and the Doctor " The Night of the Doctor " See also The Curse of Fatal Death v t e Doctor Who : Twelfth Doctor stories Television Series 8 " Deep Breath " " Into the Dalek " " Robot of Sherwood " " Listen " " Time Heist " " The Caretaker " " Kill the Moon " " Mummy on the Orient Express " " Flatline " " In the Forest of the Night " " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " Series 9 Special " Last Christmas " " The Magician's Apprentice " / " The Witch's Familiar " " Under the Lake " / " Before the Flood " " The Girl Who Died " " The Woman Who Lived " " The Zygon Invasion " / " The Zygon Inversion " " Sleep No More " " Face the Raven " " Heaven Sent " " Hell Bent " Special " The Husbands of River Song " Series 10 Special " The Return of Doctor Mysterio " " The Pilot " " Smile " " Thin Ice " " Knock Knock " " Oxygen " " Extremis " " The Pyramid at the End of the World " " The Lie of the Land " " Empress of Mars " " The Eaters of Light " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Special " Twice Upon a Time " Other appearances Major " For Tonight We Might Die " Minor " The Day of the Doctor " " The Time of the Doctor " See also " The Fires of Pompeii " Books The Blood Cell Video games Legacy Lego Dimensions v t e Doctor Who : Cyberman stories Television First Doctor The Tenth Planet Second Doctor The Moonbase The Tomb of the Cybermen The Wheel in Space The Invasion Fourth Doctor Revenge of the Cybermen Fifth Doctor Earthshock " The Five Doctors " Sixth Doctor Attack of the Cybermen Seventh Doctor Silver Nemesis Tenth Doctor " Rise of the Cybermen " / " The Age of Steel " " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " " The Next Doctor " Eleventh Doctor " Closing Time " " Nightmare in Silver " Twelfth Doctor " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Thirteenth Doctor " The Haunting of Villa Diodati " " Ascension of the Cybermen " / " The Timeless Children " " The Power of the Doctor " Other appearances Major " Cyberwoman " Minor The War Games The Mind of Evil Carnival of Monsters " Dalek " " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " " A Good Man Goes to War " " The Day of the Doctor " " The Time of the Doctor " " Face the Raven " " Hell Bent " Flux " Once, Upon Time " / " The Vanquishers " See also Dimensions in Time Tardisode " Twice Upon a Time " Audio Spare Parts Legend of the Cybermen Books Iceberg Made of Steel Video games Destiny of the Doctors Top Trumps " Blood of the Cybermen " Return to Earth The Mazes of Time The Eternity Clock Legacy Lego Dimensions Stage Doctor Who Prom Doctor Who Live v t e Doctor Who : The Master stories Television Third Doctor Terror of the Autons The Mind of Evil The Claws of Axos Colony in Space The Dæmons The Sea Devils The Time Monster Frontier in Space Fourth Doctor The Deadly Assassin The Keeper of Traken Logopolis Fifth Doctor Castrovalva Time-Flight The King's Demons " The Five Doctors " Planet of Fire Sixth Doctor The Mark of the Rani The Ultimate Foe Seventh Doctor Survival Eighth Doctor Doctor Who Tenth Doctor " Utopia " / " The Sound of Drums " / " Last of the Time Lords " " The End of Time " Twelfth Doctor " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " " The Magician's Apprentice " / " The Witch's Familiar " " Extremis " " The Lie of the Land " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Thirteenth Doctor " Spyfall " " Ascension of the Cybermen " / " The Timeless Children " " The Power of the Doctor " Minor appearances The Caves of Androzani " Deep Breath " " Into the Dalek " " The Caretaker " " Flatline " " In the Forest of the Night " " Empress of Mars " " The Eaters of Light " See also The War Games in Colour The Curse of Fatal Death Scream of the Shalka " The Giggle " Audio The Fourth Doctor Adventures Trail of the White Worm / The Oseidon Adventure Other The Monthly Adventures Unbound The Eighth Doctor Adventures Dominion Mastermind The End of the Line Jago & Litefoot The War Master Master of Worlds Books Missing Adventures The Dark Path Verdigris Eighth Doctor Adventures The Eight Doctors Legacy of the Daleks The Adventuress of Henrietta Street Sometime Never...

The Deadstone Memorial The Gallifrey Chronicles Past Doctor Adventures The Infinity Doctors Last of the Gaderene Prime Time The Quantum Archangel Deadly Reunion Other Who Killed Kennedy Happy Endings Harvest of Time The Story of Martha Video games Destiny of the Doctors Legacy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Enough_and_Time_(Doctor_Who)&oldid=1297002342 " Categories : Twelfth Doctor episodes 2017 British television episodes Television episodes written by Steven Moffat The Master (Doctor Who) television stories Cybermen television stories Fiction about black holes Fiction about time dilation Doctor Who multi-Master stories Television episodes set in hospitals Television episodes set in outer space Television episodes set in Bristol Television episodes set in Antarctica Television episodes set in the 1980s Television episodes set in the 2010s Fiction set in 1986 Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 16:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World Enough and Time ( Doctor Who ) 6 languages Add topic

