Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Background 3 Zoroastrianism 4 Judaism Toggle Judaism subsection 4.1 Hebrew Bible 4.2 Rabbinic Judaism 4.2.1 Later interpretations 5 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 5.1 Bible 5.1.1 Interaction with humans 5.2 Theology 6 Islam Toggle Islam subsection 6.1 Theology ( Kalām ) 6.1.1 Classical period 6.1.2 Modern and Contemporary movements 6.2 Iconography 7 Baháʼí faith 8 Metaphysics 9 Esotericism Toggle Esotericism subsection 9.1 Graeco-Roman world 9.2 Gnosticism 9.3 Hermetic Qabalah 9.4 Theosophy 10 Yazidism 11 In art 12 See also 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Sources 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Angel 129 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Atikamekw Авар Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Iñupiatun IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Мокшень Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Romani čhib Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Toba Jaku Iban Kumoring IsiNdebele seSewula ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Supernatural being in religions and mythologies Not to be confused with Angle .

This article is about the supernatural beings. For other uses, see Angel (disambiguation) .

"Angelology" redirects here. For the novel, see Angelology (novel) .

Statue of the angel of the Annunciation , c.

1430–1440 , Metropolitan Museum of Art Schutzengel ("Guardian angel") by Bernhard Plockhorst depicts a guardian angel watching over two children.

The Archangel Michael wears a Roman military cloak and cuirass in this 17th-century depiction by Guido Reni .

An angel is a spiritual heavenly, or supernatural entity, usually humanoid with bird-like wings, often depicted as a messenger or intermediary between God (the transcendent ) and humanity (the profane ) in various traditions like the Abrahamic religions .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Other roles include protectors and guides for humans, such as guardian angels and servants of God.

[ 4 ] In Western belief-systems the term is often used to distinguish benevolent from malevolent intermediary beings.

[ 5 ] Emphasizing the distance between God and mankind, revelation-based belief-systems require angels to bridge the gap between the earthly and the transcendent realm.

[ 6 ] Angels play a lesser role in monistic belief-systems , since the gap is non-existent. However, angelic beings might be conceived as aid to achieve a proper relationship with the divine.

[ 7 ] Abrahamic religions describe angelic hierarchies , which vary by religion and sect. Some angels are indicated with names (such as Gabriel or Michael ) or are of a specific kind or rank  (such as a seraph or an archangel ). Malevolent angels are often believed to have been expelled from heaven and are called fallen angels . In many such religions, the devil (or devils) are identified with such angels.

The Wounded Angel , Hugo Simberg , 1903, voted Finland's "national painting" in 2006 Angels in art are often identified with bird wings , [ 8 ] halos , [ 9 ] and divine light. They are usually shaped like humans of extraordinary beauty, though this is not always the case –sometimes, they are portrayed as being frightening or inhuman.

[ 10 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word angel arrives in modern English from Old English engel (with a hard g ) and the Old French angele .

[ 11 ] Both of these derive from Late Latin angelus , which in turn was borrowed from Late Greek ἄγγελος angelos (literally "messenger").

[ 12 ] Τhe word's earliest form is Mycenaean a-ke-ro , attested in Linear B syllabic script.

[ 13 ] According to the Dutch linguist R. S. P. Beekes , ángelos itself may be "an Oriental loan, like ἄγγαρος ( ángaros , 'Persian mounted courier')." [ 14 ] The rendering of ángelos is the Septuagint's default translation of the Biblical Hebrew term malʼākh , denoting simply "messenger" without connoting its nature. In the Latin Vulgate , this meaning becomes bifurcated: when malʼākh or ángelos is supposed to denote a human messenger, words like nuntius or legatus are applied. If the word refers to some supernatural being, the word angelus appears. Such differentiation has been taken over by later vernacular translations of the Bible , early Christian and Jewish exegetes and eventually modern scholars.

[ 15 ] Background [ edit ] The concept of angels is historically best to be understood from different ideas of the concept of God throughout history . In polytheistic and animistic worldviews , supernatural powers (i.e. deities, spirits , daemons, etc.) were assigned to different natural phenomena .

[ 16 ] (p102) [ 17 ] Within a monotheistic framework, these powers were reconsidered to be servants of the supreme deity , turning autonomous supernatural beings into "angels".

[ 16 ] (p102) By that, supernatural powers controlling or influencing humanity's perception of the world, including natural phenomena and humans, are ultimately under control of a supreme God.

[ 16 ] (p102) Prominent angels, such as Michael and Gabriel, reflect a connection to the Chief Semitic deity El . Even "bad" angels such as Satan , Samael , Iblis etc., can be understood as an operating force within the nature of humans, as responsible for selfish tendencies.

[ 16 ] (p102) The idea of angels in early Hebrew scripture  as supernatural agents is absent.

[ 18 ] Instead, the Hebrew deity intervenes in human affairs, mostly by means of punishment.

[ 19 ] Only in later thought of post-exilic and prophetic writings , the Biblical deity is conceptualized as distant and more merciful, his interventions replaced by the idea of angels.

[ 19 ] However, such angels still carry out the gruesome attributes of God and can be both benevolent and malevolent.

[ 19 ] The notion of angels as embodiment of good emerges only under influence of Zoroastrianism , in which the Devil is conceived as the principle of evil, with a hosts of demons, in battle with the holy entities ( Aməša Spəṇta ) created by Ahura Mazda (principle of good).

[ 19 ] [ 18 ] Influence of dualistic tendencies and replacement of divine powers by angels is evident from the Qumram writings . In the Angelic Liturgy , the Hebrew term elim (deities, heavenly powers) is used for angelic beings and not for God.

[ 20 ] (p23) The War Scroll speaks about angels of light fighting against demonic beings of darkness.

[ 20 ] (p20) Zoroastrianism [ edit ] Main article: Yazata Relief of Angel, Taq-e Bostan In Zoroastrianism there are different angel-like figures. They patronize human beings and other creatures, and also manifest God's energy.

The Amesha Spentas , although rather emanations of Ahura Mazda ("Wise Lord", God) than distinct messengers, have often been compared to angels.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Similar to angels in Abrahamic tradition , Vohu Manah reveals to Zoroaster the true nature of God .

[ 23 ] Additionally to the Amesha Spentas, the Fravashi have often been compared to angels, functioning as a guardian angel , and have been adopted as such by Zoroastrians themselves since the 19th century.

[ 24 ] Unlike the Amesha Spentas, the Fravashi appear as individualized warriors of Ahura Mazda's celestial army, descending from heaven to aid  those who summon them against demons.

[ 25 ] Judaism [ edit ] Main article: Angels in Judaism In Judaism, angels ( Hebrew : מַלְאָךְ ‎ mal’āḵ ; "messenger"), are understood through interpretation of the Tanakh and in a long tradition as supernatural beings who stand by God in heaven, but are strictly to be distinguished from God (YHWH) and are subordinate to him. Occasionally, they can show selected people God's will and instructions.

[ 26 ] In the Jewish tradition they are also inferior to humans since they have no will of their own and are able to carry out only one divine command.

[ 27 ] Hebrew Bible [ edit ] Three angels hosted by Abraham , Ludovico Carracci (c. 1610–1612), Bologna, Pinacoteca Nazionale Tobias and the Angel by Filippino Lippi , created between c. 1472 and c. 1482 The Torah uses the Hebrew terms מלאך אלהים ( mal'āk̠ 'ĕlōhîm ; "messenger of God"), מלאך יהוה ( mal'āk̠ Yahweh ; "messenger of the Lord"), בני אלהים ( bənē 'ĕlōhîm ; " sons of God ") and הקודשים ( haqqôd̠əšîm ; "the holy ones") to refer to beings traditionally interpreted as angels.

The term 'מלאך' ( 'mal'āk̠' ) is also used in other books of the Hebrew Bible . In the early stages of Hebrew writings, the term refers to human messengers, not to supernatural entities.

[ 19 ] [ 28 ] A human messenger might be a prophet or priest, such as Malachi , "my messenger"; the Greek superscription in the Septuagint translation states the Book of Malachi was written "by the hand of his messenger" ἀγγέλου ( angélu ). Examples of a supernatural messenger [ 29 ] are the " Malak YHWH ", who is either a messenger from God, [ 30 ] an aspect of God (such as the logos ), [ 31 ] or God himself as the messenger (the " theophanic angel.") [ 29 ] [ 32 ] In the early writings of the Hebrew Bible, both Hebrew : בְנֵי־הָאֱלֹהִים , romanized : Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm , lit.

'Sons of Gods' as well as the Hebrew : מַלְאָךְ , romanized : mal’āḵ , lit.

'messenger' are aspects of God.

[ 33 ] In the earliest records, the Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm are in heaven. They are depicted as the heavenly court or the pantheon of religious belief-system of their time. They reflect the transcendent aspect of the Divine, but become progressively differentiated from the good aspect of the Divine. The mal’āḵ on the other hand, expresses the Divinties' interaction with the world. As such the mal’āḵ functions as the voice of the Divine, the Divine spirit, or as God himself. In Exodus 3:2-4, it is both Yahweh as well as a mal’āḵ Moses is addressed by.

[ 34 ] The fusion of the Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm with the mal’āḵ is evident in the Book of Hiob. Here, Satan is both one of the Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm in the heavenly court, as well as a mal’āḵ expressing God's interaction with humanity.

[ 35 ] Michael D. Coogan notes that it is only in the late books that the terms "come to mean the benevolent semi-divine beings familiar from later mythology and art." [ 36 ] Daniel is the biblical book to refer to individual angels by name, [ 37 ] mentioning Gabriel in Daniel 9:21 and Michael in Daniel 10:13. These angels are part of Daniel's apocalyptic visions and are an important part of apocalyptic literature .

[ 36 ] [ 38 ] In Daniel 7 , Daniel receives a dream-vision from God. [...] As Daniel watches, the Ancient of Days takes his seat on the throne of heaven and sits in judgement in the midst of the heavenly court [...] an [angel] like a son of man approaches the Ancient One in the clouds of heaven and is given everlasting kingship.

[ 39 ] Jeffrey Burton Russel writes that "the more the banim and the mal'ak were seen as distinct from the God, the more it was possible to thrust upon the evil elements in the divine character that Yahweh had discarded.".

[ 40 ] Coogan explains the development of this concept of angels: "In the postexilic period, with the development of explicit monotheism, these divine beings—the 'sons of God' who were members of the Divine Council —were in effect demoted to what are now known as 'angels', understood as beings created by God, but immortal and thus superior to humans." [ 36 ] This conception of angels is best understood in contrast to demons and is often thought to be "influenced by the ancient Persian religious tradition of Zoroastrianism , which viewed the world as a battleground between forces of good and forces of evil, between light and darkness." [ 36 ] One of these is hāššāṭān , a figure depicted in (among other places) the Book of Job .

Rabbinic Judaism [ edit ] Rabbinic Judaism has been an orthodox form of Judaism since the 6th century CE , after the codification of the Babylonian Talmud . In post-Biblical Judaism , certain angels took on particular significance and developed unique personalities and roles. According to Rabbinic Judaism, the angels have no bodies, but are eternally living creatures created out of fire. The Babylonian Talmud reads as "The Torah was not given to ministering angels." (לא נתנה תורה למלאכי השרת) usually understood as a concession to human's imperfection, in contrast to the angels.

[ 41 ] Thus, they occasionally appear in Midrashim as competition with humans.

[ 42 ] The angels as heavenly beings, strictly following the laws of God, become jealous of God's affection for man. Humans, by following the Torah, in prayer, by resisting evil instincts ( yetzer hara ) and by teshuva , are preferred to the flawless angels. As a result, they are also inferior to humans in the Jewish tradition. In the Midrash, the plural of El ( Elohim ) used in Genesis in relation to the creation of human beings is explained by the presence of angels: God therefore consulted with the angels, but made the final decision alone. This story serves as an example, teaching that the powerful should also consult with the weak. God's own final decision highlights God's undisputable omnipotence.

[ 42 ] Although archangels were believed to rank among the heavenly host , no systematic hierarchy ever developed.

Metatron is considered one of the highest of the angels in Merkabah and Kabbalah mysticism and often serves as a scribe; he is briefly mentioned in the Talmud [ 43 ] and figures prominently in Merkabah mystical texts. Michael, who serves as a warrior [ 44 ] and advocate for Israel ( Daniel 10:13 ), is looked upon particularly fondly.

[ 45 ] Gabriel is mentioned in the Book of Daniel ( Daniel 8:15–17 ) and briefly in the Talmud, [ 46 ] as well as in many Merkabah mystical texts . There is no evidence in Judaism for the worship of angels , but there is evidence for the invocation and sometimes even conjuration of angels.

[ 37 ] Philo of Alexandria identifies the angel with the Logos inasmuch as the angel is the immaterial voice of God. The angel is something different from God himself, but is conceived as God's instrument.

[ 47 ] Four classes of ministering angels minister and utter praise before the Holy One, blessed be He: the first camp (led by) Michael on His right, the second camp (led by) Gabriel on His left, the third camp (led by) Uriel before Him, and the fourth camp (led by) Raphael behind Him; and the Shekhinah of the Holy One, blessed be He, is in the centre. He is sitting on a throne high and exalted [ 48 ] Later interpretations [ edit ] According to Kabbalah , there are four worlds and our world is the last world: the world of action (Assiyah). Angels exist in the worlds above as a 'task' of God. They are an extension of God to produce effects in this world. After an angel has completed its task, it ceases to exist. The angel is in effect the task. This is derived from the book of Genesis when Abraham meets with three angels and Lot meets with two. The task of one of the angels was to inform Sara and Abraham of their coming child. The other two were to save Lot and to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah .

[ 37 ] Jewish philosopher Maimonides explained his view of angels in his Guide for the Perplexed II:4 and II ... This leads Aristotle in turn to the demonstrated fact that God, glory and majesty to Him, does not do things by direct contact. God burns things by means of fire; fire is moved by the motion of the sphere; the sphere is moved by means of a disembodied intellect, these intellects being the 'angels which are near to Him', through whose mediation the spheres move ... thus totally disembodied minds exist which emanate from God and are the intermediaries between God and all the bodies [objects] here in this world.

— Guide for the Perplexed II:4, Maimonides Maimonides had a neo-Aristotelian interpretation of the Bible. Maimonides writes that to the wise man, one sees that what the Bible and Talmud refer to as "angels" are actually allusions to the various laws of nature; they are the principles by which the physical universe operates.

For all forces are angels! How blind, how perniciously blind are the naive?! If you told someone who purports to be a sage of Israel that the Deity sends an angel who enters a woman's womb and there forms an embryo, he would think this a miracle and accept it as a mark of the majesty and power of the Deity, despite the fact that he believes an angel to be a body of fire one third the size of the entire world. All this, he thinks, is possible for God. But if you tell him that God placed in the sperm the power of forming and demarcating these organs, and that this is the angel, or that all forms are produced by the Active Intellect ; that here is the angel, the "vice-regent of the world" constantly mentioned by the sages, then he will recoil. – Guide for the Perplexed II:4 One of Melozzo 's musician (seraphim) angels from the Basilica dei Santi Apostoli, now in the sacristy of St. Peter's Basilica Angel of the Revelation by William Blake , created between c. 1803 and c. 1805 Christianity [ edit ] An angel on a confessional in a Roman Catholic church in Warsaw as a metaphor of the seal of confession Main article: Angels in Christianity Christian Medieval concept of angels derives from Hebrew and Greek scriptures.

[ 49 ] In the Bible angels are anthropomorphized intermediaries between God and humanity.

[ 50 ] Few angels appear to be impersonal forces of the divine will, while others have individual names and personalities.

[ 51 ] In the formative stage, the Christian concept of an angel characterized the angel as a 'messenger' of God. The word "angel" can be drawn to the term or role of a "messenger" throughout the Bible in both old and new testaments - ( Hebrews 1:14 ) calls them "ministering [or serving] spirits", sent by God to aid the "heirs of salvation". Later came identification of individual angelic messengers: Gabriel , Michael , Raphael , and Uriel .

[ 52 ] Then, in the space of slightly over two centuries (from the 3rd to the 5th) the image of angels took on definite characteristics both in theology and in art.

[ 53 ] Ellen Muehlberger has argued that in Late Antiquity , angels were conceived of as one type of being among many, whose primary purpose was to guard and to guide Christians.

[ 54 ] In systematic Christian theology, angels are imagined as incorporeal entities and in opposition to corporeal humans, as in the writings of Origen and Thomas Aquinas .

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Bible [ edit ] Angels are represented throughout Bibles as spiritual beings which are intermediate between God and humanity: "For thou hast made him [man] a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour" ( Psalms 8:4–5 ). Christians, based on Psalms and Genesis 2:1, believe that angels were the first beings created by God before the creation of Earth ( Psalms 148:2–5 ; Colossians 1:16 ). Greek translations of the Hebrew Bible refer to intermediary beings as angels, instead of daimons , thus giving raise to a distinction between demons and angels.

[ 57 ] In the Old Testament , both benevolent and fierce angels are mentioned, but never called demons . The symmetry lies between angels sent by God, and intermediary spirits of foreign deities, not in good and evil deeds.

[ 58 ] In the New Testament , the existence of angels, just like that of demons, is taken for granted.

[ 59 ] They can intervene and intercede on behalf of humans. Angels protect the righteous ( Matthew 4:6 , Luke 4:11 ). They dwell in the heavens ( Matthew 28:2 , John 1:51 ), act as God's warriors ( Matthew 26:53 ) and worship God ( Luke 2:13 ).

[ 60 ] In the parable of the Rich man and Lazarus , angels behave as psychopomps .

[ citation needed ] The Resurrection of Jesus features angels, telling the woman that Jesus is no longer in the tomb, but has risen from the dead.

[ 61 ] Angels don't marry ( Matthew 22:30 , Mark 12:25 , and Luke 20:34–46 ).

[ 62 ] Paul the Apostle acknowledges good (2 Cor 11:14; Gal 1:8; 4:14) and evil angels in his writings.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] According to 1 Corinthians 6:3, angels will be judged by God, implying that angels can be both good and evil. Some scholars suggest that Gal 3:19 means that the Law of Moses was introduced by angels rather than God, combined with his statements in Galatians , implies a negative role.

[ 65 ] In Colossians 2:18 , he criticizes the worship of angels.

[ 66 ] Interaction with humans [ edit ] Kristus i Getsemane (1873), an angel comforting Jesus before his arrest in the Garden of Gethsemane , by Carl Heinrich Bloch (1834–1890) Forget not to show love unto strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.— Hebrews 13:2 Three separate cases of angelic interaction deal with the births of John the Baptist and Jesus . In ( Luke 1:11 ), an angel appears to Zechariah to inform him that he will have a child despite his old age, thus proclaiming the birth of John the Baptist . In Luke 1:26, Gabriel visits Mary in the Annunciation to foretell the birth of Jesus . Angels proclaim the birth of Jesus in the Adoration of the shepherds in Luke 2:10.

[ 67 ] According to Matthew 4:11, after Jesus spent 40 days in the desert, "...the Devil left him and, behold, angels came and ministered to him." In Luke 22:43 an angel comforts Jesus during the Agony in the Garden .

[ 68 ] In Matthew 28:5 an angel speaks at the empty tomb, following the Resurrection of Jesus and the rolling back of the stone by angels.

[ 67 ] In 1851 Pope Pius IX approved the Chaplet of Saint Michael based on the 1751 reported private revelation from archangel Michael to the Carmelite nun Antonia d'Astonac.

[ 69 ] In a biography of Gemma Galgani written by Germanus Ruoppolo, Galgani stated that she had spoken with her guardian angel .

Jacob Wrestling with the Angel , by Gustave Doré in 1855 Pope John Paul II emphasized the role of angels in Catholic teachings in his 1986 address titled "Angels Participate In History Of Salvation", in which he suggested that modern mentality should come to see the importance of angels.

[ 70 ] According to the Vatican's Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments , "The practice of assigning names to the Holy Angels should be discouraged, except in the cases of Gabriel, Raphael and Michael whose names are contained in Holy Scripture." [ 71 ] Theology [ edit ] Further information: Christian theology By the late 4th century, the Church Fathers agreed that there were different categories of angels, with appropriate missions and activities assigned to them. There was, however, some disagreement regarding the nature of angels. Some argued that angels had physical bodies, [ 72 ] while some maintained that they were entirely spiritual. Some theologians had proposed that angels were not divine but on the level of immaterial beings subordinate to the Trinity . The resolution of this Trinitarian dispute included the development of doctrine about angels.

[ 73 ] According to Augustine of Hippo , the term 'angel' refers to "the name of their office, not [...] their nature", as they are pure spirits who act as messengers, clarifying: "If you seek the name of their nature, it is 'spirit'; if you seek the name of their office, it is 'angel': from what they are, 'spirit', from what they do, 'angel'." [ 74 ] Gregory of Nazianzus thought that angels were made as "spirits" and "flames of fire", following Hebrews 1, and that they can be identified with the "thrones, dominions, rulers and authorities" of Colossians 1.

[ 54 ] Forty Gospel Homilies by Pope Gregory I (c. 540 – 12 March 604) noted angels and archangels.

[ 75 ] The Fourth Lateran Council 's (1215) Firmiter credimus decree (issued against the Albigenses ) declared that the angels were created beings and that men were created after them. The First Vatican Council (1869) repeated this declaration in Dei Filius , the " Dogmatic constitution on the Catholic faith ".

In the Middle Ages, theologians had to address Augustine's ideas of "angelic knowledge", as set out in De Genesi ad litteram , which he divided into "morning" knowledge, knowledge of Creation before it is created derived from direct access to the Word of God, and "evening" knowledge, knowledge of Creation derived from perceiving it after it has been created.

[ 76 ] Thomas Aquinas (13th century) related angels to Aristotle 's metaphysics in his Summa contra Gentiles , [ 77 ] Summa Theologica , [ 78 ] the 8th question of Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate , [ 76 ] and in De substantiis separatis , [ 79 ] a treatise on angelology.

Aquinas varied significantly from the Augustinian view in two major respects: angels were not created in an initial state of bliss, and only beatified angels have "morning" knowledge.

[ 80 ] In other words: angels have an angelic nature, but in their natural states have no access to Divine "morning" knowledge of Creation, which they only gain with supernatural assistance.

[ 81 ] This was Aquinas' most original contribution to Christian angelology.

[ 80 ] Although angels have greater knowledge than men, they are not omniscient , as Matthew 24:36 points out.

[ 82 ] According to the Summa Theologica , angels were created instantaneously by God in a state of grace in the Empyrean Heaven (LXI. 4) at the same time when he created all the contents of the corporeal world (LXI. 3). They are pure spirits whose life consists in knowledge and love. Being bodiless, their knowledge is intellectual and not through senses (LIV. 5). Differently from humans, their knowledge is not acquired from the exterior world (having acquired all knowledge they would ever receive in the moment of their creation); moreover they attain to the truth of a thing at a single glance without need of reasoning (LV. a; LVIII. 3,4). They know all that passes in the external world (LV. 2) and the totality of creatures, but they don't know human secret thoughts that depends on human free will and thereby are not necessarily linked up with external events (LVII. 4). They don't know also the future unless God reveals it to them (LVII. 3).

[ 83 ] According to Aquinas, angels are the closest creatures to God. Therefore, like God, they are constituted by pure form without matter .

[ 84 ] While they do not have a physical composition of matter and form (called ilemorphysm ), they possess the metaphysical composition of act (the act of being [ 85 ] ) and potency (their finite essence, yet without being [ 85 ] ).

[ 86 ] Each angel is a species which a unique individual belongs to; angels differ one from another by way of their unique and irrepetible form. In other words, form - and not matter - is their principle of individuation .

[ 87 ] Islam [ edit ] Main article: Angels in Islam Depiction of an angel in a Persian miniature (Iran, 1555) Belief in angels is fundamental to Islam. The Quranic word for angel ( Arabic : ملاك Malāk ) derives either from Malaka , meaning "he controlled", due to their power to govern different affairs assigned to them, [ 88 ] or from the root either from ʼ-l-k , l-ʼ-k or m-l-k with the broad meaning of a " messenger ", just like its counterparts in Hebrew ( malʾákh ) and Greek ( angelos ). Unlike their Hebrew counterpart, the term is exclusively used for heavenly spirits of the divine world, but not for human messengers. The Quran refers to both angelic and human messengers as "rasul" instead.

[ 89 ] The Quran is the principal source for the Islamic concept of angels.

[ 90 ] Some of them, such as Gabriel and Michael , are mentioned by name in the Quran, others are only referred to by their function. Most Muslim theologians, such as al-Suyuti , based on a hadith stating that the angels have been created through light ( nūr ) or fire ( nār ), depict angels as entities consisting of substance, in contrast to philosophers who argued for angels being disembodied spirits.

[ 91 ] Additionally, angels are thought to be endowed with reason and be subject to God's tests.

Al-Maturidi (853–944 CE) states that the inhabitants of heaven were tested by adorenments, just as humans and jinn on earth were tested, pointing at Sūrat al-Kahf [Q. 18:7].

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] When angels fail their tests, they might end up on earth, such as Harut and Marut . If the devils ( šayāṭīn ) have been angels once or form a separate type of creature from the beginning, is discussed in Islamic tradition.

[ 94 ] Contrary to popular belief, angels are never described as agents of revelation in the Quran, although interpretation credits Gabriel with that.

[ 95 ] Angels are not limited to benevolent tasks, but can also carry out grim orders.

[ 96 ] Not demons, but angels are tasked to guard and punish sinners in hell.

[ 97 ] Angels play a significant role in Mi'raj literature , where Muhammad encounters several angels during his journey through the heavens.

[ 98 ] Further angels have often been featured in Islamic eschatology, Islamic theology and Islamic philosophy .

[ 99 ] Individual angels are further evoked in exorcism rites , with their names engraved in talismans or amulets to call upon their powers.

[ 100 ] Theology ( Kalām ) [ edit ] Classical period [ edit ] The Angels meet Adam, the prototypical human being, before they are being tested to prostrate themselves before Adam. They share, albeit to a lesser degree, the defiant reaction of Iblis, the future devil, who, in contrast to the angels, is depicted with a dark face. Painting from a manuscript of  the Manṭiq al-ṭayr (The Conference of the Birds) of Farīd al-Dīn ʿAṭṭār. Iran, Shiraz, 899/1494.

[ 101 ] Islamic theology usually distinguishes between three types of invisible creatures: angels ( malāʾikah ), djinn , and devils ( šayāṭīn ).

[ 102 ] Islamic theologian al-Ghazali (c. 1058 – 1111) divides human nature into four domains, each representing another type of creature: animals, beasts, devils and angels.

[ 103 ] Reconciling the literal meaning ( Ẓāhir ) with the Avicennan cosmology of falsafa of angels, he identified angels with the " celestial intellects " or "immaterial souls".

[ 104 ] Angels, made from light ( Nūr ) and thus associated with reason (' aql ), represent the intellectual capacity of a human and the ability to bound the devilish qualities from within.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] By that, Ghazali does not deny the literal reality of angels, but rejects that they could be perceived directly.

[ 107 ] Although belief in angels remains one of Six Articles of Faith in Islam, one can not find a dogmatic angelology in Islamic tradition. However, theologians generally distinguish between the angels in heaven ( karubiyin ), fully absorbed in the ma'rifa (knowledge) of God, and the messengers ( rasūl ) who carry out divine decrees between heaven and earth.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Others add a third group of angels, and categorize angels into İlliyyûn Mukarrebûn (those around God's throne), Mudabbirât (carrying the laws of nature), and Rasūl (messengers).

[ 110 ] Al-Baydawi based this divide into two groups on Quranic verses: angels who are self-immersed in knowledge of "the Truth" (al-Haqq), based on "they laud night and day, they never wane" (21:29), they are the "highmost" and "angels brought near" and those who are the executors of commands, based on "they do not disobey Allah in what He commanded them but they do what they are commanded" (66:6), who are the administers of the command of heaven to earth.

[ 111 ] : 509 Modern and Contemporary movements [ edit ] Some modern scholars have emphasized a metaphorical reinterpretation of the concept of angels.

[ 112 ] Salafism and Wahhabism generally emphasize a literal interpretation of angels against modernistic interpretations, as for example, suggested by Nasr Abu Zayd . Simultaneously, many traditional materials regarding angels accepted during the Classical period are often disregarded by Wahhabis and Salafis. The Muslim Brotherhood scholars Sayyid Qutb and Umar Sulaiman Al-Ashqar reject much established material during earlier periods, for example, the story of Harut and Marut or calling the Angel of Death Azrail . Sulayman Ashqar not only rejects the traditional material itself, but also disapproves of previous scholars who used such reports.

[ 113 ] Iconography [ edit ] Muhammad advancing on Mecca, with the angels Gabriel , Michael , Israfil and Azrail . ( Siyer-i Nebi , 16th century) In Islam, just like in Judaism and Christianity, angels are often represented in anthropomorphic forms combined with supernatural images, such as wings, being of great size or wearing heavenly articles.

[ 114 ] The Quran describes them as "messengers with wings—two, or three, or four: He [God] adds to Creation as He pleases..." [ 115 ] The 13th century book Ajā'ib al-makhlūqāt wa gharā'ib al-mawjūdāt (The Wonders of Creation) by Zakariya al-Qazwini describes Islamic angelology, and is often illustrated with many images of angels. The angels are typically depicted with bright, vivid colors, giving them unusual liveliness and other-worldly translucence.

[ 116 ] While some angels are referred to as "Guardians of the Kingdom of God," others are associated with hell. An undated manuscript of The Wonders of Creation from the Bavarian State Library in Munich includes depictions of angels both alone and alongside humans and animals.

[ 116 ] Angels are also illustrated in Timurid and Ottoman manuscripts, such as The Timurid Book of the Prophet Muhammad's Ascension ( Mir'ajnama ) and the Siyer-i Nebi .

[ 117 ] Baháʼí faith [ edit ] In his Kitáb-i-Íqán Baháʼu'lláh , founder of the Baháʼí Faith , describes angels as people who "have consumed, with the fire of the love of God, all human traits and limitations", and have "clothed themselves" with angelic attributes and have become "endowed with the attributes of the spiritual".

ʻAbdu'l-Bahá describes angels as the "confirmations of God and His celestial powers" and as "blessed beings who have severed all ties with this nether world" and "been released from the chains of self", and "revealers of God's abounding grace". The Baháʼí writings also refer to the Concourse on High , an angelic host, and the Maid of Heaven of Baháʼu'lláh's vision.

[ 118 ] I raised my hand another time, and bared one of Her breasts that had been hidden beneath Her gown. Then the firmament was illumined by the radiance of its light, contingent beings were made resplendent by its appearance and effulgence, and by its rays, infinite numbers of suns dawned forth, as though they trekked through heavens that were without beginning or end. I became bewildered at the pen of God's handiwork, and at what it had inscribed upon Her temple. It was as though She had appeared with a body of light in the forms of the spirit, as though She moved upon the earth of essence in the substance of manifestation. I noticed that the houris had poked their heads out of their rooms and were suspended in the air above Her. They grew perplexed at Her appearance and Her beauty and were entranced by the raptures of Her song. Praise be to Her creator, fashioner, and maker--to the one Who made Her manifest.

Then she nearly swooned within herself, and with all her being she sought to inhale My fragrance. She opened Her lips, and the rays of light dawned forth from Her teeth, as though the pearls of the cause had appeared from Her treasures and Her shells.

She asked, "Who art Thou?" I said, "A servant of God and the son of his maidservant." [ 119 ] — Tablet of the Maiden, Baháʼu'lláh Metaphysics [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2024 ) In Ancient Greek philosophy , there is no significant distinction made between good and evil spirits.

[ 120 ] Under Iranian influence, the sublunary sphere was traced to inspiring angels.

[ 120 ] Philo of Alexandria already identified the Neo-Platonic interpretation of daemons as angels. The daemons were thought to be intermediary between the supernatural and earthly realm, interpreted by Philo as the Greek term for angels.

[ 58 ] In the commentaries of Proclus (4th century) on the Timaeus of Plato , Proclus uses the terminology of "angelic" ( aggelikos ) and "angel" ( aggelos ) in relation to metaphysical beings. According to Aristotle , just as there is a Prime Mover , [ 121 ] so too, must there be spiritual secondary movers.

[ 122 ] Ibn Sina , developed an angelological hierarchy of Intellects, which are created by " the One " (God). Accordingly, the first creation by God is the supreme intellect. From that intellect, intermediary spirits (angels) emanate. From these intellects, the intellect corresponding to the soul finally emerges. It is by the last Intellect that matter is animated and illuminates the mind.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Materialism removed angels from philosophical and scientific consideration.

Thomas Hobbes declared angels to be "accidences of the brain" without any external reality.

Immanuel Kant ’s critique of knowledge further diminished the rational justification for angels.

[ 125 ] Esotericism [ edit ] Graeco-Roman world [ edit ] Main article: Magic in the Greco-Roman world The Greek magical papyri , a set of texts forming into a completed grimoire that date somewhere between 100 BC and 400 AD, also list the names of the angels found in monotheistic religions, but they are presented as deities .

[ 126 ] Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel, though of Jewish origin, were popular figures in Hellenistic Egyptian paganism.

[ 127 ] Gnosticism [ edit ] Main article: Gnosticism In Gnostic cosmologies , angels are generally hostile celestial powers. Numerous references to angels present themselves in the Nag Hammadi Library , in which they both appear as malevolent servants of the Demiurge and innocent associates of the aeons .

[ 128 ] The angels are credited with creating the world and also its rulers in constant battle against each other. They are usurpers of spiritual powers to whom the Gnostic must strive against to become free from envy and greed, and eventually obtains salvation in the immaterial realms.

[ 129 ] On the other hand, the soul may act as an angel-like messenger who reveals mysteries and awakens knowledge in human consciousness.

[ 130 ] Hermetic Qabalah [ edit ] Main article: Hermetic Qabalah According to the Kabbalah as described by the Golden Dawn there are ten archangels , each commanding one of the choirs of angels and corresponding to one of the Sephirot . It is similar to the Jewish angelic hierarchy.

Rank Choir of Angels Translation Archangel Sephirah 1 Hayot Ha Kodesh Holy Living Ones Metatron Keter 2 Ophanim Wheels Raziel Chokmah 3 Erelim Brave ones [ 131 ] Tzaphkiel Binah 4 Hashmallim Glowing ones, Amber ones [ 132 ] Tzadkiel Chesed 5 Seraphim Burning Ones Khamael Gevurah 6 Malakim Messengers, angels Raphael Tipheret 7 Elohim Godly Beings Uriel Netzach 8 Bene Elohim Sons of Elohim Michael Hod 9 Cherubim [ 133 ] Gabriel Yesod 10 Ishim Men (man-like beings, phonetically similar to "fires") Sandalphon Malkuth Theosophy [ edit ] Main article: Theosophy In the teachings of the Theosophical Society , Devas are regarded as living either in the atmospheres of the planets of the Solar System ( Planetary Angels ) or inside the Sun ( Solar Angels ) and they help to guide the operation of the processes of nature such as the process of evolution and the growth of plants ; their appearance is reputedly like colored flames about the size of a human. It is believed by Theosophists that devas can be observed when the third eye is activated. Some (but not most) devas originally incarnated as human beings .

[ 134 ] It is believed by Theosophists that nature spirits , elementals ( gnomes , undines , sylphs , and salamanders ), and fairies also can be observed when the third eye is activated.

[ 135 ] It is maintained by Theosophists that these less evolutionarily developed beings have never been previously incarnated as humans; they are regarded as being on a separate line of spiritual evolution called the "deva evolution"; eventually, as their souls advance as they reincarnate , it is believed they will incarnate as devas.

[ 136 ] It is asserted by Theosophists that all of the above-mentioned beings possess etheric bodies that are composed of etheric matter , a type of matter finer and more pure that is composed of smaller particles than ordinary physical plane matter .

[ 136 ] Yazidism [ edit ] Main articles: List of Yazidi holy figures and Yazidism § Holy figures In Yazidism , there are seven Divine Beings (often called 'angels' in the literature) who were created by God prior to the creation of this world. God appointed Tawûsî Melek as their leader and assigned all of the world's affairs to these seven Divine Beings.

[ 137 ] These Divine Beings are referred to as Tawûsî Melek, Melek Şemsedîn , Melek Nasirdîn , Melek Fexredîn , Melek Sicadîn , Melek Şêxsin and Melek Şêxûbekir .

In art [ edit ] Main articles: Angels in art and Putto Draft for an Angel by Desiderius Lenz According to mainstream Christian theology, angels are wholly spiritual beings and therefore do not eat, excrete or have sex, and have no gender. Although their different roles, such as warriors for some archangels, may suggest a human gender, Christian artists were careful not to given them specific gender attributes, at least until the 19th century, when some acquire breasts for example.

[ 138 ] Three Putti Next to a Cartouche , after François Boucher , 1727–1760, etching and engraving, 26.5 × 21.5 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York City In an address during a General Audience of 6 August 1986, entitled "Angels participate in the history of salvation", Pope John Paul II explained that "[T]he angels have no 'body' (even if, in particular circumstances, they reveal themselves under visible forms because of their mission for the good of people)." [ 70 ] Christian art perhaps reflects the descriptions in Revelation 4:6–8 of the Four Living Creatures ( Greek : τὰ τέσσαρα ζῷα ) and the descriptions in the Hebrew Bible of cherubim and seraphim (the chayot in Ezekiel 's Merkabah vision and the Seraphim of Isaiah ). However, while cherubim and seraphim have wings in the Bible, no angel is mentioned as having wings.

[ 139 ] The earliest known Christian image of an angel—in the Cubicolo dell'Annunziazione in the Catacomb of Priscilla (mid-3rd century)—is without wings. In that same period, representations of angels on sarcophagi , lamps and reliquaries also show them without wings, [ 140 ] as for example the angel in the Sacrifice of Isaac scene in the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus (although the side view of the Sarcophagus shows winged angelic figures).

The earliest known representation of angels with wings is on the "Prince's Sarcophagus", attributed to the time of Theodosius I (379–395), discovered at Sarigüzel, near Istanbul , in the 1930s.

[ 141 ] From that period on, Christian art has represented angels mostly with wings, as in the cycle of mosaics in the Basilica of Saint Mary Major (432–440).

[ 142 ] Four- and six-winged angels, drawn from the higher grades of angels (especially cherubim and seraphim ) and often showing only their faces and wings, are derived from Persian art and are usually shown only in heavenly contexts , as opposed to performing tasks on earth. They often appear in the pendentives of church domes or semi-domes . Prior to the Judeo-Christian tradition, in the Greek world the goddess Nike and the gods Eros and Thanatos were also depicted in human-like form with wings.

John Chrysostom explained the significance of angels' wings: They manifest a nature's sublimity. That is why Gabriel is represented with wings. Not that angels have wings, but that you may know that they leave the heights and the most elevated dwelling to approach human nature. Accordingly, the wings attributed to these powers have no other meaning than to indicate the sublimity of their nature.

[ 143 ] Angels are typically depicted in Mormon art as having no wings based on a quote from Joseph Smith ("An angel of God never has wings").

[ 144 ] In terms of their clothing, angels, especially the Archangel Michael, were depicted as military-style agents of God and came to be shown wearing Late Antique military uniform. This uniform could be the normal military dress, with a tunic to about the knees, an armour breastplate and pteruges , but was often the specific dress of the bodyguard of the Byzantine Emperor , with a long tunic and the loros , the long gold and jewelled pallium restricted to the Imperial family and their closest guards.

The basic military dress was shown in Western art into the Baroque period and beyond (see Reni picture above), and up to the present day in Eastern Orthodox icons . Other angels came to be conventionally depicted in long robes, and in the later Middle Ages they often wear the vestments of a deacon , a cope over a dalmatic . This costume was used especially for Gabriel in Annunciation scenes—for example the Annunciation in Washington by Jan van Eyck .

Some types of angels are described as possessing more unusual or frightening attributes, such as the fiery bodies of the Seraphim , and the wheel-like structures of the Ophanim .

Southern German Baroque angel, by Ignaz Günther , circa 1760–1770, lindenwood with traces of gesso, 26.7 x 18.4 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art Arquebusier Angels , hundreds of colonial paintings depicting these angels, Colonial Bolivia and Peru, 17th century, were part of the Cusco Colonial Painting School The extraordinary-looking Cherubim (immediately to the right of Ezekiel) and Ophanim (the nested-wheels) appear in the chariot vision of Ezekiel An angel in the former coat of arms of Tenala Sopó Archangels , a series of archangels painted around 1650 in colonial Colombia.

Apparition of Saint Michael , ca. 1686 by Cristóbal de Villalpando .

Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral collection. Colonial Mexico.

16th century stone statue depicting the Angel of Portugal , at the Machado de Castro National Museum, in Portugal.

An illustration of a dying woman witnessing angels, presumably depicting a deathbed vision , by Frederick William Fairholt for the 1844 short story "A Forlorn Hope".

See also [ edit ] Angel of the North Angels in art Apsara Chalkydri George Clayton Classification of demons Cupid and Erotes Dakini Demigod Elioud Eudaemon (mythology) Exorcism Gandharva Ghost Genius (mythology) Hierarchy of angels Holy Spirit In paradisum List of angels in theology List of films about angels Non-physical entity Substance theory Uthra Valkyrie Watcher (angel) Yaksha References [ edit ] ^ The Free Dictionary: "angel" Archived 8 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved 1 September 2012 ^ "Angels in Christianity" .

Religion Facts . Archived from the original on 6 April 2015.

^ Mircea Eliade Encyclopedia of Religion Macmillan Publishing (1986) p. 282 ^ Augustine of Hippo 's Enarrationes in Psalmos Archived 9 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine , 103, I, 15 , augustinus.it (in Latin) ^ Mircea Eliade Encyclopedia of Religion Macmillan Publishing (1986) p. 282 ^ Mircea Eliade Encyclopedia of Religion Macmillan Publishing (1986) p. 284 ^ Mircea Eliade Encyclopedia of Religion Macmillan Publishing (1986) p. 283 ^ Proverbio (2007), pp. 90–95; compare review in La Civiltà Cattolica , 3795–3796 (2–16 August 2008), pp. 327–328.

^ Didron, Vol 2, pp.68–71.

^ Blau, Ludwig; Kohler, Kaufmann.

"Angelology" .

Jewish Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "angel – Definition of angel in English by Oxford Dictionaries" .

Oxford Dictionaries – English . Archived from the original on 12 May 2013.

^ Strong, James.

"Strong's Greek" .

Biblehub.com .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2021 . Retrieved 4 October 2017 .

Transliteration: aggelos Phonetic Spelling: (ang'-el-os) ^ palaeolexicon.com, a-ke-ro Archived 2 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Palaeolexicon.

^ Beekes, R. S. P.

, Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, p. 9.

^ Kosior, Wojciech (June 2013).

"The Angel in the Hebrew Bible from the Statistic and Hermeneutic Perspectives. Some Remarks on the Interpolation Theory" .

The Polish Journal of Biblical Research .

12 (1 (23)): 55– 70.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2022 . Retrieved 22 November 2013 .

^ a b c d Abu-Hamdiyyah, Muhammad. The Qur'an: an introduction. Routledge, 2020.

^ al-Suyūṭī’s, Jalāl al-Dīn. "“Panangelon”: Angelology and Its Relation to Polytheism." The Intermediate Worlds of Angels: 153-154 ^ a b Barr, James. "The question of religious influence: The case of Zoroastrianism, Judaism, and Christianity." Journal of the American Academy of Religion 53.2 (1985): 201-235.

^ a b c d e The Encyclopedia of Religion . Vol. 1. New York: Macmillan. 1986. p.

283 .

ISBN 0-02-909700-2 .

^ a b Rees, Valery. From Gabriel to Lucifer: A cultural history of angels. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2012.

^ Lewis, James R., Oliver, Evelyn Dorothy, Sisung Kelle S. (Editor) (1996), Angels A to Z , Entry: Zoroastrianism , pp. 425–427, Visible Ink Press , ISBN 0-7876-0652-9 ^ Piras A. (2016) Angel. In Vocabulary for the stury of religion Brill ^ Reynolds, G. S. (2009). Angels. In K. Fleet, G. Krämer, D. Matringe, J. Nawas and D. J. Stewart (eds.), Encyclopaedia of Islam Three Online. Brill.

https://doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_23204 ^ Kuehn, S., Leder, S., & Pökel, H. P. (2019, December). Introduction: Angels and Their Religious and Cosmological Contexts. In The Intermediate Worlds of Angels. Ergon-Verlag. p. 15 ^ Piras A. (2016) Angel. In Vocabulary for the stury of religion Brill ^ Hermann Röttger: Mal'ak jhwh, Bote von Gott. Die Vorstellung von Gottesboten im hebräischen Alten Testament. Peter Lang Verlag, Frankfurt am Main 1978, ISBN 3-261-02633-2 (zugl. Dissertation, Universität Regensburg 1977).
Johann Michl: Engel (jüd.). In: RAC, Band 5. Hiersemann Verlag, Stuttgart 1962, p. 60–97. (German) ^ Joseph Hertz: Kommentar zum Pentateuch, hier zu Gen 19,17 EU. Morascha Verlag Zürich, 1984. Band I, p. 164. (German) ^ Jones, David Albert. Angels: a history. Oxford University Press, 2010. p. 3 ^ a b " "מַלְאָךְ", Francis Brown, S. R. Driver, and Charles A. Briggs, eds.: A Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament , p. 521" . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

^ Pope, Hugh.

"Angels." Archived 1 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. accessed 20 October 2010 ^ Frederick Copleston, A History of Philosophy , Volume 1, Continuum, 2003, p. 460.

^ Baker, Louis Goldberg.

Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology : Angel of the Lord Archived 12 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine "The functions of the angel of the Lord in the Old Testament prefigure the reconciling ministry of Jesus. In the New Testament, there is no mention of the angel of the Lord; the Messiah himself is this person." ^ Russell, Jeffrey Burton. The devil: Perceptions of evil from antiquity to primitive Christianity. Cornell University Press, 1987. p. 197 ^ Russell, Jeffrey Burton. The devil: Perceptions of evil from antiquity to primitive Christianity. Cornell University Press, 1987. p. 197 ^ Russell, Jeffrey Burton. The devil: Perceptions of evil from antiquity to primitive Christianity. Cornell University Press, 1987. p. 201-202 ^ a b c d Coogan, Michael D. (2009).

A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament . Oxford University Press.

^ a b c "Angelology" . The Jewish Encyclopedia.

Archived from the original on 28 March 2010 . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

^ Dunn, James D. G.

(15 July 2010).

Did the First Christians Worship Jesus?: The New Testament Evidence . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 67.

ISBN 978-1-61164-070-0 .

God sends an angel to communicate with prophets, and an interpreter angel appears regularly in apocalyptic visions and as companion in heavenly journeys. One of the most fascinating features of several ancient stories is the appearance of what can be called theophanic angels; that is, angels who not only bring a message from God, but who represent God in personal terms, or who even may be said to embody God.

^ Chilton, Bruce D.

(2002).

"(The) Son of (The) Man, and Jesus" . In Craig A. Evans (ed.).

Authenticating the Words of Jesus . BRILL. p. 276.

ISBN 0-391-04163-0 .

As described in the book of Daniel, "one like a son of man" is clearly identified as the messianic and angelic redeemer of Israel, a truly heavenly redeemer known to Israel as the archangel Michael.

^ Russell, Jeffrey Burton. The devil: Perceptions of evil from antiquity to primitive Christianity. Cornell University Press, 1987. p. 198-199 ^ Hayes, Christine.

The Torah was not Given to Ministering Angels: Rabbinic Aspirationalism.

Talmudic Transgressions. Brill, 2017. 123–160.

^ a b Reinhard Gregor Kratz, Hermann Spieckermann: Götterbilder, Gottesbilder, Weltbilder: Griechenland und Rom, Judentum, Christentum und Islam. Mohr Siebeck, 2006, ISBN 978-3-16-148807-8 (German) ^ Sanhedrin 38b and Avodah Zerah 3b.

^ Aleksander R. Michalak, Angels as Warriors in Late Second Temple Jewish Literature, Tuebingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2012.

^ Hannah Darrell D., Michael and Christ: Michael Traditions and Angel Christology in Early Christianity , Tuebingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1999 ^ cf. Sanhedrin 95b ^ Copleston, Frederick Charles (2003).

A history of philosophy, Volume 1 . Continuum International Publishing Group, p. 460.

ISBN 0-8264-6895-0 ^ Friedlander, Gerald.

Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer Varda Books ^ Marshall, P., & Walsham, A. (Eds.). (2006). Angels in the early modern world. Cambridge University Press.
p. 3 ^ Marshall, P., & Walsham, A. (Eds.). (2006). Angels in the early modern world. Cambridge University Press.
p. 3 ^ Marshall, P., & Walsham, A. (Eds.). (2006). Angels in the early modern world. Cambridge University Press.
p. 4 ^ Barker, Margaret (2004).

An Extraordinary Gathering of Angels , M Q Publications.

^ "LA FIGURA DELL'ANGELO NELLA CIVILTA' PALEOCRISTIANA – PROVERBIO CECILIA – TAU – Libro" . 27 December 2008. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008 . Retrieved 23 September 2017 .

^ a b Muehlberger, Ellen (2013).

Angels in late ancient Christianity . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-993193-4 .

OCLC 806291246 .

^ JONES, David Albert. Angels: a history. Oxford University Press, 2010.

^ HAECKER, Ryan. Origen's Speculative Angelology. 2021. p. 9 ^ Martin, Dale Basil (2010).

"When Did Angels Become Demons?" .

Journal of Biblical Literature .

129 (4): 657– 677.

doi : 10.2307/25765960 .

ISSN 0021-9231 .

JSTOR 25765960 .

^ a b Martin, Dale Basil (2010). "When Did Angels Become Demons?".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

129 (4): 657– 677.

doi : 10.2307/25765960 .

ISSN 0021-9231 .

JSTOR 25765960 .

^ Loren T. Stuckenbruck; Gabriele Boccaccini (2016).

Enoch and the Synoptic Gospels: Reminiscences, Allusions, Intertextuality . SBL Press. p. 119.

ISBN 978-0-88414-118-1 .

^ Loren T. Stuckenbruck; Gabriele Boccaccini (2016).

Enoch and the Synoptic Gospels: Reminiscences, Allusions, Intertextuality . SBL Press. pp.

112– 113.

ISBN 978-0-88414-118-1 .

^ Loren T. Stuckenbruck; Gabriele Boccaccini (2016).

Enoch and the Synoptic Gospels: Reminiscences, Allusions, Intertextuality . SBL Press. p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-88414-118-1 .

^ David Jeremiah (2013).

"Created in the Beginning" .

Angels Who They Are and How They Help--What the Bible Reveals .

Crown Publishing Group . p. 75.

ISBN 9780307831293 .

OCLC 859530086 .

^ MARTIN, DALE BASIL. “When Did Angels Become Demons?” Journal of Biblical Literature 129, no. 4 (2010): 674.

https://doi.org/10.2307/25765960 .

^ JONES, David Albert. Angels: a history. Oxford University Press, 2010. p. 8 ^ MARTIN, DALE BASIL. “When Did Angels Become Demons?” Journal of Biblical Literature 129, no. 4 (2010): 674.

https://doi.org/10.2307/25765960 .

^ JONES, David Albert. Angels: a history. Oxford University Press, 2010. p. 58 ^ a b "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Angels" .

www.newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2006 . Retrieved 29 October 2005 .

^ "BibleGateway, Luke 22:43" . Biblegateway.com.

Archived from the original on 15 July 2012 . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

^ Ann Ball, 2003 Encyclopedia of Catholic Devotions and Practices ISBN 0-87973-910-X page 123 ^ a b "Angels Participate In History Of Salvation" . Vatican.va. 6 August 1986. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

^ "Directory on popular piety and the liturgy. Principles and guidelines" .

www.vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2012 . Retrieved 15 March 2020 .

^ Ludlow, Morwenna (2012). Brakke, David (ed.).

"Demons, Evil, and Liminality in Cappadocian Theology" (PDF) .

Journal of Early Christian Studies .

20 (2). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press: 179–211 [183].

doi : 10.1353/earl.2012.0014 .

hdl : 10871/15370 .

ISSN 1067-6341 .

S2CID 145816767 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ Proverbio (2007), pp. 29–38; cf. summary in Libreria Hoepli Archived 27 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine and review in La Civiltà Cattolica , 3795–3796 (2–16 August 2008), pp. 327–328.

^ Augustine, En. in Ps. 103, 1, 15: PL 37, 1348 ^ Pope Gregory I ; David Hurst (OSB.) (1990). "Homily 34".

Forty Gospel Homilies . Cistercian Publications. p. 287.

ISBN 978-0-87907-623-8 .

You should be aware that the word "angel" denotes a function rather than a nature. Those holy spirits of heaven have indeed always been spirits. They can only be called angels when they deliver some message. Moreover, those who deliver messages of lesser importance are called angels; and those who proclaim messages of supreme importance are called archangels. And so it was that not merely an angel but the archangel Gabriel was sent to the Virgin Mary.

^ a b Scribano 2022 , p. 11.

^ Thomas Aquinas.

"46" .

Summa contra Gentiles . Vol. 2. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012 . Retrieved 2 February 2011 .

^ Thomas Aquinas . "Treatise on The Angels (Spirit)".

Summa Theologiae: The substance of the angels absolutely considered (Prima Pars, Q. 50) . Newadvent.org.

Archived from the original on 2 November 2010 . Retrieved 2 February 2011 .

^ Aquinas, Thomas.

De substantiis separatis . Josephkenny.joyeurs.com. Archived from the original on 12 December 2010.

^ a b Scribano 2022 , p. 12.

^ Scribano 2022 , pp. 12–13.

^ "BibleGateway, Matthew 24:36" . Biblegateway.com.

Archived from the original on 15 July 2012 . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

^ Pegues, O.P., R.P. Thomas (1922).

Cathechism of the "Summa Theologica" of Saint Thomas Aquinas for the Use of the Faithful . Translated by Whitacre, O.P., Aelred. Leipzig: St Athanasius Press. pp.

26– 27.

ISBN 978-1-7216-9547-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Edward Feser (2009).

Aquinas A Beginner's Guide . Simon and Schuster. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-78074-006-5 .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

An angel, says Aquinas, is a form without matter, and thus its essence corresponds to its form alone (DEE 4). ... Does this mean that an angel, as a pure form, is also pure actuality, devoid of potency? By no means.

^ a b "... of essence and actus essendi in angels, and from their consequent caused character to their potency-act composition)" ... As quoted in John F. Whippel (2020).

Metaphysical Themes in Thomas Aquinas III . Studies in philosophy and the history of philosophy. Vol. 63.

CUA Press . p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-8132-3355-0 .

ISSN 0585-6965 .

and JSTOR 24636655 ^ ideo est in eo compositio actus et potencie . Cfr. Quodlibet IX, question 4, article 1, corpus, Rome: Leonine edition , 1996, vol. 25, fasc. 2/1, p. 102 Column B, lines 115-124 and p. 103 column A, lines 125-132). As quoted in "Commentary on actus essendi " .

Actus Essendi . 2 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2023 . Retrieved 15 May 2023 .

; also quoted in Juan José Herrera (2015).

"El "actus essendi" en Tomás de Aquino: Distinción, evolución y síntesis personal" .

La fascinación de ser metafísico .

Academia.edu : 55– 90.

^ Edouard Hugon (2013).

Cosmology Translated, with Notes by Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo . Editiones Scholasticae. p. 196.

ISBN 978-3-86838-531-1 .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

Quote: "Another requirement is that there be a principle of individuation. But certain beings, namely angels, lack a principle of individuation, which is signate matter. Hence, the angelic form, even though it is communicable in itself as species, is not in fact communicated, because there are no numerically distinct subjects that can receive it." ^ Syed Anwer Ali Qurʼan, the Fundamental Law of Human Life: Surat ul-Faateha to Surat-ul-Baqarah (sections 1–21) Syed Publications 1984 University of Virginia
Digitalized 22. Okt. 2010 p. 121 ^ S.R. Burge Journal of Qurʼanic Studies The Angels in Sūrat al-Malāʾika: Exegeses of Q. 35:1 Sep 2011. vol. 10, No. 1 : pp. 50–70 ^ Stephen Burge Angels in Islam: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's al-Haba'ik fi akhbar al-mala'ik Routledge 2015 ISBN 978-1-136-50473-0 p. 23 ^ Stephen Burge Angels in Islam: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's al-Haba'ik fi akhbar al-mala'ik Routledge 2015 ISBN 978-1-136-50473-0 ^ Saleh, Walid A. "Rereading al-Ṭabarī through al-Māturīdī: New light on the third century hijrī." Journal of Qur'anic Studies 18.2 (2016): 180-209.

^ Ulrich Rudolph Al-Māturīdī und Die Sunnitische Theologie in Samarkand Brill, 1997 ISBN 9789004100237 pp. 54-56 ^ Erdağı, Deniz Özkan. "Evil in Turkish Muslim horror film: the demonic in “Semum”." SN Social Sciences 4.2 (2024): 1-22.

^ Welch, A.T., Paret, R. and Pearson, J.D., "al-Ḳurʾān", in: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition, Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E.
van Donzel, W.P. Heinrichs. Consulted online on 05 May 2022 < http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0543 >
First published online: 2012
First print edition: ISBN 978-90-04-16121-4 , 1960-2007 section 2 ^ Yazaki, Saeko. "Classes of Beings in Sufism." Sufi Cosmology. Brill, 2022. 68-88.

^ Lange, C. R. "Locating hell in Islamic traditions-conference booklet." International symposium in Islamic Traditions. 2012.

^ Stephen Burge Angels in Islam: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's al-Haba'ik fi akhbar al-mala'ik Routledge 2015 ISBN 978-1-136-50473-0 p. 29 ^ Stephen Burge Angels in Islam: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's al-Haba'ik fi akhbar al-mala'ik Routledge 2015 ISBN 978-1-136-50473-0 p. 22 ^ Patrick Hughes, Thomas Patrick Hughes Dictionary of Islam Asian Educational Services 1995 ISBN 978-81-206-0672-2 page 73 ^ Kuehn (2019) .

^ Egdunas Racius ISLAMIC EXEGESIS ON THE JINN: THEIR ORIGIN, KINDS AND SUBSTANCE AND THEIR RELATION TO OTHER BEINGS pp. 132–135 ^ Zh. D. Dadebayev, M.T. Kozhakanova, I.K.Azimbayeva Human's Anthropological Appearance in Abai Kunanbayev's Works World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology Vol:6 2012-06-23 p. 1065 ^ Tamer, Georges. Islam and Rationality: The Impact of al-Ghazālī. Papers Collected on His 900th Anniversary. Vol. 1. Vol. 94. Brill, 2015. p. 103 ^ Amira El-Zein (2009). Islam, Arabs, and Intelligent World of the Jinn. Syracuse University Press. pp. 34–51.

^ "Meleklere İman » Sorularla İslamiyet" .

Sorularla İslamiyet (in Turkish). 24 June 2008 . Retrieved 16 August 2024 .

^ Russell, Jeffrey Burton (1986). Lucifer: The Devil in the Middle Ages. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-9429-1. p. 60 ^ Wensinck, A. J. (2013). The Muslim Creed: Its Genesis and Historical Development. Vereinigtes Königreich: Taylor & Francis. p. 200 ^ Imam Abu Hanifa's Al Fiqh Al Akbar Explained By أبو حنيفة النعمان بن ثابت Abu 'l Muntaha Ahmad Al Maghnisawi Abdur Rahman Ibn Yusuf" ^ Serdar, Murat. "Hıristiyanlık ve İslâm'da Meleklerin Varlık ve Kısımları." Bilimname 2009.2 (2009). p. 156 ^ ibn ʿUmar al-Baydawi, ʿAbd Allah (2016).

The Lights Of Revelation And The Secrets Of Interpretation . Translated by Haddad, Gibril Fouad. Beacon Books and Media Limited.

ISBN 9780992633578 .

^ Guessoum, Nidhal (2010).

Islam's Quantum Question: Reconciling Muslim Tradition and Modern Science . I.B. Tauris.

ISBN 978-0-85773-075-6 .

^ Stephen Burge Angels in Islam: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's al-Haba'ik fi Akhbar al-malik Routledge 2015 ISBN 978-1-136-50473-0 p. 13-14 ^ Stephen Burge Angels in Islam: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's al-Haba'ik fi akhbar al-mala'ik Routledge 2015 ISBN 978-1-136-50473-0 pp. 97–99 ^ Quran 35:1 , Esposito (2002 , pp. 26–28), W. Madelung. "Malā'ika".

Encyclopaedia of Islam Online .

, Gisela Webb. "Angel".

Encyclopaedia of the Qurʼan Online .

^ a b "The Wonders of Creation" .

www.wdl.org . 1750 . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ Gruber, Christiane J. (2008). The Timurid "Book of Ascension" (Micrajnama): A Study of the Text and Image in a Pan-Asian Context. Patrimonia. p. 254 ^ Smith, Peter (2000).

"angels" .

A concise encyclopedia of the Baháʼí Faith . Oxford: Oneworld Publications. pp.

38–39 .

ISBN 1-85168-184-1 .

^ "Tablet of the Maiden" .

bahai-library.com .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2019 . Retrieved 6 June 2019 .

^ a b Woschitz, Karl M., Görg, Manfred, Wischmeyer, Oda, Sparn, Walter, Lohberg, Gabriele, Stubbe, Ellen, Herrmann, Klaus and Schöck, Cornelia, “Angels”, in: Religion Past and Present. Consulted online on 08 February 2024, doi : 10.1163/1877-5888_rpp_COM_04337 , First published online: 2011, First print edition: ISBN 9789004146662 , 2006-2013 ^ Aristotle .

Metaphysics . 1072a ff.

^ Aristotle .

Metaphysics . 1073a13 ff.

^ Abdullah Saeed Islamic Thought: An Introduction Routledge 2006 ISBN 978-1-134-22565-1 p. 101 ^ Mark Verman The Books of Contemplation: Medieval Jewish Mystical Sources SUNY Press 1992 ISBN 978-0-7914-0719-6 p. 129 ^ Lang, B. (2015). Angel. In F. Jaeger (ed.), Encyclopedia of Early Modern History Online. Brill.

https://doi.org/10.1163/2352-0272_emho_COM_018765 ^ Betz, Hans (1996).

The Greek Magical Papyri In Translation . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-04447-7 .

Entries: "Introduction to the Greek Magical Papyri" and "PGM III. 1-164/fourth formula".

^ Ahuvia, Mika.

On My Right Michael, On My Left Gabriel .

^ James M. Robinson (1988).

The Nag Hammadi Library .

Read online for free at the Internet Archive .

^ Piras A. (2016) Angel. In Vocabulary for the stury of religion Brill ^ Piras A. (2016) Angel. In Vocabulary for the stury of religion Brill ^ "Strong's Hebrew: 691. אֶרְאֵל (erel) – perhaps a hero" .

biblesuite.com .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 5 December 2012 .

^ "Strong's Hebrew: 2830. חַשְׁמַל (chashmal) – perhaps amber" .

biblesuite.com .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2013 . Retrieved 5 December 2012 .

^ "Strong's Hebrew: 3742. כְּרוּב (kerub) – probably an order of angelic beings" .

biblesuite.com .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 December 2012 .

^ Hodson, Geoffrey, Kingdom of the Gods ISBN 0-7661-8134-0 —Has color pictures of what Devas supposedly look like when observed by the third eye —their appearance is reputedly like colored flames about the size of a human.

Paintings of some of the devas claimed to have been seen by Hodson from his book Kingdom of the Gods : ^ "Eskild Tjalve's paintings of devas, nature spirits, elementals and fairies" . 21 November 2002. Archived from the original on 21 November 2002 . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

^ a b Powell, A.E.

The Solar System London:1930 The Theosophical Publishing House (A Complete Outline of the Theosophical Scheme of Evolution) See "Lifewave" chart (refer to index) ^ Omarkhali, Khanna (2017).

The Yezidi religious textual tradition, from oral to written : categories, transmission, scripturalisation, and canonisation of the Yezidi oral religious texts : with samples of oral and written religious texts and with audio and video samples on CD-ROM . Wiesbaden.

ISBN 978-3-447-10856-0 .

OCLC 994778968 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Because angels are purely spiritual creatures without bodies, there is no sexual difference between them. There are no male or female angels; they are not distinguished by gender.", p. 10, "Catholic Questions, Wise Answers", Ed. Michael J. Daley, St. Anthony Messenger Press, 2001, ISBN 978-0-86716-398-8 . See also Catholic Answers Archived 2 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine , which gives the standard, unchanged, Catholic position.

^ "Angel", The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia James Orr, editor, 1915 edition.

^ Proverbio (2007), pp. 81–89; cf. review in La Civiltà Cattolica , 3795–3796 (2–16 August 2008), pp. 327–328.

^ Proverbio (2007) p. 66.

^ Proverbio (2007), pp. 90–95 ^ Proverbio (2007) p. 34.

^ "History of the Church, 3:392" . Institute.lds.org.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2020 . Retrieved 30 July 2012 .

Sources [ edit ] Esposito, John (2002).

What Everyone Needs to Know about Islam .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0 .

Kuehn, Sara (2019).

"The Primordial Cycle Revisited: Adam, Eve, and the Celestial Beings" .

The Intermediate Worlds of Angels: Islamic Representations of Celestial Beings in Transcultural Contexts . Germany: Ergon Verlag. pp.

173– 199.

ISBN 978-3-95650-623-9 – via Academia.edu.

Scribano, Emanuela (2022). "Descartes' Innatisms as Anti-Augistinianism".

Descartes in Context: Essays . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780197649558 .

Further reading [ edit ] Angels in Art by Clara Erskine Clement Waters Barker, Margaret (2004).

An Extraordinary Gathering of Angels , M Q Publications.

ISBN 978-1-84072-680-0 Bennett, William Henry (1911), "Angel" , in Chisholm, Hugh (ed.), Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 2 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp.

4– 6 Briggs, Constance Victoria, 1997.

The Encyclopedia of Angels : An A-to-Z Guide with Nearly 4,000 Entries.

Plume.

ISBN 0-452-27921-6 .

Bunson, Matthew, (1996).

Angels A to Z: A Who's Who of the Heavenly Host.

Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 0-517-88537-9 .

Cruz, Joan Carroll, OCDS , 1999.

Angels and Devils.

TAN Books and Publishers, Inc.

ISBN 0-89555-638-3 Cummings, Owen F., 2023.

Angels In Scripture and Tradition , Paulist Press, New Jersey.

ISBN 978-0-8091-5633-7 Davidson, A. B.

(1898).

"Angel" . In James Hastings (ed.).

A Dictionary of the Bible . Vol. I. pp.

93– 97.

Davidson, Gustav, (1967).

A Dictionary of Angels: Including the Fallen Angels . Free Press.

ISBN 0-02-907052-X Driver, Samuel Rolles (Ed.) (1901) The book of Daniel.

Cambridge UP.

Guiley, Rosemary, 1996.

Encyclopedia of Angels.

ISBN 0-8160-2988-1 Jastrow, Marcus, 1996, A dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmud Bavli and Yerushalmi, and the Midrashic literature compiled by Marcus Jastrow, PhD., Litt.D. with an index of Scriptural quotations , Vol 1 & 2, The Judaica Press, New York Kainz, Howard P., "Active and Passive Potency" in Thomistic Angelology Martinus Nijhoff.

ISBN 90-247-1295-5 Kreeft, Peter J. 1995.

Angels and Demons: What Do We Really Know About Them?

Ignatius Press.

ISBN 0-89870-550-9 Leducq, M. H. (1853).

"On the Origin and Primitive Meaning of the French word Ange" .

Proceedings of the Philological Society .

6 (132).

Archived from the original on 3 February 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2018 .

Lewis, James R. (1995).

Angels A to Z.

Visible Ink Press.

ISBN 0-7876-0652-9 Michalak, Aleksander R. (2012), Angels as Warriors in Late Second Temple Jewish Literature.

Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3-16-151739-6 .

Miller, Stephen. (2019), The Book of Angels: Seen and Unseen.

Cambridge Scholars Pub.

ISBN 978-1-5275-3434-6 .

https://www.cambridgescholars.com/product/978-1-5275-3434-6 Muehlberger, Ellen (2013).

Angels in Late Ancient Christianity.

Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-993193-4 Oosterzee, Johannes Jacobus van.

Christian dogmatics: a text-book for academical instruction and private study.

Trans. John Watson Watson and Maurice J. Evans. (1874) New York, Scribner, Armstrong.

Proverbio, Cecilia (2007).

La figura dell'angelo nella civiltà paleocristiana (in Italian). Assisi, Italy: Editrice Tau.

ISBN 978-88-87472-69-1 .

Ronner, John, 1993.

Know Your Angels: The Angel Almanac With Biographies of 100 Prominent Angels in Legend & Folklore-And Much More!

Mamre Press.

ISBN 0-932945-40-6 .

Smith, George Adam (1898) The book of the twelve prophets, commonly called the minor.

London, Hodder and Stoughton.

von Heijne, Camilla, 2010.

The Messenger of the Lord in Early Jewish Interpretations of Genesis . BZAW 412. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York, ISBN 978-3-11-022684-3 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Angels .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Angels .

Coptic Doxology of Heavenly Order Zoroastrian angels Jewish Encyclopedia entry on angels Directory on popular piety and the liturgy. Principles and guidelines Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments.

Directory of Popular Piety and the Liturgy , §§ 212–217, The Holy Angels , Vatican City, December 2001] Angels , BBC Radio 4 discussion with Martin Palmer, Valery Rees & John Haldane ( In Our Time , Mar. 24, 2005) v t e Angels in Abrahamic religions Angels in Judaism Individuals Michael Gabriel Raphael Uriel Angel of the Lord Angel of the Presence Destroying Angel Azrael Ariel Arariel Azazel Camael Cassiel Dobiel Dumah Eisheth Hadraniel Haniel Jerahmeel Jophiel Kushiel Lailah Mastema Metatron Nuriel Pravuil Raziel Sachiel Samael Samyaza Sandalphon Senoy, Sansenoy and Semangelof Tzaphqiel Yahoel Zadkiel Zerachiel Groups Seraphim Chayot Ophanim Cherubim Hashmallim Ishim Sons of God Recording angels Angels in Christianity Individuals Michael Gabriel Abaddon Raphael Uriel Ariel Azazel Sariel Sandalphon Raguel Ramiel Selaphiel Barachiel Jegudiel Camael Guardian Angel of Portugal Jerahmeel Jophiel Metatron Samyaza Pravuil Sachiel Zadkiel Sarathiel Zerachiel Phanuel Aker Gabuthelon Arphugitonos Beburos Zebuleon Daniel Kerubiel Kokabiel Kushiel Leliel Muriel Pahaliah Seraphiel Shamsiel Chazaqiel Groups Seraphim Cherubim Ophanim / Thrones Dominions / Lordships Virtues Powers / Authorities Principalities / Rulers Archangels Watchers / Guardian angels Angels in Islam Individuals Mikha'il Jibra'il Israfil Azra'il ar-Rūḥ ʿAzāzīl Iblis Artiya'il Darda'il Dumah Kalqa'il Futrus Ḥabīb Harut and Marut Mālik Munkar and Nakir Riḍwan Groups Mu'qarrabun ( Cherubim and Seraphim ) Archangels Angels of Hell Hafaza ( Guardian angel ) Recording angels Nāzi'āt and Nāshiṭāt Uthras (angels) in Mandaeism Individuals Yushamin Abatur Ptahil Hibil Shitil Anush Sam Ziwa Manda d-Hayyi Shilmai Nidbai Adathan and Yadathan Yufin-Yufafin Urfeil and Marfeil Tar and Tarwan Bihram Zihrun Etinsib Ziwa Nbat Nsab Gubran Shihlun Yurba Yukabar Yukashar Yawar Ziwa Simat Hayyi Saureil Groups Niṭufta Gupna Ziwa Related Angel Moroni Mormonism Hierarchy of angels Heavenly host Seven Archangels Three Angels' Messages Watcher Fallen angels List of angels in theology List of angels in Ars Paulina Ambiguous Chalkydri Elioud Nephilim Teraphim In culture Art List of angels in fiction List of films about angels v t e Angels in Christianity First Sphere Seraphim Cherubim Ophanim or Thrones Second Sphere Dominions Virtues Powers or Authorities Third Sphere Principalities or Rulers Archangels Angels v t e People and things in the Quran Characters Non-humans Allāh ('The God ') Names of Allah found in the Quran, such as Karīm (Generous) Animals Related The baqara (cow) of Israelites The dhiʾb (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph The fīl ( elephant ) of the Abyssinians Ḥimār ( Domesticated donkey ) The hud-hud ( hoopoe ) of Solomon The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave The namlah (female ant) of Solomon The nūn (fish or whale) of Jonah The nāqat (she-camel) of Ṣāliḥ Non-related ʿAnkabūt (Female spider ) Dābbat al-Arḍ ( Beast of the Earth ) Ḥimār ( Wild ass ) Naḥl ( Honey bee ) Qaswarah (' Lion ', 'beast of prey' or 'hunter') Malāʾikah ( Angels ) Angels of Hell Mālik Zabāniyah Bearers of the Throne Harut and Marut Jundallah Kirāman Kātibīn (Honourable Scribes) Raqib Atid Muqarrabun Jibrīl (Gabriel, chief) Ar-Rūḥ ('The Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Amīn ('The Trustworthy Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Qudus ('The Holy Spirit ') Angel of the Trumpet ( Isrāfīl or Raphael ) Malakul-Mawt (Angel of Death, Azrael) Mīkāil (Michael) Jinn (Genies) Jann ʿIfrīt Sakhr (Asmodeus) Qarīn Shayāṭīn ( Demons ) Iblīs ash-Shayṭān (the (chief) Devil ) Mārid ('Rebellious one') Others Ghilmān or Wildān Ḥūr Prophets Mentioned Ādam ( Adam ) Al-Yasa ʿ ( Elisha ) Ayyūb ( Job ) Dāwūd ( David ) Dhūl-Kifl (Ezekiel?) Hārūn (Aaron) Hūd (Eber?) Idrīs ( Enoch ?) Ilyās (Elijah) ʿImrān (Joachim the father of Maryam) Isḥāq ( Isaac ) Ismāʿīl ( Ishmael ) Dhabih Ullah Lūṭ ( Lot ) Ṣāliḥ Shuʿayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab ?) Sulaymān ibn Dāwūd ( Solomon son of David) ʿ Uzair ( Ezra ?) Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā ( John the Baptist the son of Zechariah) Yaʿqūb ( Jacob ) Isrāʾīl (Israel) Yūnus ( Jonah ) Dhūn-Nūn ('He of the Fish (or Whale )' or 'Owner of the Fish (or Whale)') Ṣāḥib al-Ḥūt ('Companion of the Whale') Yūsuf ibn Ya‘qūb ( Joseph son of Jacob) Zakariyyā ( Zechariah ) Ulul-ʿAzm ('Those of the Perseverance and Strong Will') Muḥammad Aḥmad Other names and titles of Muhammad ʿĪsā ( Jesus ) Al-Masīḥ (The Messiah ) Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary) Mūsā Kalīmullāh ( Moses He who spoke to God) Ibrāhīm Khalīlullāh ( Abraham Friend of God) Nūḥ ( Noah ) Debatable ones Dhūl-Qarnain Luqmān Maryam ( Mary ) Ṭālūt ( Saul or Gideon ?) Implied Irmiyā (Jeremiah) Ṣamūʾīl ( Samuel ) Yūshaʿ ibn Nūn (Joshua, companion and successor of Moses) People of Prophets Good ones Adam's immediate relatives Martyred son Wife Believer of Ya-Sin Family of Noah Father Lamech Mother Shamkhah bint Anush or Betenos Luqman's son People of Abraham Mother Abiona or Amtelai the daughter of Karnebo Ishmael's mother Isaac's mother People of Jesus Disciples (including Peter ) Mary's mother Zechariah's wife People of Solomon Mother Queen of Sheba Vizier Zayd (Muhammad's adopted son) People of Joseph Brothers (including Binyāmin (Benjamin) and Simeon ) Egyptians ʿAzīz ( Potiphar , Qatafir or Qittin) Malik (King Ar-Rayyān ibn Al-Walīd)) Wife of ʿAzīz ( Zulaykhah ) Mother People of Aaron and Moses Egyptians Believer (Hizbil or Hizqil ibn Sabura) Imraʾat Firʿawn ( Āsiyá bint Muzāḥim the Wife of Pharaoh , who adopted Moses) Magicians of the Pharaoh Wise, pious man Moses' wife Moses' sister-in-law Mother Sister Evil ones Āzar (possibly Terah ) Firʿawn ( Pharaoh of Moses' time) Hāmān Jālūt (Goliath) Qārūn (Korah, cousin of Moses) As-Sāmirī Abū Lahab Slayers of Ṣāliḥ's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr) Implied or not specified Abraha Abu Bakr Bal'am/Balaam Barṣīṣā Caleb or Kaleb the companion of Joshua Luqman's son Nebuchadnezzar II Nimrod Rahmah the wife of Ayyub Shaddad Groups Mentioned Aṣḥāb al-Jannah People of Paradise People of the Burnt Garden Aṣḥāb as-Sabt (Companions of the Sabbath ) Jesus' apostles Ḥawāriyyūn ( Disciples of Jesus ) Companions of Noah's Ark Aṣḥāb al-Kahf war-Raqīm ( Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?

Companions of the Elephant People of al-Ukhdūd People of a township in Surah Ya-Sin People of Yathrib or Medina Qawm Lūṭ (People of Sodom and Gomorrah) Nation of Noah Tribes, ethnicities or families ‘ Ajam Ar-Rūm (literally 'The Romans') Banī Isrāʾīl (Children of Israel) Muʾtafikāt (Sodom and Gomorrah) People of Ibrahim People of Ilyas People of Nuh People of Shuaib Ahl Madyan People of Madyan ) Aṣḥāb al-Aykah ('Companions of the Wood') Qawm Yūnus (People of Jonah) Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog People of Fir'aun Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad) Aṣḥāb Muḥammad ( Companions of Muhammad ) Anṣār (literally 'Helpers') Muhajirun (Emigrants from Mecca to Medina) People of Mecca Wife of Abu Lahab Children of Ayyub Sons of Adam Wife of Nuh Wife of Lut Yaʾjūj wa Maʾjūj (Gog and Magog) Son of Nuh Aʿrāb ( Arabs or Bedouins ) ʿĀd (people of Hud) Companions of the Rass Qawm Tubbaʿ (People of Tubba ) People of Sabaʾ or Sheba Quraysh Thamūd (people of Ṣāliḥ) Aṣḥāb al-Ḥijr ('Companions of the Stoneland ') Ahl al-Bayt ('People of the Household') Household of Abraham Brothers of Yūsuf Lot's daughters Progeny of Imran Household of Moses Household of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim Daughters of Muhammad Muhammad's wives Household of Salih Implicitly mentioned Amalek Ahl as-Suffa (People of the Verandah) Banu Nadir Banu Qaynuqa Banu Qurayza Iranian people Umayyad Dynasty Aus and Khazraj People of Quba Religious groups Ahl al-Dhimmah Kāfirūn disbelievers Majūs Zoroastrians Munāfiqūn ( Hypocrites ) Muslims Believers Ahl al-Kitāb ( People of the Book ) Naṣārā ( Christian (s) or People of the Injil) Ruhban (Christian monks) Qissis (Christian priest) Yahūd ( Jews ) Ahbār (Jewish scholars) Rabbani/Rabbi Sabians Polytheists Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot Locations Mentioned Al-Arḍ Al-Muqaddasah ('The Holy Land') 'Blessed' Land' Al- Jannah ( Paradise , literally 'The Garden') Jahannam ( Hell ) Door of Hittah Madyan ( Midian ) Majmaʿ al-Baḥrayn Miṣr (Mainland Egypt ) Salsabīl (A river in Paradise) In the Arabian Peninsula (excluding Madyan) Al-Aḥqāf ('The Sandy Plains,' or 'the Wind-curved Sand-hills') Iram dhāt al-ʿImād ( Iram of the Pillars ) Al- Madīnah (formerly Yathrib ) ʿArafāt and Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām Al-Ḥijr (Hegra) Badr Ḥunayn Makkah ( Mecca ) Bakkah Ḥaraman Āminan ('Sanctuary (which is) Secure') Kaʿbah ( Kaaba ) Maqām Ibrāhīm (Station of Abraham) Safa and Marwa Sabaʾ ( Sheba ) ʿArim Sabaʾ ( Dam of Sheba ) Rass Sinai Region or Tīh Desert Al- Wād Al-Muqaddas Ṭuwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa ) Al-Wādil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai ) Al-Buqʿah Al-Mubārakah ('The Blessed Place') Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor In Mesopotamia Al-Jūdiyy Munzalanm-Mubārakan ('Place-of-Landing Blessed') Bābil ( Babylon ) Qaryat Yūnus ('Township of Jonah ,' that is Nineveh ) Religious locations Bayʿa (Church) Miḥrāb Monastery Masjid ( Mosque , literally 'Place of Prostration ') Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām ('The Sacred Grove') Al-Masjid Al-Aqṣā ( Al-Aqsa , literally 'The Farthest Place-of-Prostration') Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca) Masjid al-Dirar A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly: Masjid Qubāʾ ( Quba Mosque ) The Prophet's Mosque Salat (Synagogue) Implied Antioch Antakya Arabia Al- Ḥijāz (literally 'The Barrier') Al-Ḥajar al-Aswad (Black Stone)  & Al-Hijr of Isma'il Cave of Hira Ghār ath-Thawr (Cave of the Bull) Hudaybiyyah Ta'if Ayla Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha Bilād ar-Rāfidayn (Mesopotamia) Canaan Cave of Seven Sleepers Dār an-Nadwa Jordan River Nile River Palestine River Paradise of Shaddad Events, incidents, occasions or times Incident of Ifk Laylat al-Qadr (Night of Decree) Event of Mubahala Sayl al-ʿArim (Flood of the Great Dam of Ma'rib in Sheba) The Farewell Pilgrimage Treaty of Hudaybiyyah Battles or military expeditions Battle of al-Aḥzāb ('the Confederates') Battle of Badr Battle of Hunayn Battle of Khaybar Battle of Uhud Expedition of Tabuk Conquest of Mecca Days Al- Jumuʿah (The Friday) As- Sabt (The Sabbath or Saturday) Days of battles Days of Hajj Doomsday Months of the Islamic calendar 12 months: Four holy months Ash-Shahr Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred or Forbidden Month) Ramaḍān Pilgrimages Al- Ḥajj (literally 'The Pilgrimage', the Greater Pilgrimage) Al-ʿ Umrah (The Lesser Pilgrimage) Times for prayer or remembrance Times for Duʿāʾ (' Invocation '), Ṣalāh and Dhikr ('Remembrance', including Taḥmīd ('Praising'), Takbīr and Tasbīḥ ): Al-ʿAshiyy (The Afternoon or the Night) Al-Ghuduww ('The Mornings') Al-Bukrah ('The Morning') Aṣ-Ṣabāḥ ('The Morning') Al-Layl ('The Night') Al- ʿIshāʾ ('The Late-Night') Aẓ- Ẓuhr ('The Noon') Dulūk ash-Shams ('Decline of the Sun') Al- Masāʾ ('The Evening') Qabl al- Ghurūb ('Before the Setting (of the Sun)') Al-Aṣīl ('The Afternoon') Al- ʿAṣr ('The Afternoon') Qabl ṭulūʿ ash-Shams ('Before the rising of the Sun') Al- Fajr ('The Dawn') Implied Ghadir Khumm Laylat al-Mabit First Pilgrimage Other Holy books Al- Injīl (The Gospel of Jesus) Al- Qurʾān (The Book of Muhammad) Ṣuḥuf-i Ibrāhīm (Scroll(s) of Abraham) At- Tawrāt (The Torah ) Ṣuḥuf-i-Mūsā (Scroll(s) of Moses) Tablets of Stone Az- Zabūr (The Psalms of David) Umm al-Kitāb ('Mother of the Book(s)') Objects of people or beings Heavenly food of Jesus' apostles Noah's Ark Staff of Musa Tābūt as-Sakīnah (Casket of Shekhinah) Throne of Bilqis Trumpet of Israfil Mentioned idols (cult images) 'Ansāb Jibt and Ṭāghūt ( False god ) Of Israelites Baʿal The ʿijl ( golden calf statue) of Israelites Of Noah's people Nasr Suwāʿ Wadd Yaghūth Yaʿūq Of Quraysh Al-Lāt Al-ʿUzzā Manāt Celestial bodies Maṣābīḥ (literally 'lamps'): Al-Qamar (The Moon) Kawākib (Planets) Al-Arḍ (The Earth) Nujūm (Stars) Ash-Shams (The Sun) Plant matter Baṣal (Onion) Fūm (Garlic or wheat) Shaṭʾ (Shoot) Sūq (Plant stem) Zarʿ (Seed) Fruits ʿAdas ( Lentil ) Baql (Herb) Qith-thāʾ ( Cucumber ) Rummān ( Pomegranate ) Tīn ( Fig ) Zaytūn ( Olive ) In Paradise Forbidden fruit of Adam Bushes, trees or plants Plants of Sheba Athl ( Tamarisk ) Sidr ( Lote-tree ) Līnah (Tender Palm tree ) Nakhl ( Date palm ) Sidrat al-Muntahā Zaqqūm Liquids Māʾ (Water or fluid) Nahr (River) Yamm (River or sea) Sharāb (Drink) Note: Names are sorted alphabetically. Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship) Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐fksg5
Cached time: 20250817152111
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.560 seconds
Real time usage: 1.848 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10965/1000000
Revision size: 91902/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 486418/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10427/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 23/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 389453/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.891/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19239759/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1468.299      1 -total
 32.93%  483.468      1 Template:Reflist
 17.76%  260.763     30 Template:Navbox
 10.86%  159.494     29 Template:Cite_book
 10.25%  150.558     20 Template:Cite_web
  8.23%  120.880     13 Template:Lang
  5.47%   80.244      1 Template:Angels_in_Abrahamic_Religions
  4.72%   69.291      1 Template:Qur&#039;anic_people
  4.21%   61.812      5 Template:Sfn
  4.20%   61.664      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19404136:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817152111 and revision id 1306404558. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Angel&oldid=1306404558 " Categories : Angels Heraldic charges Heaven Avian humanoids Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Latin-language sources (la) CS1 errors: ISBN date Source attribution CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2015 Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles to be expanded from December 2024 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles prone to spam from July 2012 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 15:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Angel 129 languages Add topic

