Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Beginning 3 Japanese influence 4 Religion, symbolism, myths and legends 5 Interiors 6 Women in the garden 7 Decorative art 8 Graphic arts 9 Breakup 10 Members and associates 11 Gallery 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 Bibliography 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Nabis (art) 36 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kotava Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Les Nabis ) French artists The first Nabis painting, by Paul Sérusier , Le Bois d'Amour à Pont-Aven or Le Talisman , 1888, oil on wood, 27 x 21.5 cm, Musée d'Orsay , Paris The Nabis ( French : les nabis , French pronunciation: [le nabi] ) were a group of young French artists active in Paris from 1888 until 1900, who played a large part in the transition from Impressionism and academic art to abstract art , symbolism and the other early movements of modernism . The members included Pierre Bonnard , Maurice Denis , Paul Ranson , Édouard Vuillard , Ker-Xavier Roussel , Félix Vallotton , Paul Sérusier and Auguste Cazalis.

[ 1 ] Most were students at the Académie Julian in Paris in the late 1880s. The artists shared a common admiration for Paul Gauguin and Paul Cézanne and a determination to renew the art of painting, but varied greatly in their individual styles. They believed that a work of art was not a depiction of nature, but a synthesis of metaphors and symbols created by the artist.

[ 2 ] In 1900, the artists held their final exhibition and went their separate ways.

[ 3 ] Etymology [ edit ] The Nabis took their name from a Hebrew term which comes from the word nebiim or "prophets".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ a ] The term was coined in 1888 by the linguist Auguste Cazalis, [ 7 ] who drew a parallel between the way these painters aimed to revitalize painting (as 'prophets of modern art') and the way the ancient prophets had rejuvenated Israel.

[ 8 ] Beginning [ edit ] Motif Romanesque by Maurice Denis (1890), one of the earliest Nabi paintings The Nabis were a group of young artists of the Académie Julian in Paris, who wanted to transform the foundations of art. One of the artists, Paul Sérusier , had traveled to Pont-Aven in October 1888, where under the guidance of Paul Gauguin he made a small painting of the port on wood, composed of patches of vivid color assembled to give the feeling of the port. The students called this first Nabis painting The Talisman , and it eventually became an icon of 20th-century art.

[ 3 ] In 1889, the same year of the Paris International Exposition and the opening of the Eiffel Tower , the group held its first modest exposition at the Café des Arts, which was located without the grounds of the Exposition. It was titled The Impressionist and Synthesist Group , and included works by two well-known artists, Paul Gauguin and Émile Bernard .

In August 1890, Maurice Denis , then nineteen years old, gave the group a more concrete philosophy. Writing under the name Pierre Louis, he wrote an article in the journal Art et Critique entitled The Definition of Neo-traditionalism , which became the manifesto of the movement. The celebrated opening line of the essay was: "Remember that a picture, before being a battle horse, a female nude or some sort of anecdote, is essentially a flat surface covered with colors assembled in a certain order." This idea was not original to Denis; the idea had been put forward not long before by Hippolyte Taine in The Philosophy of Art , where Taine wrote: "A painting is a colored surface, in which the various tones and various degrees of light are placed with a certain choice; that is its intimate being." However, it was the expression of Denis which seized the attention of artists. As Denis explained, he did not mean that the form of the painting was more important than the subject. He wrote, "The profoundness of our emotions comes from the sufficiency of these lines and these colors to explain themselves...everything is contained in the beauty of the work." In his essay, he termed this new movement "neo-traditionalism", in opposition to the "progressivism" of the Neo-impressionists, led by Seurat .

[ 9 ] The following year, in 1891, three of the Nabis, Pierre Bonnard , Édouard Vuillard and Maurice Denis, took a studio at 28 rue Pigalle in Paris. It was frequented by other early Nabis, including Ker-Xavier Roussel and Paul Sérusier, as well as journalists and figures from the theatrical and literary world.

In 1892, the Nabis branched out into the theatrical world and the decorative arts. Paul Ranson, assisted by Sérusier, Bonnard, and Vuillard, designed sets for a theatrical presentation of the Bateau ivre of the poet Arthur Rimbaud . Maurice Denis made costumes and sets for another theatrical production, the Trilogy d'Antoina at the Théatre Moderne, and also painted a ceiling for the residence of the art collector and painter Henry Lerolle .

The Nabis held a group exhibition in Toulouse in June 1894, and the following year presented their work in Siegfried Bing 's Maison de l'Art Nouveau, the famous gallery which had given its name to the Art Nouveau movement.

[ 3 ] Throughout their existence the Nabis were a sort of half-serious semi-secret society, who used humorous nicknames and a private vocabulary.

[ 10 ] Even the name of the group was secret until 1897. They called a studio an 'ergasterium' [ 10 ] and ended their letters with the initials E.T.P.M.V. et M.P.

, signifying En ta paume, mon verbe et ma pensée ("In your palm, my word and my thoughts").

[ 11 ] Japanese influence [ edit ] The graphic art of Japan, known as Japonism , particularly woodblock prints, was an important influence on the Nabis. The style was popularized in France by the art dealer Siegfried Bing, who traveled to Japan to collect prints by Hokusai and other Japanese artists, and published a monthly art journal, Le Japon Artistique , between May 1888 and April 1891, which offered color illustrations. In 1900 he organized an exhibit of seven hundred prints at the École des Beaux-Arts .

[ 12 ] Pierre Bonnard was particularly influenced by the Japanese style; his nickname among the Nabis was "Le plus japonard". For one series of four paintings created in 1890–91, The Women in the Garden , now in the Musée d'Orsay , Bonnard adapted a Japanese format called kakemono with a narrow vertical canvas. The models are his sister Andrée and his cousin Berthe Schaedin. The four figures are presented in curving, serpentine postures, like those in Japanese prints. The faces of the women look away from the artist; the bold patterns of their costumes and the foliage behind them dominate the paintings. He originally conceived the work as a Japanese screen, but he finally decided to separate it into four paintings, and to emphasize the decorative aspect, he added a painted border around the canvases.

[ 12 ] The theme of women in a garden, stylistically adapted from Japanese prints, appeared in the work of other Nabis, including Maurice Denis and Paul Sérusier. Denis used the theme of women in gardens in paintings and decorative murals. Sérusier adapted the same format in his Women at the Spring (1898), stylistically depicting women descending a hill to take water from a spring.

[ 12 ] Maurice Denis, Evening in September (1891) The printed dress by Édouard Vuillard (1891), Museu de Arte de São Paulo Religion, symbolism, myths and legends [ edit ] The Nabis were influenced by the literature, music and theater of the symbolist movement, and, among some of the Nabis, there was a strong current of mysticism and esotericism . Their approach to their order was partly humorous and whimsical; the studio of Ranson at 25 Boulevard du Montparnasse was called their "temple", Madame Ranson was termed "The light of the Temple", and the original Nabi painting by Sérusier was displayed in the studio like a shrine, and titled The Talisman . Sérusier whimsically painted Paul Ranson in a sort of Nabic robe, with a staff and a text before him. However, they also had a more serious side. They rejected the materialism of the new industrial age, and admired the poetry of Baudelaire , Mallarmé and Edgar Allan Poe . They placed themselves in opposition to the current of naturalism expressed in the paintings of Courbet and Manet and the literature of Émile Zola .

[ 13 ] Maurice Denis and Paul Sérusier were the Nabis who most often painted religious subjects. The work of Denis was influenced by the paintings of Fra Angelico . He often painted scenes and themes taken from the Bible, but with the figures in modern costume, in simplified landscapes and surrounded by light, a symbol of faith. In 1895, he received a commission for a series of seven large paintings called The Legend of Saint Hubert for the Paris home of Baron Cochin. They illustrated the story of Saint Hubert hunting in the forest of Aquitaine , seeing a vision of Christ, and being converted to Christianity.

[ 13 ] Paul Sérusier painted less Christian and more mystical scenes, particularly La Vision pros du torrent or The rendezvous of fairies (1897), showing a group of women in Breton costumes passing through the forest, carrying bouquets of flowers to a ceremony, and Femmes à la Source , depicting a series of women solemnly descending through a mystical forest to a spring. This illustrates the legend of the Danaides , who in mythology were condemned to fill and refill leaking jugs of water from a spring. He painted several works of women in Breton costumes conducting pagan ceremonies in the forests of Brittany.

[ 13 ] Maurice Denis , Le Calvaire (Climbing to Calvary) (1889), Musée d'Orsay Maurice Denis, Final scene of the Legend of Saint Hubert (1897), Departmental Museum of Maurice Denis, Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1897) Paul Sérusier , Women at the Spring , Musée d'Orsay (1898) Paul Sérusier, The Sacred Woods Interiors [ edit ] The Nabis Pierre Bonnard , Félix Vallotton and Édouard Vuillard created particularly remarkable paintings depicting the interiors of homes, where the inhabitants of the rooms were almost entirely absorbed into the intense floral decoration and furnishings. In some of the paintings, such as Vuillard's The Seamstress and La Table de toilet (1895), or People in an Interior - Music , it is difficult to even find and count the individuals in the painting.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Édouard Vuillard, The Seamstress , (1893), Indianapolis Museum of Art Édouard Vuillard, Woman in a Striped Dress (1895), National Gallery of Art Édouard Vuillard, People in Interior- Music (1896), Petit Palais Museum, Paris Misia at the Piano (c. 1898), Édouard Vuillard, Metropolitan Museum of Art Women in the garden [ edit ] One of the most common subjects of the Nabis was women in an idyllic garden setting, usually picking flowers or fruit. It appeared in four panels representing the seasons of a young woman's life by Maurice Denis (1890–91), painted for the bedroom of a young girl, and in the panels of women in the public parks of Paris by Édouard Vuillard (1894) painted for the residence of his patron Alexandre Nathanson; two paintings of women and children picking apples in an orchard by Pierre Bonnard (1894–96); and in a tapestry by Paul Ranson, Spring , depicting three women picking fruit. All the images are highly stylized, often using the same serpentine forms to represent the women, the trees and the foliage. The young women in the series by Denis are shown traveling along a road, dressed in vestal white in the first painting, then in different colors as they reach maturity in the final painting.

[ 3 ] Paul Sérusier , The flower barrier (1889) April or The road of life by Maurice Denis , painted for the bedroom of a young girl. (1892) Women picking flowers in the garden, tapestry by Paul Ranson (1895) The Bonnard Family in the garden, screen by Pierre Bonnard (1896) Decorative art [ edit ] One of the stated objectives of the Nabis was to break down the barriers between art and ordinary life, and in particular the distinction between art and decoration. Much of the art they created was designed specifically to be decorative, for display in salons and dining rooms. They designed screens, murals, wallpaper, tapestries, dishware, lampshades, and ornament for furniture, as well as theater decor and costume design, and graphic design for advertising posters.

Paul Ranson , working with Art Nouveau architect Henry Van de Velde made murals to decorate the dining room of art gallery owner Siegfried Bing . After a visit to the United States, where he saw the stained glass designs of Louis Comfort Tiffany and his firm, Bing invited the Nabis to submit their own designs for Tiffany glass. Roussel, Vuillard, Vallotton, Ranson, Denis, Bonnard, and Ibels all made designs, which Bing displayed in his gallery in Paris in April 1895, along with designs of non-Nabis, including Toulouse-Lautrec . In the end the windows were not made, but Maurice Denis continued to create window designs on symbolist themes, with bold designs and vivid colors. In 1895, Vuillard was commissioned to design a series of plates, which featured women in highly stylized costumes.

[ 16 ] [ 15 ] Decorative screen, The Public Gardens by Édouard Vuillard (1895) Stained glass window, The Path of Life , by Maurice Denis (1895) The Ladder in the Foliage by Maurice Denis (1892), canvas on a wood panel, made for the ceiling of the home of art patron Henry Lerolle . The same woman on the ladder is seen from four points of view.

Plate depicting a woman in a striped blouse, by Édouard Vuillard (1895) Graphic arts [ edit ] Members of the Nabis worked in a variety of media, using oils on both canvas and cardboard, and distemper on canvas and wall decoration, and they also produced posters, prints, book illustrations, textiles and furniture. Considered to be on the cutting edge of modern art during their early period, their subject matter was representational (though often Symbolist in inspiration), but was design-oriented along the lines of the Japanese prints they so admired, and Art Nouveau . However, the artists of the Nabis circle were highly influenced by the paintings of the Impressionists , and thus while sharing the flatness, page layout, and negative space of art nouveau and other decorative modes, much of Les Nabis' art has a painterly, non-realistic look, with color palettes reminiscent of Cézanne and Gauguin. Bonnard's posters and lithographs are more firmly in the Art Nouveau, or Toulouse-Lautrec manner. After the turn of the century, as modern art moved towards Fauvism , Expressionism , Cubism , and Abstraction , Les Nabis were viewed as conservatives and, indeed, were among the last group of artists to stick to the roots and artistic ambitions of the Impressionists, pursuing these ends almost into the middle of the 20th century. In their later years, these painters also largely abandoned their earlier interests in decorative and applied arts.

Pierre Bonnard , Les Parisiennes 1893, lithograph Félix Vallotton poster for Siegfried Bing's Gallery (1893) Félix Vallotton, La raison probante (The Cogent Reason) , a woodcut from the series Intimités (1898) Maurice Denis, Frontispiece lithograph from the series Amour (1899) Breakup [ edit ] In 1897, the Nabis were not present at the well-known Salon des Indépendants , but instead held their own exposition at the Galerie Vollard, more avant-garde than the Salon. Their final exhibition as a group took place in 1900 at the Galerie Bernheim, with works of Bonnard, Denis, Ibels, Maillol, Roussel, Sérusier, Vallotton and Vuillard. After that show, each of the artists went his separate way.

[ 3 ] Looking back in 1909, Denis described the accomplishment of the Nabis. "Art is no longer a visual sensation that we gather, like a photograph, as it were, of nature. No, it is a creation of our spirit, for which nature is only the occasion." [ 17 ] In 1937, Vuillard described the breakup of the Nabis. "...The march of progress was so rapid. Society was ready to welcome cubism and surrealism before we had reached what we had imagined as our goal. We found ourselves in a way suspended in the air." [ 18 ] Members and associates [ edit ] Pierre Bonnard (1867–1947), le nabi très japonard Maurice Denis (1870–1943), le nabi aux belles icônes Maxime Dethomas (1869–1929) Meyer de Haan (1852–1895), le nabi hollandais Rene Georges Hermann-Paul (1864–1940) Henri-Gabriel Ibels (1867–1936), le nabi journaliste Georges Lacombe (1868–1916), le nabi sculpteur Lugné-Poe (1869–1940) Aristide Maillol (1861–1944) Paul Ranson (1864–1909), le nabi plus japonard que le nabi japonard József Rippl-Rónai (1861–1927), le nabi hongrois Ker-Xavier Roussel (1867–1944) Paul Sérusier (1864–1927), le nabi à la barbe rutilante Marguérite Sérusier , wife of Paul Sérusier; a notable decorative painter Félix Vallotton (1865–1925), le nabi étranger Jan Verkade (1868–1946), le nabi obéliscal Édouard Vuillard (1868–1940), le nabi zouave Maurice Denis , aged eighteen, in 1889 Édouard Vuillard , Self-portrait , 1889 Pierre Bonnard , Self-portrait , c. 1889 Paul Ranson , Paul Sérusier , and Marie-France Ranson in Paul Ranson's studio, c. 1900 Ker-Xavier Roussel , Édouard Vuillard , Romain Coolus , Félix Vallotton , 1899 Portrait of Paul Ranson in Nabi costume, by Paul Sérusier Other members of the group included the playwright Pierre Veber, the musician Pierre Hermant, and the linguist Auguste Cazalis, [ 19 ] called (by Ranson) le nabi Ben Kallyre .

[ 20 ] Gallery [ edit ] The Waltz , Félix Vallotton , Museum of Modern Art Le Havre (1893) Félix Vallotton , The Mistress and the Servant, 1896 Paul Ranson , Nabis Landscape , 1890 Georges Lacombe , Marine bleue, Effet de vagues , 1893 See also [ edit ] Pont-Aven School Henry Lerolle , patron Odilon Redon Notes [ edit ] ^ The French term nabi (also used in English), referring to a person inspired to speak the word of God, is clearly related to the Hebrew term for prophet – נביא ( navi ) mentioned frequently in the Hebrew Bible – and the similar Arabic word نَبِيّ ( nabiyy ). The word appears in many languages, including Indonesian.

References [ edit ] ^ Symbolist Art Theories: A Critical Anthology edited by Henri Dorra , p.352 ^ Nabis, French artists in Encyclopædia Britannica online edition ^ a b c d e Bétard, Daphne, La révolution Nabie , in Les Nabis et le décor , Beaux-Arts Éditions, pp. 8-21 ^ Enclopaedia Britannica on-line edition, "The Nabis", retrieved 19 April 2020 ^ Pierre Bonnard, the graphic art , p. 7 ^ Burhan 1979, p. 231:  "There is, in fact, every reason to believe that the title was chosen by these young painters as a reference to Islamic traditions, since when-ever Serusier signed a canvas 'Nabi,' ... he wrote the word out in Arabic script." as quoted in Pierre Bonnard, the graphic art , notes ^ Brooker, Peter (2013).

The Oxford Critical and Cultural History of Modernist Magazines, Volume 3, Part 1 . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 91.

ISBN 0199659583 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary, headword nabi ^ Bouillon 2006 , pp. 20–21.

^ a b "The life and art of Édouard Vuillard" . Christie's. 7 February 2019. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021 . Retrieved 24 March 2021 .

^ "In The Palm of Your Hand, My Words and My Thoughts" . Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art. 2017. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 24 March 2021 .

^ a b c Lacambre, Geneviève, La déferlante japonaise , published in Les Nabis et le décor , Beaux Arts Editions (March 2019), pp. 38-40 ^ a b c Raffali, Ludovic, Les Nabis - Un movement Symbolist?

in Les Nabis et le Decor , L'Objet d'Art , March 2019, pp. 63, 64 ^ Jolin, Camille, Les Intéieurs de Vuillars- Entre Poésie Mystère , L'Objet d'Art , Les Nabis et Le Decor , March 2019, pp. 52-55 ^ a b " Les Nabis et le décor - Musée du Luxembourg, Paris" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-09-24 . Retrieved 2019-05-24 .

^ Jolin, Camille, Le Beau dans le quotidian , in Les Nabis et le Decor , pp. 29-41, in L'Objet D'Art , March 2019 ^ Bouillon 2006 , pp. 17–18.

^ Pierre Bonnard and Ingid Rybeck, Chez Bonnard a Deauville , Konstrevy no. 4, Stockholm (1937), cited in L'objet de l'Art, Les Nabis et le Decor (March 2019), page 65 ^ G. L. Groom, Édouard Vuillard: Painter-decorator: Patrons and Projects, 1892-1912 ( Yale University Press , 1993), p.

10 ^ Many of the attributed nicknames are cited in Willibrord (Jan) Verkade, Die Unruhe zu Gott: Erinnerungen eines Malermönchs , 5th Edition (Herder & Co., Freiburg im Breisgau 1930), pp.

67–70.

Bibliography [ edit ] Bouillon, Jean-Paul (2006).

Maurice Denis - Le spirituel dans l'art (in French). Paris: Gallimard.

ISBN 978-2-07-031929-9 .

Cogeval, Guy (2015).

Bonnard . Paris: Hazan, Malakoff. (in French) ISBN 978-2-7541-08-36-2 * Further reading [ edit ] Boyer, Patricia Eckert (1989).

The Nabis and the Parisian Avant-Garde .

Rutgers University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8135-1380-5 .

Chasse, Charles (1969).

The Nabis and Their Period . London: Lund Humphries.

ASIN B001387EYI .

Clement, Russell T. (1996).

Four French Symbolists: A Sourcebook on Pierre Puvis de Chavannes, Gustave Moreau, Odilon Redon, and Maurice Denis . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0-313-29752-6 .

Dorival, Bernard (1957).

Les peintres du vingtième siècle; Nabis, Fauves, Cubistes (in French). Paris: Editions Pierre Tisne.

ASIN B000PT18NY .

Freches-Thory, Claire; Terrasse, Antoine (2003).

Nabis: Bonnard, Vuillard and Their Circle . London: Flammarion.

ISBN 978-2-08-011076-3 .

Kostenevitch, Albert (2005).

Bonnard: and the Nabis . London: Parkstone Press.

ISBN 978-1-85995-015-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Nabis (art) .

The Prophets of Montmartre , an article on the Nabis by Alamantra Pierre Bonnard, the Graphic Art , an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on Bonnard and others in the Nabis collective v t e Nabis Painters Pierre Bonnard Maurice Denis Maxime Dethomas Meijer de Haan Hermann-Paul Henri-Gabriel Ibels Georges Lacombe Aristide Maillol Paul Ranson Ker-Xavier Roussel Paul Sérusier Félix Vallotton Jan Verkade Édouard Vuillard Paintings The Talisman (1888) The Seamstress (1893) Toulouse-Lautrec Cooking (1898) Homage to Cézanne (1900) Related L'Estampe originale Intimism Lugné-Poe Post-Impressionism v t e Post-Impressionism 19th-century movements Neo-Impressionism Divisionism Pointillism Cloisonnism Les Nabis Synthetism Symbolism Art Nouveau Artists Cuno Amiet Charles Angrand Émile Bernard Edvard Munch Pierre Bonnard Marius Borgeaud Paul Cézanne Henri-Edmond Cross Maurice Denis Georges Dufrénoy Paul Gauguin Hippolyte Petitjean Paul Ranson Odilon Redon Henri Rousseau René Schützenberger Paul Sérusier Georges Seurat Paul Signac Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec Charles Laval Georges Lemmen Maximilien Luce Vincent van Gogh Théo van Rysselberghe Félix Vallotton Édouard Vuillard 20th-century movements Fauvism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Expressionism Cubism Artists Georges Braque Charles Camoin André Derain Raoul Dufy Henri Matisse Albert Gleizes Ernst Ludwig Kirchner Karl Schmidt-Rottluff Wassily Kandinsky Sonia Lewitska Franz Marc Jean Metzinger Henry Ottmann Francis Picabia Pablo Picasso Robert Antoine Pinchon Henriette Tirman Jean Marchand Othon Friesz Exhibitions Artistes Indépendants Les XX Volpini Exhibition Le Barc de Boutteville La Libre Esthétique Ambroise Vollard Salon d'Automne Salon des Indépendants Salon des Cent Salon des Tuileries Critics Félix Fénéon Albert Aurier Related Impressionism Modernism Modern art Secessionism v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐xtcr2
Cached time: 20250815080446
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.671 seconds
Real time usage: 0.900 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1926/1000000
Revision size: 27444/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 151044/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1546/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 111910/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.373/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15840470/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  703.311      1 -total
 16.13%  113.453      2 Template:Reflist
 14.95%  105.141      6 Template:Navbox
 14.15%   99.540      1 Template:Langx
 10.67%   75.042      1 Template:Les_Nabis
 10.01%   70.412      1 Template:Short_description
  8.53%   60.016      2 Template:ISBN
  6.21%   43.696      7 Template:Cite_book
  6.08%   42.779      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.72%   40.229      1 Template:ACArt Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:164701:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815080446 and revision id 1301617836. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nabis_(art)&oldid=1301617836 " Categories : Nabis (art) French artist groups and collectives 19th-century art groups Post-Impressionism French art French art movements Art movements Académie Julian Hidden categories: Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nabis (art) 36 languages Add topic

