Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 2.1 Development 2.2 Origins 3 Functions 4 Coelomic fluid 5 Classification in zoology 6 Coelomates Toggle Coelomates subsection 6.1 Coelomate phyla 7 Pseudocoelomates Toggle Pseudocoelomates subsection 7.1 Pseudocoelomate phyla 8 Acoelomates 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Coelom 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Lietuvių Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Main body cavity in many animals Coelom Cross-section of an oligochaete worm . The worm's body cavity surrounds the central typhlosole .

Details Pronunciation ( / ˈ s iː l əm / SEE -ləm , plural coeloms or coelomata / s iː ˈ l oʊ m ə t ə / see- LOH -mə-tə ) Identifiers Greek koilōma Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] The coelom (or celom ) [ 1 ] is the main body cavity in many animals [ 2 ] and is positioned inside the body to surround and contain the digestive tract and other organs . In some animals , it is lined with mesothelium . In other animals, such as molluscs , it remains undifferentiated. In the past, and for practical purposes, coelom characteristics have been used to classify bilaterian animal phyla into informal groups.

Etymology [ edit ] The term coelom derives from the Ancient Greek word κοιλία ( koilía ) 'cavity'.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Structure [ edit ] Development [ edit ] The coelom is the mesodermally lined cavity between the gut and the outer body wall.

During the development of the embryo , coelom formation begins in the gastrulation stage. The developing digestive tube of an embryo forms as a blind pouch called the archenteron .

In protostomes , the coelom forms by a process known as schizocoely .

[ 6 ] The archenteron initially forms, and the mesoderm splits into two layers: the first attaches to the body wall or ectoderm , forming the parietal layer and the second surrounds the endoderm or alimentary canal forming the visceral layer . The space between the parietal layer and the visceral layer is known as the coelom or body cavity.

In deuterostomes , the coelom forms by enterocoely .

[ 6 ] The archenteron wall produces buds of mesoderm , and these mesodermal diverticula hollow to become the coelomic cavities. Deuterostomes are therefore known as enterocoelomates . Examples of deuterostome coelomates belong to three major clades: chordates ( vertebrates , tunicates , and lancelets ), echinoderms ( starfish , sea urchins , sea cucumbers ), and hemichordates ( acorn worms and graptolites ).

Origins [ edit ] The evolutionary origin of the coelom is uncertain. The oldest fossil presumed to have been an animal with a body cavity was the Vernanimalcula . Current hypothesis include: [ citation needed ] [ 7 ] The acoelomate theory, which states that coelom evolved from an acoelomate ancestor.

The enterocoel theory, which states that coelom evolved from gastric pouches of cnidarian ancestors. This is supported by research on flatworms [ citation needed ] and small worms recently discovered [ clarification needed ] in marine fauna [ citation needed ] ("coelom" [ 8 ] ).

Functions [ edit ] A coelom can absorb shock or provide a hydrostatic skeleton . It can also support an immune system in the form of coelomocytes that may either be attached to the wall of the coelom or may float about in it freely. The coelom allows muscles to grow independently of the body wall — this feature can be seen in the digestive tract of tardigrades (water bears) which is suspended within the body in the mesentery derived from a mesoderm-lined coelom.

Coelomic fluid [ edit ] The fluid inside the coelom is known as coelomic fluid. This is circulated by mesothelial cilia or by contraction of muscles in the body wall.

[ clarification needed ] [ 9 ] The coelomic fluid serves several functions: it acts as a hydroskeleton; it allows free movement and growth of internal organs; it serves for transport of gases, nutrients and waste products around the body; it allows storage of sperm and eggs during maturation; and it acts as a reservoir for waste.

[ 10 ] Classification in zoology [ edit ] Further information: Body cavity In the past, some zoologists grouped bilaterian animal phyla based on characteristics related to the coelom for practical purposes, knowing, and explicitly stating, that these groups were not phylogenetically related. Animals were classified in three informal groups according to the type of body cavity they possess, in a non-taxonomic, utilitarian way, as the Acoelomata, Pseudocoelomata, and Coelomata. These groups were never intended to represent related animals, or a sequence of evolutionary traits.

However, although this scheme was followed by a number of college textbooks and some general classifications, it is now almost totally abandoned as a formal classification. Indeed, as late as 2010, one author of a molecular phylogeny study mistakenly called this classification scheme the "traditional, morphology-based phylogeny".

[ 11 ] Classification of tripoblasts based on body cavities Coelomate animals or Coelomata (also known as eucoelomates – "true coelom") have a body cavity called a coelom with a complete lining called peritoneum derived from mesoderm (one of the three primary tissue layers ). The complete mesoderm lining allows organs to be attached to each other so that they can be suspended in a particular order while still being able to move freely within the cavity. Most bilateral animals, including all the vertebrates , are coelomates.

Pseudocoelomate animals have a pseudocoelom (literally "false cavity"), which is a fluid filled body cavity. Tissue derived from mesoderm partly lines the fluid filled body cavity of these animals. Thus, although organs are held in place loosely, they are not as well organized as in a coelomate. All pseudocoelomates are protostomes ; however, not all protostomes are pseudocoelomates. An example of a pseudocoelomate is the roundworm. Pseudocoelomate animals are also referred to as blastocoelomate .

Acoelomate animals, like flatworms , have no body cavity at all. Semi-solid mesodermal tissues between the gut and body wall hold their organs in place.

Coelomates [ edit ] Coeloms developed in triploblasts but were subsequently lost in several lineages. The lack of a coelom is correlated with a reduction in body size. Coelom is sometimes incorrectly used to refer to any developed digestive tract. Some organisms may not possess a coelom or may have a false coelom ( pseudocoelom ). Animals having coeloms are called coelomates , and those without are called acoelomates . There are also subtypes of coelom: [ citation needed ] schizocoelom: develops from split in mesoderm found in annelids , arthropods and molluscs haemocoelom: true coelom reduced and cavity filled with blood found from Arthropoda to Mollusca enterocoelom: develops from wall of embryonic gut found from Echinodermata to Chordata Coelomate phyla [ edit ] According to Brusca and Brusca , [ 12 ] the following bilaterian phyla possess a coelom: Nemertea , traditionally viewed as acoelomates. Its coelom, called a rhynchocoel, lies above the digestive tract instead of around it like in other coelomate animals.

[ 13 ] Priapulida appears to belong to the pseudocoelomate animals, but the possibility of it having a true coelom has still not been completely dismissed.

[ 14 ] Onychophora Tardigrada Arthropoda Chaetognatha Bryozoa Mollusca Annelida Brachiopoda Phoronida Echinodermata Hemichordata Chordata Pseudocoelomates [ edit ] In some protostomes , the embryonic blastocoele persists as a body cavity. These protostomes have a fluid filled main body cavity unlined or partially lined with tissue derived from mesoderm.

This fluid-filled space surrounding the internal organs serves several functions like distribution of nutrients and removal of waste or supporting the body as a hydrostatic skeleton .

A pseudocoelomate or blastocoelomate is any invertebrate animal with a three-layered body and a pseudocoel . The coelom was apparently lost or reduced as a result of mutations in certain types of genes that affected early development. Thus, pseudocoelomates evolved from coelomates.

[ 15 ] "Pseudocoelomate" is no longer considered a valid taxonomic group , since it is not monophyletic . However, it is still used as a descriptive term.

Important characteristics: lack a vascular blood system diffusion and osmosis circulate nutrients and waste products throughout the body.

lack a skeleton hydrostatic pressure gives the body a supportive framework that acts as a skeleton.

no segmentation body wall epidermis and muscle often syncytial usually covered by a secreted cuticle most are microscopic parasites of almost every form of life (although some are free living) eutely in some loss of larval stage in some possibly pedomorphism Pseudocoelomate phyla [ edit ] Bilaterian pseudocoelomate phyla according to Brusca and Brusca,: [ 12 ] Nematoda (roundworms) Nematomorpha (horsehair worms) Loricifera Priapulida Kinorhyncha Rotifera , including Acanthocephala (spiny-headed worms) [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Acoelomates [ edit ] Acoelomates lack a fluid-filled body cavity between the body wall and digestive tract. This can cause some serious disadvantages. Fluid compression is negligible, while the tissue surrounding the organs of these animals will compress. Therefore, acoelomate organs are not protected from crushing forces applied to the animal's outer surface. The coelom can be used for diffusion of gases and metabolites etc. These creatures do not have this need, as the surface area to volume ratio is large enough to allow absorption of nutrients and gas exchange by diffusion alone, due to dorso-ventral flattening.

Flatworms Micrognathozoa Mesozoa [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Xenacoelomorpha [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Gastrotricha , traditionally viewed as blastocoelomates Entoprocta , traditionally viewed as blastocoelomates Gnathostomulida , traditionally viewed as blastocoelomates Cycliophora [ 22 ] A body cavity is also absent in placozoans , cnidarians ( jellyfish and allies) and the ctenophores (comb jellies), but these animals are neither bilaterians or triploblastic .

See also [ edit ] Abdominal cavity References [ edit ] ^ "celom" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ "coelom" – via The Free Dictionary .

^ Bailly, Anatole (1981-01-01).

Abrégé du dictionnaire grec français . Paris: Hachette.

ISBN 2010035283 .

OCLC 461974285 .

^ Bailly, Anatole.

"Greek-french dictionary online" .

www.tabularium.be . Retrieved 2018-01-14 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Coelom and Serous Membranes" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 642.

^ a b Lüter, Carsten (2000-06-01). "The origin of the coelom in Brachiopoda and its phylogenetic significance".

Zoomorphology .

120 (1): 15– 28.

doi : 10.1007/s004359900019 .

ISSN 1432-234X .

S2CID 24929317 .

^ "Origins and Evolution of Animals" . Archived from the original on 2018-11-12.

^ "McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms" .

Answers.com . Archived from the original on 2014-12-20.

^ Ruppert, Edward E.; Fox, Richard, S.; Barnes, Robert D. (2004).

Invertebrate Zoology, 7th edition . Cengage Learning. p. 205.

ISBN 978-81-315-0104-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Dorit, R. L.; Walker, W. F.; Barnes, R. D. (1991).

Zoology . Saunders College Publishing. p.

190 .

ISBN 978-0-03-030504-7 .

^ Nielsen, C. (2010). " The 'new phylogeny'. What is new about it?

" Palaeodiversity 3, 149–150.

^ a b R. C. Brusca, G. J. Brusca.

Invertebrates . Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates, 2003 (2nd ed.), p. 47, ISBN 0-87893-097-3 .

^ "Nemertea" .

Encyclopedia of Arkansas . Retrieved 2025-05-26 .

^ Coelom development in the priapulid worm Priapulus caudatus ^ Evers, Christine A., Lisa Starr.

Biology:Concepts and Applications.

6th ed. United States:Thomson, 2006.

ISBN 0-534-46224-3 .

^ Sielaff, Malte; Schmidt, Hanno; Struck, Torsten H.; Rosenkranz, David; Mark Welch, David B.; Hankeln, Thomas; Herlyn, Holger (2016).

"Phylogeny of Syndermata (Syn. Rotifera): Mitochondrial gene order verifies epizoic Seisonidea as sister to endoparasitic Acanthocephala within monophyletic Hemirotifera" .

Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution .

96 : 79– 92.

Bibcode : 2016MolPE..96...79S .

doi : 10.1016/j.ympev.2015.11.017 .

^ Study of Rotifers of Safari Zoo Lake Lahore in Relation to Physico-chemical Parameters ^ Biology of Non-Chordates . PHI Learning Pvt. November 2017.

ISBN 978-93-87472-01-3 .

^ Comparative genomic studies on Dicyema japonicum: the phylogenetic position of dicyemids and the genomic adaptations to parasitic lifestyle ^ Nakano, Hiroaki; Lundin, Kennet; Bourlat, Sarah J.; Telford, Maximilian J.; Funch, Peter; Nyengaard, Jens R.; Obst, Matthias; Thorndyke, Michael C. (2013).

"Xenoturbella bocki exhibits direct development with similarities to Acoelomorpha" .

Nature Communications .

4 : 1537.

Bibcode : 2013NatCo...4.1537N .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms2556 .

PMC 3586728 .

^ Ueki, Tatsuya; Arimoto, Asuka; Tagawa, Kuni; Satoh, Noriyuki (October 2019).

"Xenacoelomorph-Specific Hox Peptides: Insights into the Phylogeny of Acoels, Nemertodermatids, and Xenoturbellids" .

Zoological Science .

36 (5).

doi : 10.2108/zs190045.full .

ISSN 0289-0003 . Archived from the original on 2025-03-23.

^ R.C.Brusca, G.J.Brusca 2003, p. 379.

Further reading [ edit ] Dudek, Ronald W.; Fix, James D. (2004).

"Body Cavities" .

Embryology . Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

ISBN 978-0-7817-5726-3 .

Hall, B.K.; et al. (2008).

"Animals Based on Three Germ Layers and a Coelem" .

Strickberger's evolution: the integration of genes, organisms and populations . Jones & Bartlett Learning.

ISBN 978-0-7637-0066-9 .

Overhill, Raith, ed. (2006).

"What are the advantages of the coelem and metamarism?" .

An introduction to the invertebrates (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-85736-9 .

v t e Human embryonic development in the first three weeks Week 1 Fertilization Oocyte activation Zygote Cleavage Blastomere Morula Cavitation Blastocoel Blastocyst Inner cell mass Trophoblast Week 2 ( Bilaminar ) Hypoblast Epiblast Week 3 ( Trilaminar ) Germ layers Archenteron / Primitive streak Primitive pit Primitive node / Blastopore Primitive groove Gastrula Gastrulation Regional specification Ectoderm Surface ectoderm Neuroectoderm Somatopleuric mesenchyme Neurulation Neural crest Endoderm Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme Mesoderm Axial mesoderm Paraxial Somite Somitomere Intermediate Lateral plate Intraembryonic coelom Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme Somatopleuric mesenchyme Portal : Animals Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coelom&oldid=1304903986 " Categories : Animal anatomy Animal developmental biology Mesoderm Zoological nomenclature Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 21:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Coelom 38 languages Add topic

