Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Film content 2 Music 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Society of the Spectacle (film) 4 languages Català Cymraeg Français Galego Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1973 film by Guy Debord La Société du Spectacle Directed by Guy Debord Written by Guy Debord Narrated by Guy Debord Music by Michel Corrette Release date May 1, 1974 ( 1974-05-01 ) Running time 88 min.

Country France Language French La Société du Spectacle (English: Society of the Spectacle ) is a black-and-white 1974 film by the Situationist Guy Debord , based on his 1967 book of the same name .

[ 1 ] It was Debord's first feature-length film. It uses found footage and détournement in a radical Marxist critique of mass marketing and its role in the alienation of modern society .

[ 2 ] Film content [ edit ] The 88 minute film took a year to make and incorporates an apparent jumble of footage from feature films juxtaposed with still photographs, industrial films, early 1970s glossy 'lifestyle' TV ads, and news footage of unrest in the streets.

[ 3 ] The feature films include The Battleship Potemkin , October , Chapaev , The New Babylon , The Shanghai Gesture , For Whom the Bell Tolls , Rio Grande , They Died with Their Boots On , Johnny Guitar , and Mr. Arkadin , as well as other Soviet films.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Throughout the film, there are intertitles consisting of quotations from The Society of the Spectacle , along with Debord (in voice-over) reading texts from Marx , Machiavelli , the 1968 Occupation Committee of the Sorbonne , Tocqueville , Émile Pouget , and Sergey Solovyov and others.

[ 6 ] Without citations, these quotes are hard to decipher, especially with the conflicting subtitles (which exist even in the French version): but that is part of Debord's goal to "problematize reception" (Greil and Sanborn) and force the viewer to be active. In addition, the words of some of the authors are détourned through deliberate misquoting.

[ 7 ] Footage of historical events is included, such as the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald (the alleged assassin of U.S. President John F. Kennedy in 1963), the Spanish Civil War of 1936-1939, the 1956 Hungarian Revolution and the Paris riots in May 1968, along with clips of people such as Mao Zedong , Fidel Castro , Richard Nixon and the Spanish anarchist Buenaventura Durruti .

In 1984, Debord withdrew his films from circulation because of the negative press and the assassination of his friend and patron Gerard Lebovici . Since Debord's suicide in 1994, Debord's wife Alice Becker-Ho has been promoting Debord's film. A DVD box set titled Guy Debord: Oeuvres cinématographiques complètes was released in 2005 and contains Debord's seven films.

Music [ edit ] The piece used in the film is Les Délices de la Solitude , Op. 20 No. 6 - Sonata in D Major : I.

Allegro Moderato , by Michel Corrette .

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Debord, Guy (1974-05-01), La société du spectacle (Documentary), Guy Debord, Leonid Brezhnev, Fidel Castro, Jacques Duclos, Simar Films , retrieved 2021-02-26 ^ Facets Features ^ The pussies of Guy Debord , selected excerpts from the film ^ Pro Arts Gallery & Commons ^ The Society of the Spectacle at Eye Filmin Amsterdam|Eye ^ Artaud Double Bill + The Society of the Spectacle|The Museum of Arts and Design (MAD) ^ Guide to the détournements in The Society of the Spectacle ^ "La librairie de Guy Debord - Philippe Sollers/Pileface" .

www.pileface.com . Retrieved 2023-06-07 .

Sources [ edit ] Marcus, Greil and Sanborn, "On the films of Guy Debord", Keith; Feature; Artforum; February 2006 Bracken, Len; Guy Debord: Revolutionary ; Feral House; 1997;  California Knabb, Ken; Guy Debord's Complete Cinematic Works ; AK Press; 1978;  Canada Marshall, Peter; Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism ; Fontana Press; 1992;  London Lasn, Kalle; Culture Jam: How to Reverse America's Suicidal Consumer Binge - And Why We Must ; Quill; 1999; New York External links [ edit ] La Société du spectacle at IMDb Observations on the English translation of Guy Debord's Oeuvres Cinématographiques Completes v t e Guy Debord Written works Report on the Construction of Situations (1957) Mémoires (1959) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) A Game of War (1987) Films directed Hurlements en faveur de Sade (1952) The Society of the Spectacle (1974) Songs written La Java des Bons-Enfants (1974) Chant des journées de mai (1974) Miscellaneous Letterist International Spectacle Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Society_of_the_Spectacle_(film)&oldid=1292330450 " Categories : 1974 films French documentary films Situationist International Documentary films about the media French collage films 1970s French films Films directed by Guy Debord Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Template film date with 1 release date This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 12:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Society of the Spectacle (film) 4 languages Add topic

