Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and other terms 2 Catholic Church 3 Anglican Communion Toggle Anglican Communion subsection 3.1 Training 4 History 5 Minor canons 6 See also 7 Notes and references 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Curate 13 languages العربية Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Português Slovenščina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Curé ) Religious occupation Not to be confused with Curator .

John Vianney , the Curé d'Ars A curate ( / ˈ k j ʊər ɪ t / ) is a person who is invested with the care or cure ( cura ) of souls of a parish . In this sense, curate means a parish priest ; but in many English-speaking countries the term curate is commonly used to describe clergy who are assistants to the parish priest. The duties or office of a curate are called a curacy .

Etymology and other terms [ edit ] The term is derived from the Latin curatus (compare Curator ).

In other languages, derivations from curatus may be used differently. In French , the curé is the chief priest (assisted by a vicaire ) of a parish, [ 1 ] as is the Italian curato , the Spanish cura , and the Filipino term kura paróko (which almost always refers to the parish priest), which is derived from Spanish.

Catholic Church [ edit ] Part of a series on the Hierarchy of the Catholic Church Saint Peter Ecclesiastical titles ( order of precedence ) Pope Pope emeritus Cardinal Cardinal Vicar Crown Prince Protector Moderator of the curia Chaplain of His Holiness Papal legate Papal majordomo Apostolic nuncio Apostolic delegate Apostolic Syndic Apostolic visitor Vicar apostolic Apostolic exarch Apostolic prefect Assistant to the papal throne Eparch Metropolitan Patriarch Catholicos Bishop Archbishop Bishop emeritus Diocesan bishop Major archbishop Primate Suffragan bishop Titular bishop Coadjutor bishop Auxiliary bishop Prelate Provost Pontiff Territorial prelate Territorial abbot Liturgical titles Acolyte Consecrator Lector Subdeacon Administrative and pastoral titles Auditor Brother Chancellor Chaplain Military chaplain Military ordinary Coarb Confessor Consultor Curate Deacon Archdeacon Defender of the bond Definitor Devil's advocate Diocesan administrator Ecclesiastical judge Exorcist Laity Lay abbot Abthain Commendatory Lay cardinal Minister Major orders Minor orders Missionary Monsignor Officialis Ostiarius Pastor Assistant pastor Palatinus Personal prelate Preacher Prefect Presbyter Elder Priest Principal Protonotary apostolic Reverend Saint Servant of God Blessed Venerable Seminarian Vicar Judicial vicar Vicar general Vicar forane Sub-dean Consecrated and professed titles Abbess Abbot Consecrated virgin Corrector Custos Friar Dean Grand master Hermit Master of novices Monk Novice Nun Postulant Prior Provincial superior Rector Religious Superior general Additional titles Almoner Altar server Archimandrite Archpriest Archdeacon Canon Captain General of the Church Chorbishop Coarb Commissary Apostolic Conclavist Custos Datarius Gonfalonier of the Church Honorary prelate Minor canon Notarius Ostiarius Peritus Postulator Prebendary Precentor Prince-bishop Prince-abbot Prince-primate Prince-provost Promotor Fidei Protopriest Protodeacon Protosyncellus Regionarius Sacristan Sidewalk counselor Usher Associations and organization titles Third orders Oblates Confraternities Pious Unions Grand master Knights Hospitaller Order of the Holy Sepulchre Teutonic Knights Inquisitor Grand Inquisitor Preceptor Catholic Church portal v t e In the Catholic Church , the English word curate is used for a priest assigned to a parish in a position subordinate to that of the parish priest . The parish priest (or often, in the United States, the pastor or minister [ citation needed ] ) is the priest who has canonical responsibility for the parish . He may be assisted by one or more other priests, referred to as curates, assistant priests , [ 2 ] parochial vicars, [ 3 ] or (in America) associate or assistant pastors .

Anglican Communion [ edit ] Edgar Sheppard , then Curate at Marlow and Hornsey In the Church of England today, curate refers to priests (or, in the first year, transitional deacons ) who are in their first post after ordination (usually for four years), and are completing their training (not unlike an apprenticeship ). The technical term curate , as found in the 1662 Book of Common Prayer , meant the incumbent of a benefice, that is the person licensed by the diocesan bishop to the "cure of souls", who, depending on how the benefice income was raised and distributed, was a rector , a vicar , or a perpetual curate .

[ 4 ] A vicar arises when a rectory was sold to lay rectors, which would often be a monastic house (such as abbey) or university college; a perpetual curacy where another priest or senior cleric has long-term control of the parish finances, granting an agreed stipend and general powers to the curate, albeit of theoretically of the same job security , below.

Although the expression curate-in-charge was mainly used of an informal arrangement  whereby an incumbent gave most responsibility for one of the parish churches to an assistant, in law it denoted a cleric licensed by the bishop to exercise some or all of the cure of souls when the incumbent had failed to make adequate provision for them or was subject to disciplinary measures.

[ 5 ] Once in possession of their benefices, rectors and vicars enjoyed a somewhat locally varied array of rights, absolutely, a home in which to live without charge, and generally a generous income from the parish especially in the era of tithes, yet could be removed after due legal process and for a restricted number of reasons.

[ 6 ] Perpetual curates were placed on a similar footing in 1838 and were commonly styled "vicars", and this practice was legally recognised in 1868.

[ 7 ] Clergy (both transitional deacons and priests ) who assist the "curate" were, and are, properly called assistant curates, but are often referred to as "the curate".

A house provided for an assistant curate is sometimes colloquially called a " curatage ". Assistant curates are also licensed by the bishop, but only at the request of the "curate", who had the right of dismissal subject to certain conditions.

[ 8 ] Although it is customary for a priest to serve as a curate in one or more parishes before becoming an incumbent, it is by no means unknown for priests who have previously been beneficed or consecrated bishop to return to a curacy (as assistant curate), sometimes as a matter of choice. For example, Geoffrey Francis Fisher served as Curate of Trent near Sherborne after retiring as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1961.

[ 9 ] With the 1968 Pastoral Measure and subsequent legislation, the Church of England has undergone a major process of reform which still continues today, and much of above no longer holds good. Ministers in the Church of England whose main income comes from sources other than their work as clergy may be termed "self-supporting ministers" or "curate (SSM)".

[ 10 ] Terms like "rector" and "curate" were carried overseas with the spread of Anglicanism, but their exact meaning depends on local conditions and regulations. In the Church of Ireland some curates are styled "bishop's curates" as they are accountable directly to the diocesan bishop, while sometimes mentored by local parish clergy, and are perceived to have more autonomy than other assistant curates.

[ citation needed ] In Anglican parishes with a charismatic or evangelical ( low church ) tradition, the roles of curates are usually seen as being an assistant leader to the overall leader, often in a larger team of pastoral leaders. Many of the larger charismatic and evangelical parishes have larger ministry teams with a number of pastoral leaders, some ordained and others who are not.

[ citation needed ] In the Episcopal Church of the United States , the curacy may be a temporary place to continue training after ordination, similar to an internship , [ 11 ] or it may be a permanent, subordinant position, more akin to a perpetual curate .

Training [ edit ] In the Church of England, the ongoing training of assistant curates is typically overseen by officers of the bishops called Initial Ministerial Education (IME) or Continuing Ministerial Development (CMD) Advisers.

History [ edit ] Originally a bishop would entrust a priest with the " cure of souls " (pastoral ministry) of a parish. When, in medieval Europe, this included the legal freehold of church land in the parish, the parish priest was a " perpetual curate " ( curatus perpetuus ), an assistant would be a (plain) curate ( curatus temporalis ).

The words perpetuus and temporalis distinguish their appointments but not the length of service, the apparent reference to time is accidental. A curate is appointed by the parish priest and paid from parish funds. A perpetual curate is a priest in charge of a parish who was (usually) appointed and paid by the bishop.

As the church became more embedded into the fabric of feudal Europe, various other titles often supplanted "curate" for the parish priest. " Rector " was the title given to a priest in possession of the tithe income. This right to the income was known as a "living". The title of rector comes from regere , 'to rule'.

Those parishes where a monastery had appropriated the rights to the tithe income, a portion of this income was set aside for a priest to occupy the parish, essentially acting on behalf of the monastery, in other words vicariously – hence "vicar". In some cases, a portion of a tithe for a vicar could exceed the income of some rectors, depending on the value of the livings being compared.

Minor canons [ edit ] Minor canons are those clergy who are members of a cathedral's establishment and take part in the daily services but are not part of the formal chapter . These are generally clergy who are nearer to the beginning than the end of their ministries, who have already served their curacy ( title post) in a parish church. They are often selected for their singing and liturgical ability.

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Catholicism portal Curate's egg Roman Curia Notes and references [ edit ] ^ "Curate" .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

^ "canon 545" .

Intratext . Code of Canon Law.

^ "canon 545" .

Vatican . Code of Canon Law. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013.

^ Cross & Livingstone.

Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (1974), articles "Curate", "Incumbent" & "Perpetual Curate" ^ Neep & Edinger.

A Handbook of Church Law for the Clergy A.R. Mowbray & Co (1928), p.25 ^ Neep & Edinger.

A Handbook of Church Law for the Clergy A.R. Mowbray & Co (1928), p.7 and following ^ Cross & Livingstone.

Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (1974), art. "Perpetual Curate" ^ Neep & Edinger.

A Handbook of Church Law for the Clergy A.R. Mowbray & Co (1928), p.24.

^ Carpenter, E., Archbishop Fisher, His Life and Times, London, Canterbury Press, 2012 ^ "Diocese of Bristol: Self Supporting Ministry" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2018 .

^ See , Paul Moore, Jr., Presences: A Bishop's Life in the City (1999).

Further reading [ edit ] Hart, A. Tindal (1970) The Curate's Lot: the story of the unbeneficed English clergy . London: J. Baker Lewis, Robert Michael (2016) Curacy Express: A Training Resource for New Clergy. Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Curate&oldid=1300040392 " Categories : Anglican ecclesiastical offices Catholic priesthood Christian terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Filipino-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015 This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 23:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Curate 13 languages Add topic

