Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origin and development of the Latin suits 1.2 Invention of German and French suits 1.3 Tarot cards 2 Suits Toggle Suits subsection 2.1 Symbolic origin 2.2 Comparisons between suits 3 Suits in games with traditional decks Toggle Suits in games with traditional decks subsection 3.1 Trumps 3.2 Special suits 3.3 Chosen suits 3.4 Ranking of suits 3.5 Pairing or ignoring suits 3.6 Four-color suits 4 Other suited decks Toggle Other suited decks subsection 4.1 Swiss-German Experimental Suit Systems 4.2 Suited-and-ranked decks 4.3 Other modern decks 5 Uses of playing card suit symbols 6 Character encodings 7 Metaphorical uses 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle the table of contents Playing card suit 28 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski עברית Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Саха тыла Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Suit (cards) ) Categories into which the cards of a deck are divided The four French card suits used in the English-speaking world : diamonds ( ♦ ),  clubs (♣), hearts ( ♥ ) and spades (♠) Traditional Spanish suits – clubs, swords, cups and coins – are found in Spain, as well as Hispanic America, Italy and parts of France This article contains suit card Unicode characters.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols .

In playing cards , a suit is one of the categories into which the cards of a deck are divided. Most often, each card bears one of several pips (symbols) showing to which suit it belongs; the suit may alternatively or additionally be indicated by the color printed on the card. The rank for each card is determined by the number of pips on it, except on face cards . Ranking indicates which cards within a suit are better, higher or more valuable than others, whereas there is no order between the suits unless defined in the rules of a specific card game . In most decks, there is exactly one card of any given rank in any given suit. A deck may include special cards that belong to no suit, often called jokers .

While English-speaking countries traditionally use cards with the French suits of Clubs , Spades , Hearts and Diamonds , many other countries have their own traditional suits. Much of central Europe uses the Germanic suits of Acorns , Leaves , Hearts and Bells ; Spain and parts of Italy and South America use the Latin suits of Swords , Batons , Cups and Coins ; German Switzerland uses the Swiss suits of Acorns, Shields , yellow Roses and Bells. Asian countries such as China and Japan also have their own traditional suits.

Tarot card packs have a set of distinct picture cards alongside the traditional four suits.

History [ edit ] Modern Western playing cards are generally divided into two or three general suit-systems. The older Latin suits are subdivided into the Italian and Spanish suit-systems. The younger Germanic suits are subdivided into the German and Swiss suit-systems. The French suits are a derivative of the German suits but are generally considered a separate system.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Origin and development of the Latin suits [ edit ] Main articles: Italian playing cards , Spanish-suited playing cards , and Portuguese-suited playing cards The earliest card games were trick-taking games and the invention of suits increased the level of strategy and depth in these games. A card of one suit cannot beat a card from another regardless of its rank. The concept of suits predates playing cards and can be found in Chinese dice and domino games such as Tien Gow .

Chinese money-suited cards are believed to be the oldest ancestor to the Latin suit system. The money-suit system is based on denominations of currency : Coins , Strings of Coins, Myriads of Strings (or of coins), and Tens of Myriads. Old Chinese coins had holes in the middle to allow them to be strung together. A string of coins could easily be misinterpreted as a stick to those unfamiliar with them.

By then the Islamic world had spread into Central Asia and had contacted China, and had adopted playing cards. The Muslims renamed the suit of myriads as cups; this may have been due to seeing a Chinese character for "myriad" ( 万 ) upside-down. The Chinese numeral character for Ten ( 十 ) on the Tens of Myriads suit may have inspired the Muslim suit of swords.

[ 3 ] Another clue linking these Chinese, Muslim, and European cards are the ranking of certain suits. In many early Chinese games like Madiao , the suit of coins was in reverse order so that the lower ones beat the higher ones. In the Indo-Persian game of Ganjifa , half the suits were also inverted, including a suit of coins. This was also true for the European games of Tarot and Ombre . The inverting of suits had no purpose in terms of play but was an artifact from the earliest games.

These Turko-Arabic cards, called Kanjifa , used the suits coins, clubs, cups, and swords, but the clubs represented polo sticks; Europeans changed that suit, as polo was an obscure sport to them.

The Latin suits are coins, clubs, cups, and swords. They are the earliest suit-system in Europe, and were adopted from the cards imported from Mamluk Egypt and Moorish Granada in the 1370s.

There are four types of Latin suits: Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, [ a ] and an extinct archaic type.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The systems can be distinguished by the pips of their long suits: swords and clubs.

Northern Italian swords are curved outward and the clubs appear to be batons. They intersect one another.

Southern Italian and Spanish swords are straight, and the clubs appear to be knobbly cudgels. They do not cross each other (except in the three of clubs).

Portuguese pips are like the Spanish, but they intersect like Northern Italian ones. They sometimes have dragons on the aces .

[ 6 ] This system lingers on only in the Tarocco Siciliano and the Unsun Karuta and Komatsufuda of Japan. Unsun Karuta additionally has a fifth Guru suit (circular whirls) .

The archaic system [ b ] is like the Northern Italian one, but the swords are curved inward so they touch each other without intersecting.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Minchiate (a game that used a 97-card deck) used a mixed system of Italian clubs and Portuguese swords.

Despite a long history of trade with China, Japan was not introduced to playing cards until the arrival of the Portuguese in the 1540s.

[ c ] Early locally made cards, Karuta , were very similar to Portuguese decks. Increasing restrictions by the Tokugawa shogunate on gambling, card playing, and general foreign influence, resulted in the Hanafuda deck that today is used most often for fishing-type games and the Komatsufuda and Kabufuda decks that are used for gambling. In hanafuda, the role of rank and suit in organizing cards became switched, so the deck has 12 suits, each representing a month of the year, and each suit has 4 cards, most often two normal, one Ribbon and one Special (though August, November and December each differ uniquely from this convention). In komatsufuda and kabufuda, the designs of the suits became much more abstract. The latter much moreso to the point where the suit does not matter (only rank) and the face cards indistinguishable; thus becoming a single-suited deck with ranks 1-10 and the designs quadruplicated. Unsun karuta did not face the same restrictions and instead developed an additional suit and additional ranks.

Invention of German and French suits [ edit ] Main articles: French-suited playing cards , German-suited playing cards , and Swiss playing cards During the 15th-century, manufacturers in German speaking lands experimented with various new suit systems to replace the Latin suits. One early deck had five suits, the Latin ones with an extra suit of shields.

[ 10 ] The Swiss-Germans developed their own suits of shields, roses, acorns, and bells around 1450.

[ 11 ] Instead of roses and shields, the Germans settled with hearts and leaves around 1460. The French derived their suits of trèfles (clovers or clubs ♣ ), carreaux (tiles or diamonds ♦ ), cœurs (hearts ♥ ), and piques (pikes or spades ♠ ) from the German suits around 1480. French suits correspond closely with German suits with the exception of the tiles with the bells but there is one early French deck that had crescents instead of tiles. The English names for the French suits of clubs and spades may simply have been carried over from the older Latin suits.

[ 12 ] Tarot cards [ edit ] Beginning around 1440 in northern Italy, some decks started to include an extra suit of (usually) 21 numbered cards known as trionfi or trumps , to play tarot card games .

[ 13 ] Always included in tarot decks is one card, the Fool or Excuse , which may be part of the trump suit depending on the game or region. These cards do not have pips or face cards like the other suits. Most tarot decks used for games come with French suits but Italian suits are still used in Piedmont, Bologna, and pockets of Switzerland. A few Sicilian towns use the Portuguese-suited Tarocco Siciliano , the only deck of its kind left in Europe.

The esoteric use of Tarot packs emerged in France in the late 18th century, since when special packs intended for divination have been produced. These typically have the suits cups, pentacles (based on the suit of coins), wands (based on the suit of batons), and swords. The trump cards and Fool of traditional card playing packs were named the Major Arcana ; the remaining cards, often embellished with occult images, were the Minor Arcana. Neither term is recognised by card players.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Suits [ edit ] Symbolic origin [ edit ] In divinatory, esoteric and occult tarot , the Minor Arcana, and the suits by extension, are believed to represent relatively mundane features of life. The court cards may represent the people whom one meets.

Each suit also has distinctive characteristics and connotations commonly held to be as follows: [ 16 ] Latin suit Element Class Faculty Wands, batons, clubs, staves Fire Artisans Will and creativity Swords, blades Air Nobility and military Reason or logic, wisdom, and intellect Cups, chalices, goblets, vessels Water Clergy Spiritual matters, or emotions and love Pentacles, coins, disks, rings Earth Merchants Material matters, or possessions and career Comparisons between suits [ edit ] Origin Suits Latin card suits Italian [ d ] Clubs ( Bastoni ) Cups ( Coppe ) Swords ( Spade ) Coins ( Denari ) Spanish [ e ] Clubs ( Bastos ) Cups ( Copas ) Swords ( Espadas ) Coins ( Oros ) Portuguese Clubs ( Paus ) Cups ( Copas ) Swords ( Espadas ) Coins ( Ouros ) Comparison of German, French and Swiss suits [ f ] Swiss-German [ g ] Acorns [ h ] Shields [ i ] Roses [ j ] Bells [ k ] German Acorns [ l ] Hearts [ m ] Leaves [ n ] Bells [ o ] French Clover (Clubs) [ p ] Hearts Pikes (Spades) [ q ] Tiles (Diamonds) Karuta suits Komatsufuda Clubs Cups Swords Coins Unsun Karuta Clubs ( パオ ) Cups ( コツ ) Swords ( イス ) Coins ( オウル ) Guru ( クル ) Kabufuda Clubs Hanafuda [ r ] Pine [ s ] Plum [ t ] Cherry [ u ] Wisteria [ v ] Iris [ w ] Peony [ x ] Bush Clover [ y ] Susuki Grass [ z ] Chrysan­themum [ aa ] Maple [ ab ] Willow [ ac ] Paul­ownia [ ad ] Suits in games with traditional decks [ edit ] Trumps [ edit ] In a large and popular category of trick-taking games , one suit may be designated in each deal to be trump and all cards of the trump suit rank above all non-trump cards, and automatically prevail over them, losing only to a higher trump if one is played to the same trick.

[ 17 ] Non-trump suits are called plain suits.

[ 18 ] Special suits [ edit ] Some games treat one or more suits as being special or different from the others. A simple example is Spades , which uses spades as a permanent trump suit. A less simple example is Hearts , which is a kind of point trick game in which the object is to avoid taking tricks containing hearts. With typical rules for Hearts (rules vary slightly) the queen of spades and the two of clubs (sometimes also the jack of diamonds) have special effects, with the result that all four suits have different strategic value.

Tarot decks have a dedicated trump suit.

Chosen suits [ edit ] Games of the Karnöffel Group have between one and four chosen suits , sometimes called selected suits or, misleadingly, trump suits. The chosen suits are typified by having a disrupted ranking and cards with varying privileges which may range from full to none and which may depend on the order they are played to the trick. For example, chosen Sevens may be unbeatable when led, but otherwise worthless. In Swedish Bräus some cards are even unplayable. In games where the number of chosen suits is less than four, the others are called unchosen suits and usually rank in their natural order.

Ranking of suits [ edit ] Whist-style rules generally preclude the necessity of determining which of two cards of different suits has higher rank, because a card played on a card of a different suit either automatically wins or automatically loses depending on whether the new card is a trump. However, some card games also need to define relative suit rank. An example of this is in auction games such as bridge , where if one player wishes to bid to make some number of heart tricks and another to make the same number of diamond tricks, there must be a mechanism to determine which takes precedence in the bidding order.

There is no standard order for the four suits and so there are differing conventions among games that need a suit hierarchy. Examples of suit order are (from highest to lowest): High → low Games Mnemonic ♠ ♥ ♦ ♣ Bridge for bidding and scoring Poker occasionally Taiwanese version of Big Two Alphabetical order reversed: S, H, D, C ♠ ♥ ♣ ♦ Big Two outside Taiwan 1 tip, 2 halves, 3 leaves, 4 corners ♥ ♦ ♣ ♠ Preferans only used for bidding Five Hundred for bidding and scoring Thirteen ♥ ♦ ♠ ♣ Préférence only used for bidding ♣ ♠ ♥ ♦ Skat for bidding (valued 12, 11, 10, 9) and to determine which Jack beats which in play Other European games such as Bruus ♣ ♠ ♥ ♦ Cego for determining highest card in certain situations ♣ ♥ ♠ ♦ Ninety-nine for scoring 3, 2, 1, 0 lobes Pairing or ignoring suits [ edit ] The pairing of suits is a vestigial remnant of Ganjifa , a game where half the suits were in reverse order, the lower cards beating the higher. In Ganjifa, progressive suits were called "strong" while inverted suits were called "weak". In Latin decks, the traditional division is between the long suits of swords and clubs and the round suits of cups and coins. This pairing can be seen in Ombre and Tarot card games . German and Swiss suits lack pairing but French suits maintained them and this can be seen in the game of Spoil Five .

[ 19 ] In some games, such as blackjack , suits are ignored. In other games, such as Canasta , only the color (red or black) is relevant. In yet others, such as bridge, each of the suit pairings are distinguished.

In contract bridge , there are three ways to divide four suits into pairs: by color , by rank and by shape resulting in six possible suit combinations.

Color is used to denote the red suits (hearts and diamonds) and the black suits (spades and clubs).

Rank is used to indicate the major (spades and hearts) versus minor (diamonds and clubs) suits.

Shape is used to denote the pointed (diamonds and spades, which visually have a sharp point uppermost) versus rounded (hearts and clubs) suits. This is used in bridge as a mnemonic.

Four-color suits [ edit ] The aces of a four-color deck See also: Four-color deck Some decks, while using the French suits, give each suit a different color to make the suits more distinct from each other. In bridge , such decks are known as no- revoke decks, and the most common colors are black spades, red hearts, blue diamonds and green clubs, although in the past the diamond suit usually appeared in a golden yellow-orange.  A pack occasionally used in Germany uses green spades (comparable to leaves), red hearts, yellow diamonds (comparable to bells) and black clubs (comparable to acorns). This is a compromise deck devised to allow players from East Germany (who used German suits) and West Germany (who adopted the French suits) to be comfortable with the same deck when playing tournament Skat after the German reunification .

[ 20 ] Other suited decks [ edit ] Swiss-German Experimental Suit Systems [ edit ] This is a list of suit systems devised by early Swiss-German cardmakers mentioned by Michael Dummett : [ 11 ] 15th-16th Century Swiss-German suit systems Name Time Suit 1 Suit 2 Suit 3 Suit 4 Other Suits Incomplete sheet from Basel c. 1531 Purses Keys Several incomplete packs from Basel c. 1470 to 1529 Feathers Hats Shields Bells Cards from Shields suit (presumed Swiss suit system) c. 1433-1451 Shields Acorns (presumed) Roses (presumed) Bells (presumed) Stuttgart pack c. 1427-1431 Stags Hounds Ducks Falcons Ambraser Hofjagdspiel c. 1440-1445 Falcons Lures Hounds Herons Pack by Virgil Solis c. 1540-1545 Lions Apes Parrots Peacocks 2 fragmentary sheets from the Upper Rhine 16th century Carnations Beans Birds Pack by Thomas Murner for teaching logic 1509 Bells Acorns Hearts Shields Crowns, et al. (total 16 suits) Pack by Thomas Murner for teaching law 1515 Bells Acorns Hearts Shields Crowns, et al. (total 12 suits) Liechtenstein pack c. 1440-1450, c. 1494-1500 (disputed) Coins Batons (or polosticks [ 21 ] ) Cups Swords Shields Pack by Hopfer of Nuremburg [ verification needed ] c. 1536-1539 Coins Batons (arranged as spokes of a wheel) Cups Swords (arranged as spokes of a wheel) 2 packs by Heinrich Hauk of Frankfurt 1585 and 1588 Roses Acorns Birds Bells Pack perhaps by Heinrich Hauk Lions Apes Parrots Eagles Pack by Hans Sebald Beham c. 1523 Leaves Acorns Roses Pomegranates Pack attributed to Hans Sebald Beham Acorns Bells Roses Parrots Listed by Dominican Meister Ingold 1450 Roses Crowns Pennies Rings Set of mutilated cards from Alsace c. 1480 Shields Crowns Bells Acorns Fragmentary sheet of Maihinger pack c. 1450 Lions Bears Dogs Other suit systems: 15th-16th Century Swiss-German suit system Name Time Suit 1 Suit 2 Suit 3 Suit 4 Other Suits Pack by Master of the Playing Cards [ 22 ] [ 23 ] c. 1455 Flowers Wild men Beasts of prey Stags Herons Hofämterspiel [ 24 ] c. 1460 Shields (France) Shields (Germany) Shields (Bohemia) Shields (Hungary) Flemish Hunting Deck [ 25 ] c. 1475-1480 Dog collars Dog tethers Gaming nooses Hunting horns Pack by south German engraver [ 26 ] c. 1496 Pomegranates [ ae ] Batons Cups Swords Pack by Master P. W.

[ 27 ] c. 1500 Hares Parrots Carnations Columbines Roses Pack by Jost Amman [ 28 ] 1588 Books Ink pads Pots Cups Suited-and-ranked decks [ edit ] A large number of games are based around a deck in which each card has a rank and a suit (usually represented by a color), and for each suit there is exactly one card having each rank, though in many cases the deck has various special cards as well.

Color suits used by some modern card games Games Suits red orange brown gold yellow green cyan teal blue purple magenta pink black grey white DUO 4 UNO , Phase 10 4 UNO Flip 8 4-Colour Suits 4 4-Colour Suits (Old) 4 Rook , 4-Colour Suits (German) 4 Sticheln 5 Mü 5 Rage , Level 8 6 Schotten Totten 6 Other modern decks [ edit ] Decks for some games are divided into suits, but otherwise bear little relation to traditional games. An example would be the board game Taj Mahal , in which each card has one of four background colors, the rule being that all the cards played by a single player in a single round must be the same color. The selection of cards in the deck of each color is approximately the same and the player's choice of which color to use is guided by the contents of their particular hand.

In the trick-taking card game Flaschenteufel (" The Bottle Imp "), all cards are part of a single sequence ranked from 1 to 37 but split into three suits depending on its rank. players must follow the suit led, but if they are void in that suit they may play a card of another suit and this can still win the trick if its rank is high enough . For this reason every card in the deck has a different number to prevent ties. A further strategic element is introduced since one suit contains mostly low-ranking cards and another, mostly high-ranking cards.

Whereas cards in a traditional deck have two classifications—suit and rank—and each combination is represented by one card, giving for example 4 suits × 13 ranks = 52 cards , each card in a Set deck has four classifications each into one of three categories, giving a total of 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 = 81 cards. Any one of these four classifications could be considered a suit , but this is not really enlightening in terms of the structure of the game.

Uses of playing card suit symbols [ edit ] Card suit symbols occur in places outside card playing: The four suits were famously employed by the United States' 101st Airborne Division during World War II to distinguish its four constituent regiments: Clubs (♣) identified the 327th Glider Infantry Regiment ; currently worn by the 1st Brigade Combat Team.

Diamonds ( ♦ ) identified the 501st PIR . 1st Battalion, 501st Infantry Regiment is now part of the 4th Brigade (ABN), 25th Infantry Division in Alaska; the Diamond is currently used by the 101st Combat Aviation Brigade.

Hearts ( ♥ ) identified the 502nd PIR ; [ 29 ] currently worn by the 2nd Brigade Combat Team.

Spades (♠) identified the 506th PIR ; currently worn by the 4th Brigade Combat Team.

Character encodings [ edit ] Main article: Playing cards in Unicode In computer and other digital media , suit symbols can be represented with character encoding , notably in the ISO and Unicode standards, or with Web standard ( SGML 's named entity syntax ): Playing card characters in Unicode UTF code: U+2660 (9824 dec ) U+2665 (9829 dec ) U+2666 (9830 dec ) U+2663 (9827 dec ) Symbol : ♠ ♥ ♦ ♣ Name : Black Spade Suit Red Heart Suit Red Diamond Suit Black Club Suit Entity : &spades; &hearts; &diams; &clubs; UTF code: U+2664 (9828 dec ) U+2661 (9825 dec ) U+2662 (9826 dec ) U+2667 (9831 dec ) Symbol : ♤ ♡ ♢ ♧ Name : White Spade Suit White Heart Suit White Diamond Suit White Club Suit UTF codes are expressed by the Unicode code point "U+hexadecimal number" syntax , and as subscript the respective decimal number.

Symbol s are expressed here as they are in the web browser 's HTML renderization.

Name is the formal name adopted in the standard specifications.

Unicode is the most frequently used encoding standard, and suits are in the Miscellaneous Symbols Block (2600–26FF) of the Unicode.

It is recommended to use stylistic fonts for regional variations of the French suits.

[ 30 ] Though fleurons (e.g. ✿/❀) can be used for the flower suit , and stars (e.g. ★/☆) can be used for a fifth suit such as for Five Crowns .

Metaphorical uses [ edit ] In some card games the card suits have a dominance order, for example: club (lowest) - diamond - heart - spade (highest). That led to in spades being used to mean more than expected, in abundance, very much .

[ 31 ] Other expressions drawn from bridge and similar games include strong suit (any area of personal strength) and to follow suit (to imitate another's actions).

See also [ edit ] Hearts (card game) Spades (card game) Stripped deck Five-suit bridge Russian playing cards Notes [ edit ] ^ "Portuguese" is slightly misleading nomenclature. The suit system may have originated in Catalonia and spread out through the western Mediterranean before being replaced by the "Spanish" system. The association with Portugal comes from the fact that they continued to use it until completely going over to French suits at the beginning of the 20th century.

^ Probably associated with the Duchy of Ferrara and likely abandoned after the 15th century.

^ The only users of Chinese cards during the Edo period were the expat community in Nagasaki .

[ 9 ] ^ Sample pips come from the Venetian pattern ^ Sample pips come from the Castilian pattern ^ The French suit system is generally considered to be separate from the German and Swiss due to its different set of face cards . However, when comparing only the pips, it is German in origin.

^ There does not appear to be a single universal system of correspondences between Swiss-German and French suits. Cards combining the two suit systems are manufactured in different versions with different combinations of suits.

^ Swiss-German: Eichel ^ Swiss-German: Schilten ^ Swiss-German: Rosen ^ Swiss-German: Schellen ^ German: Eichel (acorn), Ecker (beechnut), Hungarian: Makk (acorn), Czech: Žaludy (acorns) ^ German: Herz (heart), Rot (red), Hungarian: Piros (red), Czech: Srdce (heart), Červené (red) ^ German: Laub (leaves), Grün (green), Gras (grass), Blatt (leaf) Hungarian: Zöld (green), Czech: Listy (leaves), Zelené (green) ^ German: Schellen (bells), Hungarian: Tök (pumpkin), Czech: Kule (balls) ^ The shape of the clubs symbol is believed to be an adaptation of the German suit of acorns. Clubs are also known as clovers, flowers and crosses. The French name for the suit is trèfles meaning clovers , the Italian name for the suit is fiori meaning flowers and the German name for the suit is Kreuz meaning cross .

^ In German-speaking countries the spade was the symbol associated with the blade of a spade . The English term spade originally did not refer to the tool but was derived from the Spanish word espada meaning sword from the Spanish suit. Those symbols were later changed to resemble the digging tool instead to avoid confusion. In German and Dutch the suit is alternatively named Schippen and schoppen respectively, meaning shovels .

^ In Hanafuda, each of the 12 suits is associated with a month of the year. The traditional month associations differ from region to region. Most notable in modern usage, is that in Korea the suits for November and December are switched compared to the standard Japanese order.

^ Japanese: matsu ( 松 , pine ) , Korean: 송학 ; 松鶴 ; songhak ; lit.

pine crane. Associated with the month January.

^ Japanese: ume ( 梅 , plum blossom ) , Korean: 매조 ; 梅鳥 ; maejo ; lit.

plum bird. Associated with the month February.

^ Japanese: sakura ( 桜 , cherry blossom ) , Korean: 벚꽃 ; beotkkot ; lit.

cherry blossom or 사쿠라 ; sakura . Associated with the month March.

^ Japanese: fuji ( 藤 , wisteria ) , Korean: 흑싸리 ; heugssali ; lit.

black bush clover . Associated with the month April.

^ Japanese: ayame ( 菖蒲 , iris ) or kakitsubata ( 杜若 , Iris laevigata ) , Korean: 난초 ; 蘭草 ; nancho ; lit.

orchid. Associated with the month May.

^ Japanese: botan ( 牡丹 , peony ) , Korean: 모란 ; 牡丹 ; moran ; lit.

peony. Associated with the month June.

^ Japanese: hagi ( 萩 , bush clover ) , Korean: 홍싸리 ; hongssari ; lit.

red bush clover. Associated with the month July.

^ Japanese: susuki ( 芒 , Japanese silver grass ) or bōzu ( 坊主 , Buddhist monk , shorn head) , Korean: 공산 ; 空山 ; gongsan ; lit.

empty mountain. Associated with the month August.

^ Japanese: kiku ( 菊 , chrysanthemum ) , Korean: 국진 ; gukjin . Associated with the month September.

^ Japanese: momiji ( 紅葉 , maple , red leaves) , Korean: 단풍 ; 丹楓 ; danpung ; lit.

maple, autumn leaves. Associated with the month October.

^ Japanese: yanagi ( 柳 , willow ) or ame ( 雨 , rain) , Korean: 비 ; bi ; lit.

rain. Associated with the month November in Japan and December in Korea.

^ Japanese: kiri ( 桐 , paulownia ) , Korean: 오동 ; odong ; lit.

paulownia. Associated with the month December in Japan and November in Korea.

^ Possibly alludes to the kingdom of Granada .

References [ edit ] ^ Parlett, David (1990).

The Oxford Guide to Card Games . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

27–34 .

^ McLeod, John .

Games classified by type of cards or tiles used at pagat.com . Retrieved 24 March 2017.

^ Pollett, Andrea (2002). "Tuman, or the Ten Thousand Cups of the Mamluk Cards".

The Playing-Card .

31 (1): 34– 41.

^ Mann, Sylvia (1974). "A Suit-System Subdivided".

The Playing-Card .

3 (1): 51.

^ McLeod, John.

Games played with Latin suited cards at pagat.com . Retrieved 10 November 2015.

^ Wintle, Adam.

Portuguese Playing Cards at the World of Playing Cards. Retrieved 26 March 2017.

^ Dummett, Michael (1990–1991). "A Survey of 'Archaic' Italian Cards".

The Playing-Card .

19 (2, 4): 43– 51, 128– 131.

^ Gjerde, Tor.

Italian renaissance woodcut playing cards at old.no. Retrieved 26 March 2017.

^ "（六）鎖国時代の中国の紙牌 - 日本かるた文化館" .

Japan Playing Card Museum (in Japanese) . Retrieved 2 September 2023 .

^ Meyer, Huck.

Liechtenstein'sches Spiel at trionfi.com. Retrieved 24 March 2017.

^ a b Dummett, Michael (1980).

The Game of Tarot . London: Duckworth. pp.

14– 16.

^ Berry, John (1999). "French suits and English names".

The Playing-Card .

28 (2): 84– 89.

^ McLeod, John.

Card Games: Tarot Games at pagat.com . Retrieved 10 November 2015.

^ Renée, Janina (2001).

Tarot for a New Generation (First ed.). St. Paul, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications. p. 5.

ISBN 0738701602 .

In the system that is most commonly used, these suits are designated as Wands, Swords, Cups, and Pentacles.

^ Smith, Caroline; Astrop, John (1999).

The Elemental Tarot . New York: St. Martin's Griffin. p. 7.

ISBN 0312241399 .

The Minor Arcana comprises fifty-six cards divided into four suits, which in most decks are swords, wands, cups, and coins or pentacles.

^ Dee, Jonathan (2002). "Introduction to the Minor Arcana". In Liz Dean (ed.).

Tarot, An illustrated guide . Silverdale Books.

ISBN 1-85605-685-6 .

^ McLeod, John.

Mechanics of Card Games at pagat.com . Retrieved 24 March 2017.

^ Parlett, David .

The Language of Cards at David Parlett Gourmet Games. Retrieved 24 March 2017.

^ Leyden, Rudolf von; Dummett, Michael (1982).

Ganjifa, The Playing Cards of India . London: Victoria and Albert Museum . pp.

52– 53.

^ "Kartenbilder" (in German). deutscherskatverband.de. 17 January 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

^ Meyer, Huck.

Liechtenstein'sches Spiel at trionfi.com. Retrieved 24 March 2017.

^ Wintle, Simon (February 7, 2017).

"Master of the Playing Cards" .

www.wopc.co.uk . The World of Playing Cards . Retrieved August 31, 2024 .

^ "Master of the Playing Cards - The Queen of Flowers" .

MetMuseum.org . Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved September 4, 2024 .

^ Wintle, Simon (July 3, 1996).

"Hofamterspiel, c.1460" .

www.wopc.co.uk . The World of Playing Cards . Retrieved August 31, 2024 .

^ Wintle, Simon (May 6, 2015).

"Flemish Hunting Deck" .

www.wopc.co.uk . The World of Playing Cards . Retrieved August 31, 2024 .

^ Wintle, Simon (July 3, 1996).

"South German Engraver" .

www.wopc.co.uk . The World of Playing Cards . Retrieved August 31, 2024 .

^ Wintle, Simon (July 17, 2011).

"Master PW Circular Cards" .

www.wopc.co.uk . The World of Playing Cards . Retrieved August 31, 2024 .

^ Wintle, Simon (July 3, 1996).

"The Book of Trades by Jost Amman, 1588" .

www.wopc.co.uk . The World of Playing Cards . Retrieved August 31, 2024 .

^ Zaloga, Steven J (2007).

US Airborne Divisions in the ETO 1944-45 . Osprey Publishing. p. 58.

^ Stötzner, Andreas (December 7, 2010).

"Swiss/German/Latin playing card symbols" .

unicode.org . Retrieved August 27, 2024 .

^ Martin, Gary.

" 'In spades' - the meaning and origin of this phrase" .

Retrieved 24 March 2017.

v t e Playing cards Standard 52-card deck Playing card suits ( French ) Spades Hearts Diamonds Clubs Ranks Ace Ace of spades Ace of hearts King Queen Queen of spades Jack Curse of Scotland Beer card Specific decks Ambraser Hofjagdspiel Archaeology awareness Charruan Flemish Hunting Deck Hamas most wanted Hofämterspiel Jerry's Nugget Most-wanted Iraqi Politicards Stuttgart pack Transformation Other packs and decks As-Nas Chinese Four-colour pack Ganjifa Ganjapa Karuta Hanafuda Hyakunin Isshu Kabufuda Uta-garuta Kvitlech Polish Russian Tarot pack Tujeon Zi pai Cards Banner Blank Court card Knight Ober Unter Pip card Deuce Weli Joker Nicknames Stripped deck Talon Unicode Other suits German Leaves Swiss Shields Roses German and Swiss Acorns Bells Latin ( Italian / Spanish / Portuguese ) Cups Coins Batons Swords Chinese (Money) Cash Strings of Cash Myriads of Strings Tens of Myriads Manufacturers and brands Manufacturers ASS Altenburger Cartamundi Copag Dal Negro Fournier France Cartes F.X. Schmid Gemaco J.O. Öberg & Son Modiano Nintendo Nürnberger-Spielkarten-Verlag Oishi Tengudo Piatnik Ravensburger Trefl U.S. Games Systems United States Playing Card Company Brands Bicycle Grimaud Defunct Aspioti-ELKA Bielefelder Spielkarten C.L. Wüst Charles Goodall Dondorf Lewis Cohen Waddingtons Notable people Lee Asher Hubert Auer Bryan Berg David Blaine Derren Brown Lewis Cohen Dan and Dave Thierry Depaulis S. W. Erdnase Lennart Green Richard Harding Johann Kaspar Hechtel Ricky Jay Sekiryo Kaneda René Lavand Ed Marlo Master of the Playing Cards John McLeod Anton Moser Samuel J. Murray David Parlett Ferdinand Piatnik Richard Valentine Pitchford Franco Pratesi Johann Georg Rauch Juan Tamariz Howard Thurston Charles Troedel Dai Vernon Fusajiro Yamauchi Groups and organisations Skat British Skat Association German Skat Association International Skat Court International Skat Players Association 52 Plus Joker Cary Collection of Playing Cards Fournier Museum of Playing Cards German Doppelkopf Association German Playing Card Museum International Playing-Card Society The Playing-Card Musée Français de la Carte à Jouer Saga Arashiyama Museum of Arts and Culture Worshipful Company of Makers of Playing Cards Card manipulation and cardistry Tricks The Acme of Control Ambitious Card Blackstone's Card Trick Without Cards The Circus Card Trick The Four Burglars Out of This World Rising Card Spelling Bee Twenty-One Card Trick Bottom dealing Card marking Card sharp Card throwing Cards in the hat Cardistry-Con Cutting Double lift The Expert at the Card Table Herrmann pass History of cardistry House of cards One-way deck Palms and grips Gambler's Magician's Mechanic's Tenkai The Phantom of the Card Table Second dealing Shuffling Faro Gilbreath Zarrow Si Stebbins stack Spoke card Three-card monte Trick decks Art and media Paintings The Acrobats The Bezique Game The Card Players The Card Players II Card Players in a Rich Interior The Card Sharp with the Ace of Diamonds Cardplayers in a Sunlit Room The Cardsharps Dogs Playing Poker Still Life with a Poem Violin and Playing Cards on a Table Film and television Card Sharks Playing Cards (1896) Play Your Cards Right Video games Balatro Literature Alice's Adventures In Wonderland (1865) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nqmkl
Cached time: 20250816090341
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.756 seconds
Real time usage: 0.879 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7384/1000000
Revision size: 43551/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 152194/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17040/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 109549/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.405/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23002555/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  672.790      1 -total
 27.88%  187.548      2 Template:Reflist
 16.32%  109.828     21 Template:Lang
 15.14%  101.861     31 Template:Efn
 14.02%   94.345      7 Template:Cite_book
 12.27%   82.583      7 Template:Navbox
 11.18%   75.240      1 Template:Playing_cards
  9.87%   66.433     13 Template:Korean
  9.77%   65.711      1 Template:Short_description
  6.75%   45.387      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:218670:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816090341 and revision id 1305541952. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Playing_card_suit&oldid=1305541952 " Categories : Card suits Playing cards Contract bridge Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2024 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 17:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Playing card suit 28 languages Add topic

