Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General meetings and leadership 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents West Nordic Council 12 languages Dansk Deutsch Eesti Føroyskt Français Íslenska Kalaallisut Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia West Nordic Council Logo Map of member states Headquarters Reykjavík , Iceland Establishment • Established September 24, 1985 ; 39 years ago ( 1985-09-24 ) in Nuuk , Greenland Website www .vestnordisk .is /english / The West Nordic Council ( Danish : Vestnordisk Råd , Greenlandic : Nunat Avannarliit Killiit Siunnersuisoqatigiiffiat , Faroese : Útnorðurráðið , Icelandic : Vestnorræna ráðið ) is a cooperative forum for the parliaments and governments of Greenland , the Faroe Islands , and Iceland . It was initially founded in 1985 as the West Nordic Parliamentarian Council of Cooperation but the name was changed in 1997. The council is composed of six MPs from each nation appointed by their respective parliaments. The annual general meeting of the council rotates between the members and is its highest authority. A presidium of three members, including the council's president, oversees the organization of its work and activities.

The nations of the Council share a somewhat common recent history: Greenland and the Faroes are autonomous territories of Denmark and Iceland is a former Danish possession. They also share a similar economic base, all being dependent on fisheries . The council's main objectives are: To promote West Nordic (North Atlantic) interests.

To be guardians of north Atlantic resources and North Atlantic culture and to help to promote West Nordic interests through the West Nordic governments – not least with regards to the serious issues of resource management, pollution, etc.

To follow up on the governments' West Nordic cooperation.

To work with the Nordic Council and to be the West Nordic link in Nordic cooperation.

To act as the parliamentary link for inter-West Nordic organisations, including Arctic parliamentary cooperation.

[ 1 ] The West Nordic Council is separate from the Nordic Council , although all of the members of the West Nordic Council are also members of the Nordic Council and there is some cooperation between the two.

General meetings and leadership [ edit ] This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( February 2024 ) No.

Location Year Elected president 1st Nuuk 1985 Jens K. Lyberth 2nd 1986 Páll Pétursson 3rd 1987 Hans Jacob Debes 4th 1988 Preben Lange 5th 1989 Friðjón Þórðarson 6th 1990 Karin Kjølbro 7th 1991 Jonathan Motzfeldt 8th 1992 Steingrímur J. Sigfússon 9th 1993 Lisbeth L. Petersen 10th 1994 Jonathan Motzfeldt 11th Qaqortoq 1995 Árni Johnsen 12th Vestmannaeyjar 1996 Lisbeth L. Petersen 13th Øravík 1997 Jonathan Motzfeldt 14th Ilulissat 1998 Ísólfur Gylfi Pálmason 15th Skeiðahreppur 1999 Jógvan Durhuus 16th Tórshavn 2000 Ole Lynge 17th Nuuk 2001 Hjálmar Árnason 18th Stykkishólmur 2002 Jógvan á Lakjuni 19th Eiði 2003 Jonathan Motzfeldt 20th Narsarsuaq 2004 Birgir Ármannsson 21st Ísafjörður 2005 Henrik Old 22nd Tórshavn 2006 Jonathan Motzfeldt 23rd Nuuk 2007 Karl V. Matthíasson 24th Grundarfjörður 2008 Kári P. Højgaard 25th Runavík and Tórshavn 2009 Josef Motzfeldt 26th Tasiilaq 2010 Ólína Þorvarðardóttir 27th Bifröst University 2011 Kári P. Højgaard 28th 2012 Josef Motzfeldt 29th 2013 Unnur Brá Konráðsdóttir 30th Vestmannaeyjar 2014 Bill Justinussen 31st Runavík 2015 Lars Emil Johansen 32nd 2016 Bryndís Haraldsdóttir 33rd 2017 34th 2018 35th 2019 36th 2020 37th 2021 Kim Kielsen 38th Nuuk 2022 Steinunn Þóra Árnadóttir 39th Reykjavík 2023 Jenis av Rana 40th 2024 See also [ edit ] Hoyvík Agreement - an Iceland-Faroes free trade agreement that might be expanded to Greenland creating a West Nordic free trade zone .

Arctic cooperation and politics References [ edit ] ^ Vestnordisk Råd External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Regional organizations Bodies African Union Alliance of Sahel States Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization Arab League Arctic Council Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Asia Cooperation Dialogue Asia Council Asia-Europe Foundation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Assembly of European Regions Association of Caribbean States AUKUS Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples' Trade Treaty Benelux British–Irish Council Bucharest Nine Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System Central European Free Trade Agreement Central European Initiative Collective Security Treaty Organization Commonwealth of Independent States Commonwealth of Nations Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Community of Democratic Choice Community of Latin American and Caribbean States Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership Conference of European Regions with Legislative Power Council of the Baltic Sea States Council of Europe Craiova Group East African Community Eastern Partnership Economic Community of West African States Economic Cooperation Organization Eurasian Economic Union European Political Community European Union Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development Gulf Cooperation Council Indian Ocean Rim Association International Conference on the Great Lakes Region Liptako–Gourma Authority Latin American Economic System Latin American Integration Association Latin American Parliament Lublin Triangle Melanesian Spearhead Group Mercosur New Hanseatic League Nordic-Baltic Eight Nordic Council North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Open Balkan Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Organization of American States Organization of Ibero-American States Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Pacific Alliance Pacific Islands Forum Paneuropean Union Polynesian Leaders Group Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Regional Cooperation Council Shanghai Cooperation Organisation South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone South-East European Cooperation Process Southern African Development Community TAKM Three Seas Initiative Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat Organization of Turkic States Union of South American Nations Visegrád Group West African Economic and Monetary Union West Nordic Council Western Balkans Quad Topics Regional integration Regional organizations by population Regionalism (international relations) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=West_Nordic_Council&oldid=1252772939 " Categories : 1985 establishments in Greenland International organizations based in the Americas Nordic government Nordic organizations Organizations established in 1985 Politics of the Faroe Islands Politics of Greenland Politics of Iceland Political organisations based in Greenland Political organizations based in Iceland Hidden categories: Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Greenlandic-language text Articles containing Faroese-language text Articles containing Icelandic-language text Wikipedia articles in need of updating from February 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating This page was last edited on 22 October 2024, at 21:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents West Nordic Council 12 languages Add topic

