Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 In the Third Republic 1.2 Second World War 1.3 Post-war and later career 2 References Toggle the table of contents Fernand Grenier (French politician) 3 languages Español Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French communist politician Fernand Grenier (9 July 1901 – 12 August 1992) was a French communist politician.

Biography [ edit ] Fernand Grenier was born in to a working-class family. He spent his childhood in Tourcoing, where he obtained his school certificate. He then worked as a baker and later a municipal employee in the town of Halluin.

[ 1 ] In the Third Republic [ edit ] Grenier joined the Communist Party shortly after the Tours Congress , in 1922, and became secretary of the Halluin Communist Youth section. In November 1924 he trained at the “Leninist school” in Bobigny, together with Jacques Duclos , and stood out for his ability to write for union and political newspapers. Promoted to assume responsibilities in the Northern region of the Communist Party in 1926, he was sentenced to one year and then eight months in prison for "provoking soldiers to disobedience" following an article published in L'Avant-Garde, the newspaper of communist youth.

[ 2 ] Suspected of Trotskyism in 1930 because of his friendship with Albert Cornette, secretary of the CGTU , he lived a brief period of misfortune until 1932 when he resumed responsibilities in the North, then as a permanent member of the Central Committee, in Paris, where he was responsible for directing the Association of Friends of the Soviet Union (AUS), a position he held until 1939. In 1933 he spent a month in the USSR. In 1936, the association had 70,000 members and its magazine Russie d'aujourd'hui had a circulation of 130,000 copies.

In 1935, Fernand Grenier was responsible for the reconquest of the city of Saint-Denis, then in the Seine department, whose mayor, Jacques Doriot, had just been excluded from the Party. In the legislative elections of April–May 1936, Doriot was re-elected with a lead of 700 votes. After Doriot had resigned his mandate as deputy, Fernand Grenier stood in the partial legislative elections of August 1, 1937, and was elected deputy for Saint-Denis, defeating Doriot's replacement. In the Chamber of Deputies he was part of the Foreign Affairs Commission and the Final Accounts and Economy Commission.

[ 2 ] Second World War [ edit ] Mobilized in September 1939 he was demobilized near Annecy. Along with other communist deputies, he was stripped of his parliamentary mandate on January 21, 1940, and subsequently, of his mandate as municipal councilor of Saint-Denis in February 1940.

[ 3 ] After having had difficulties in resuming contact with the clandestine apparatus of the party, he was chosen to represent the Central Committee during the first contacts with the envoys of Free France. He then met Colonel Rémy on November 25, 1942, and with him arrived in England in January 1943 carrying a letter from the CC of the Communist Party and another from Charles Tillon , leader of the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans (FTPF). He spoke for the first time on the BBC on January 15, 1943. From then he represented the communists before the various successive bodies of Free France , but in September 1943 he could not accept a position as commissioner of the French Committee of National Liberation (CFLN) which was proposed by de Gaulle without the approval of Jacques Duclos , then the party's clandestine leader in occupied France. The Communist Party presented demands for the participation of communists in the provisional government. On April 4, 1944, a compromise was reached with the appointment of two communist commissioners, François Billoux as State Commissioner and Grenier as Air Commissioner.

[ 2 ] Following the amendment presented by Fernand Grenier on March 24, 1944, at the Provisional Consultative Assembly of Algiers, the right to vote for women was established in France with article 17 that states "Women are voters and eligible under the same conditions as men".

[ 4 ] Post-war and later career [ edit ] Fernand Grenier represented the PCF in the Provisional Consultative Assembly until October 1945, when he was re-elected deputy for the Sena in the Constituent Assembly, a deputy seat he held until 1968.

[ 3 ] He was part of the central committee of the PCF until May 1964. In September 1950, together with Denise Ginollin, he went to the Ministry of the Interior to inquire Eugène Thomas for clarification about the ban on certain books and magazines from the USSR as well as the newspaper of the Unified Socialists of Catalonia Lluita.

[ 2 ] As a member of the National Committee Franco-USSR Association, Grenier remained pro-Soviet until the end of his life. He died in Saint-Denis and was buried at the Père-Lachaise Cemetery .

References [ edit ] ^ Universalis, Encyclopædia.

"Biographie de FERNAND GRENIER (1901-1992)" .

Encyclopædia Universalis (in French) . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ a b c d Maner, Yves Le (2022-06-20), "GRENIER Fernand, Joseph" , Le Maitron (in French), Paris: Maitron/Editions de l'Atelier , retrieved 2024-04-23 ^ a b "Fernand Grenier - Base de données des députés français depuis 1789 - Assemblée nationale" .

www2.assemblee-nationale.fr . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

^ "21 avril 1944 : les Françaises obtiennent le droit de vote" .

RetroNews - Le site de presse de la BnF (in French). 2018-04-20 . Retrieved 2024-04-23 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Poland Israel People Sycomore Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fernand_Grenier_(French_politician)&oldid=1273358492 " Categories : 1901 births 1992 deaths French Communist Party politicians Communist members of the French Resistance Deputies of the 1st National Assembly of the French Fourth Republic Deputies of the 2nd National Assembly of the French Fourth Republic Deputies of the 3rd National Assembly of the French Fourth Republic Deputies of the 1st National Assembly of the French Fifth Republic Deputies of the 2nd National Assembly of the French Fifth Republic Deputies of the 3rd National Assembly of the French Fifth Republic Members of the 16th Chamber of Deputies of the French Third Republic Members of Parliament for Seine-Saint-Denis People from Saint-Denis, Seine-Saint-Denis Members of the Provisional Consultative Assembly Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 February 2025, at 23:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fernand Grenier (French politician) 3 languages Add topic

