Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 History 3 Etymology 4 Painting Toggle Painting subsection 4.1 Frescos 4.2 Stained glass 4.3 Manuscripts and printmaking 4.4 Altarpiece and panel painting 5 Sculpture Toggle Sculpture subsection 5.1 Monumental sculpture 5.2 Portable sculpture 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Gothic art 87 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 贛語 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingála Magyar Македонски Malti مصرى Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Русский Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of medieval art Gothic art Top: The Western (Royal) Portal of the Chartres Cathedral ( c.

1145 ), these architectural statues being the earliest Gothic sculptures and a revolution in style and the model for a generation of sculptors; Centre: The Sainte-Chapelle from Paris (1194–1248); Bottom: The Wilton Diptych (1395–1459) Years active Late 12th century-16th century Gothic art was a style of medieval art that developed in Northern France out of Romanesque art in the 12th century, led by the concurrent development of Gothic architecture . It spread to all of Western Europe , and much of Northern , Southern and Central Europe , never quite effacing more classical styles in Italy. In the late 14th century, the sophisticated court style of International Gothic developed, which continued to evolve until the late 15th century. In many areas, especially Germany, Late Gothic art continued well into the 16th century, before being subsumed into Renaissance art . Primary media in the Gothic period included sculpture , panel painting , stained glass , fresco and illuminated manuscripts . The easily recognisable shifts in architecture from Romanesque to Gothic, and Gothic to Renaissance styles, are typically used to define the periods in art in all media, although in many ways figurative art developed at a different pace.

The earliest Gothic art was monumental sculpture , on the walls of Cathedrals and abbeys. Christian art was often typological in nature (see Medieval allegory ), showing the stories of the New Testament and the Old Testament side by side. Saints' lives were often depicted. Images of the Virgin Mary changed from the Byzantine iconic form to a more human and affectionate mother, cuddling her infant, swaying from her hip, and showing the refined manners of a well-born aristocratic courtly lady.

Secular art came into its own during this period with the rise of cities, foundation of universities , increase in trade, the establishment of a money-based economy and the creation of a bourgeois class who could afford to patronise the arts and commission works, resulting in a proliferation of paintings and illuminated manuscripts. Increased literacy and a growing body of secular vernacular literature encouraged the representation of secular themes in art. With the growth of cities, trade guilds were formed and artists were often required to be members of a painters' guild . As a result, because of better record keeping, more artists are known to us by name in this period than any previous; some artists were even so bold as to sign their names.

Origins [ edit ] 14th Century International Gothic Mary Magdalene in St. Johns' Cathedral in Toruń , Poland Gothic art emerged in Île-de-France , France, [ 1 ] in the early 12th century, at the Abbey Church of St Denis built by Abbot Suger .

[ 2 ] Thomas O'Hagan speculates on Lombard, Frankish and Norse influences feeding into Gothic.

[ 3 ] Wilhelm Worringer 's Form in the Gothic ( German : Formprobleme der Gotik , 1911) traces the psychological roots of the style back into the past at least as far as the Migration period .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The style rapidly spread beyond its early manifestations in architecture to sculpture (both monumental and personal in size), to textile art, and to painting, which took a variety of forms, including fresco , stained glass , the illuminated manuscript , and panel painting .

[ 5 ] Monastic orders , especially the Cistercians and the Carthusians , commissioned many important ecclesiatical buildings, disseminating the style and developing distinctive variants of it across Europe.

Regional variations of architecture remained important, even when, by the late-14th century, a coherent universal style — which Louis Courajod (1841–1896) dubbed " International Gothic " — had evolved, which continued until the late-15th century (and beyond in many areas).

Although artists of the Gothic period produced far more secular works than are often known today, generally the survival rate of religious art has been better than for secular equivalents, and a large proportion of the art from the period was religious, whether commissioned by the church or by the laity.
Gothic art was often typological in nature, reflecting a belief that the events of the Old Testament pre-figured those of the New , and that this was indeed their main significance. Old and New Testament scenes appeared side-by-side in works like the Speculum Humanae Salvationis of the early-14th century, and in the decoration of churches. The Gothic period coincided with a great resurgence in Marian devotion , in which the visual arts played a major part. Images of the Virgin Mary developed from the Byzantine hieratic types, through the Coronation of the Virgin , to more human and intimate types, and cycles of the Life of the Virgin were very popular. Artists like Giotto ( c.

1267 – 1337), Fra Angelico ( c.

1395 – 1455) and Pietro Lorenzetti ( c.

1280 – 1348) in Italy, and Early Netherlandish painting , all brought realism and more natural humanity to art. Western European artists, and their patrons, became much more confident in innovative iconography , and much more originality developed, although most artists still followed copied formulae.

[ citation needed ] Iconography was affected by changes in theology, with depictions of the Assumption of Mary gaining ground on the older Death of the Virgin theme, and in devotional practices such as the Devotio Moderna , which produced new treatments of Christ in subjects such as the Man of Sorrows , Pensive Christ and Pietà , which emphasised his human suffering and vulnerability, in a parallel movement to that in depictions of the Virgin. Even in Last Judgements Christ was now usually shown exposing his chest to show the wounds of his Passion . Saints appeared more frequently, and altarpieces showed saints relevant to the particular church or donor in attendance on a Crucifixion or on an enthroned Virgin and Child , or occupying the central space themselves (this usually for works designed for side-chapels). During the Gothic period many ancient iconographical features that originated in New Testament apocrypha — like the midwives at the Nativity — were gradually eliminated under clerical pressure, though others had become too well-established, and were considered harmless.

[ 6 ] Etymology [ edit ] The Lady and the Unicorn , the title given to a series of six tapestries woven in Flanders , this one being called À Mon Seul Désir ; late 15th century; wool and silk; 377 x 473 cm; Musée de Cluny , Paris Further information: Name of the Goths The word " Gothic " for art was initially used as a synonym for " Barbaric ", and was therefore used pejoratively.

[ 7 ] Its critics saw this type of Medieval art as unrefined and too remote from the aesthetic proportions and shapes of Classical art .

[ 8 ] Renaissance authors believed that the Sack of Rome by the Gothic tribes in 410 had triggered the demise of the Classical world and all the values they held dear. In the 15th century, various Italian architects and writers complained that the new "barbarian" styles filtering down from north of the Alps posed a similar threat to the classical revival promoted by the early Renaissance.

[ 9 ] The "Gothic" qualifier for this art was first used in Raphael 's letter to Pope Leo X c.

1518 and was subsequently popularised by the Italian artist and writer Giorgio Vasari , [ 10 ] who used it as early as 1530, calling Gothic art a "monstrous and barbarous" "disorder".

[ 11 ] Raphael claimed that the pointed arches of northern architecture were an echo of the primitive huts the Germanic forest dwellers formed by bending trees together – a myth which would resurface much later in a more positive sense in the writings of the German Romantic movement. "Gothic art" was strongly criticised by French authors such as Boileau , La Bruyère , Rousseau , before becoming a recognised form of art, and the wording becoming fixed.

[ 8 ] Molière would famously comment on Gothic: The besotted taste of Gothic monuments, These odious monsters of ignorant centuries, Which the torrents of barbary spewed forth.

[ 8 ] In its beginning, Gothic art was initially called "French work" ( Opus Francigenum ), thus attesting to the priority of France in the creation of this style.

[ 8 ] [ failed verification ] Painting [ edit ] Simone Martini (1285–1344) Painting in the Gothic style did not exist until around 1200, over 50 years after the beginnings of Gothic architecture and sculpture. The transition from Romanesque to Gothic is very imprecise and not at all a clear break, and Gothic ornamental detailing is often introduced before much change is seen in the style of figures or compositions themselves. Then figures become more animated in pose and facial expression, tend to be smaller in relation to the background of scenes, and are arranged more freely in the pictorial space, where there is room. This transition occurs first in England and France around 1200, in Germany around 1220 and Italy around 1300. Painting during the Gothic period was practiced in four primary media: frescos , panel paintings , manuscript illumination and stained glass .

[ citation needed ] Frescos [ edit ] Frescos continued to be used as the main pictorial narrative craft on church walls in southern Europe as a continuation of early Christian and Romanesque traditions. An accident of survival has given Denmark and Sweden the largest groups of surviving church wall paintings in the Biblia pauperum style, usually extending up to recently constructed cross vaults . In both Denmark and Sweden, they were almost all covered with limewash after the Reformation which has preserved them, but some have also remained untouched since their creation. Among the finest examples from Denmark are those of the Elmelunde Master from the Danish island of Møn who decorated the churches of Fanefjord , Keldby and Elmelunde .

[ 12 ] Albertus Pictor is arguably the most well-known fresco artist from the period working in Sweden. Examples of Swedish churches with well-preserved frescos include Tensta , Gökhem and Anga churches.

[ citation needed ] Stained glass [ edit ] Part of German stained glass panel of 1444 with the Visitation ; pot metal of various colours, including white glass, black vitreous paint, yellow silver stain, and the "olive-green" parts are enamel.  The plant patterns in the red sky are formed by scratching away black paint from the red glass before firing.  A restored panel with new lead cames In northern Europe, stained glass was an important and prestigious form of painting until the 15th century, when it became supplanted by panel painting . Gothic architecture greatly increased the amount of glass in large buildings, partly to allow for wide expanses of glass, as in rose windows . In the early part of the period mainly black paint and clear or brightly coloured glass was used, but in the early 14th century the use of compounds of silver, painted on glass which was then fired, allowed a number of variations of colour, centred on yellows, to be used with clear glass in a single piece. By the end of the period designs increasingly used large pieces of glass which were painted, with yellows as the dominant colours, and relatively few smaller pieces of glass in other colours.

[ 13 ] Manuscripts and printmaking [ edit ] Main article: Gothic book illustration Hours of Jeanne d'Evreux , by Jean Pucelle , Paris, 1320s Illuminated manuscripts represent the most complete record of Gothic painting, providing a record of styles in places where no monumental works have otherwise survived. The earliest full manuscripts with French Gothic illustrations date to the middle of the 13th century.

[ 14 ] Many such illuminated manuscripts were royal bibles, although psalters also included illustrations; the Parisian Psalter of Saint Louis , dating from 1253 to 1270, features 78 full-page illuminations in tempera paint and gold leaf.

[ 15 ] During the late 13th century, scribes began to create prayer books for the laity, often known as books of hours due to their use at prescribed times of the day.

[ 15 ] Among the earliest is an example by William de Brailes that seems to have been written for an unknown laywoman living in a small village near Oxford in about 1240. Nobility frequently purchased such texts, paying handsomely for decorative illustrations; among the most well-known creators of these is Jean Pucelle , whose Hours of Jeanne d'Evreux was commissioned by King Charles IV as a gift for his queen, Jeanne d'Évreux .

[ 16 ] Elements of the French Gothic present in such works include the use of decorative page framing reminiscent of the architecture of the time with elongated and detailed figures.

[ 15 ] The use of spatial indicators such as building elements and natural features such as trees and clouds also denote the French Gothic style of illumination.

[ 15 ] From the middle of the 14th century, blockbooks with both text and images cut as woodcut seem to have been affordable by parish priests in the Low Countries , where they were most popular. By the end of the century, printed books with illustrations, still mostly on religious subjects, were rapidly becoming accessible to the prosperous middle class, as were engravings of fairly high quality by printmakers like Israhel van Meckenem and Master E. S.

In the 15th century, the introduction of cheap prints , mostly in woodcut , made it possible even for peasants to have devotional images at home. These images, tiny at the bottom of the market, often crudely coloured, were sold in thousands but are now extremely rare, most having been pasted to walls.

[ citation needed ] Altarpiece and panel painting [ edit ] Painting with oil on canvas did not become popular until the 15th and 16th centuries and was a hallmark of Renaissance art . In Northern Europe the important and innovative school of Early Netherlandish painting is in an essentially Gothic style, but can also be regarded as part of the Northern Renaissance , as there was a long delay before the Italian revival of interest in classicism had a great impact in the north. Painters like Robert Campin and Jan van Eyck made use of the technique of oil painting to create minutely detailed works, correct in perspective, where apparent realism was combined with richly complex symbolism arising precisely from the realistic detail they could now include, even in small works. In Early Netherlandish painting, from the richest cities of Northern Europe, a new minute realism in oil painting was combined with subtle and complex theological allusions, expressed precisely through the highly detailed settings of religious scenes. The Mérode Altarpiece (1420s) of Robert Campin and the Washington Van Eyck Annunciation or Madonna of Chancellor Rolin (both 1430s, by Jan van Eyck ) are examples.

[ 17 ] For the wealthy, small panel paintings , even polyptychs in oil painting were becoming increasingly popular, often showing donor portraits alongside, though often much smaller than the Virgin or saints depicted. These were usually displayed in the home.

[ citation needed ] Sculpture [ edit ] Main article: Gothic sculpture Monumental sculpture [ edit ] French ivory Virgin and Child, end of the 13th century, 25 cm high, curving to fit the shape of the ivory tusk The Gothic period is essentially defined by Gothic architecture , and does not entirely fit with the development of style in sculpture in either its start or finish. The facades of large churches, especially around doors, continued to have large tympanums, but also rows of sculpted figures spreading around them.

The statues on the Western (Royal) Portal at Chartres Cathedral ( c.

1145 ) show an elegant but exaggerated columnar elongation, but those on the south transept portal, from 1215–20, show a more naturalistic style and increasing detachment from the wall behind, and some awareness of the classical tradition. These trends were continued in the west portal at Reims Cathedral of a few years later, where the figures are almost in the round, as became usual as Gothic spread across Europe.

[ 18 ] Bamberg Cathedral has perhaps the largest assemblage of 13th century sculpture, culminating in 1240 with the Bamberg Rider , the first life-size equestrian statue in Western art since the 6th century.

"In Italy the Gospel of Gothic was preached from pulpits not from tympana, and the unit of the sculptor's thinking was an autonomous, self-consistent work of art" ( John Pope-Hennessy ).

[ 19 ] Nicola Pisano (1258–78) and his son Giovanni developed a style that is often called Proto-Renaissance , with unmistakable influence from Roman sarcophagi and sophisticated and crowded compositions, including a sympathetic handling of nudity, in relief panels on their pulpit of Siena Cathedral (1265–68) , Pulpit in the Pisa Baptistery , the Fontana Maggiore in Perugia , and Giovanni's pulpit in Pistoia of 1301.

[ 20 ] Another revival of classical style is seen in the International Gothic work of Claus Sluter and his followers in Burgundy and Flanders around 1400.

[ 21 ] Late Gothic sculpture continued in the North, with a fashion for very large, wooden, sculpted altarpieces with increasingly virtuoso carving and large numbers agitated expressive figures; most surviving examples are in Germany, after much iconoclasm elsewhere.

Tilman Riemenschneider , Veit Stoss and others continued the style well into the 16th century, gradually absorbing Italian Renaissance influences.

[ 22 ] Life-size tomb effigies in stone or alabaster became popular for the wealthy, and grand multi-level tombs evolved, with the Scaliger Tombs of Verona so large they had to be moved outside the church. By the 15th century there was an industry exporting Nottingham alabaster altar reliefs in groups of panels over much of Europe for economical parishes who could not afford stone retables.

[ 23 ] South portal of Chartres Cathedral ( c.

1215 –20).

West portal at Reims Cathedral , Annunciation group.

Nicola Pisano , Nativity and Adoration of the Magi from the pulpit in the Pisa Baptistery , 1260.

Claus Sluter , David and a prophet from the Well of Moses .

Base of the Holy Thorn Reliquary , French (Paris), 1390s, a Resurrection of the Dead in gold, enamel and gems.

Man of Sorrows on the main portal of Ulm Münster by Hans Multscher , 1429.

Panelled altarpiece section with Resurrection of Christ , English Nottingham alabaster , 1450–90, with remains of colour.

Later Gothic depiction of the Adoration of the Magi from Strasbourg Cathedral .

Detail of the Last Supper from Tilman Riemenschneider 's Altar of the Holy Blood , 1501–05, carved limewood , Rothenburg ob der Tauber , Bavaria .

Portable sculpture [ edit ] Lid of the Walters Casket , with the Siege of the Castle of Love at left, and jousting . Paris, 1330–1350 Small carvings, for a mainly lay and often female market, became a considerable industry in Paris and some other centres. Types of ivories included small, devotional polyptychs , single figures, especially of the Virgin , mirror-cases, combs, and elaborate caskets with scenes from Romances , used as engagement presents.

[ 24 ] The very wealthy collected extravagantly elaborate, jewelled and enamelled metalwork, both secular and religious, like the Duc de Berry 's Holy Thorn Reliquary , until they ran short of money, when they were melted down again for cash.

[ 25 ] Ivory diptych, with some of the coloured paint remaining.

Adoration of the Magi and Crucifixion .

Meuse valley, France, c.

1350 Gothic sculptures independent of architectural ornament were primarily created as devotional objects for the home or intended as donations for local churches, [ 26 ] although small reliefs in ivory , bone and wood cover both religious and secular subjects, and were for church and domestic use. These sculptures were created by urban artisans, and the most common theme for three-dimensional small statues is the Virgin Mary alone or with a child.

[ 27 ] Paris was the main centre of ivory workshops, and exported to most of northern Europe, though Italy also had a considerable production. An exemplar of these independent sculptures is among the collections of the Abbey Church of St Denis; the silver-gilt Virgin and Child dates to 1339 and features Mary enveloped in a flowing cloak holding an infantile Christ figure.

[ 27 ] Both the simplicity of the cloak and the youth of the child presage other sculptures found in northern Europe dating to the 14th century and early 15th century.

[ 27 ] Such sculpture shows an evolution from an earlier stiff and elongated style, still partly Romanesque, into a spatial and naturalistic feel in the late 12th and early 13th century.

[ 27 ] Other French Gothic sculptural subjects included figures and scenes from popular literature of the time.

[ 27 ] Imagery from the poetry of the troubadours was particularly popular among artisans of mirror-cases and small boxes presumably for use by women.

[ 27 ] The Casket with Scenes of Romances (Walters 71264) of 1330–50 is an unusually large example with space for a number of scenes from different literary sources.

Souvenirs of pilgrimages to shrines, such as clay or lead badges , medals and ampullae stamped with images were also popular and cheap. Their secular equivalent, the livery badge , showed signs of feudal and political loyalty or alliance that came to be regarded as a social menace in England under bastard feudalism . The cheaper forms were sometimes given away free, as with the 13,000 badges ordered in 1483 by King Richard III of England in fustian cloth with his emblem of a white boar for the investiture of his son Edward as Prince of Wales, [ 28 ] a huge number given the population at the time. The Dunstable Swan Jewel , modelled fully in the round in enamelled gold, is a far more exclusive version, that would have been given to someone very close or important to the donor.

See also [ edit ] art portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gothic art .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gothic painters .

Blackletter (also known as Gothic script ) Church frescos in Denmark Church frescos in Sweden Danse Macabre Gothic architecture Gothic cathedrals and churches History of painting List of Gothic artists Pleurants Renaissance of the 12th century The Ten Virgins Timeline of Italian artists to 1800 Western painting Notes [ edit ] ^ Espagne, Michel (3 March 2016) [2015]. "Cultural Transfers in Art History". In Kaufmann, Thomas DaCosta; Dossin, Catherine; Joyeux-Prunel, Béatrice (eds.).

Circulations in the Global History of Art . Studies in Art Historiography (reprint ed.). London: Routledge. p. 107.

ISBN 9781317166153 . Retrieved 26 May 2025 .

In the ambient nationalism of the late nineteenth century, the question of the origins of Gothic art was fundamental.

Vöge [...] sought to show that French monumental sculpture, which took up in the Ile de France models elaborated in Arles or Moissac, had nothing Germanic about it, but was on the contrary the expression of a French movement in art history.

^ Stokstad (2005), 516.

^ O'Hagan, Thomas (1924).

With Staff and Scrip . Toronto: Ryerson Press. p. 59 . Retrieved 26 May 2025 .

There were many agencies that contributed to the creation of Gothic art. The physical vitality of the new art epoch was derived from the blood of Lombards, Franks and Norsemen.

^ Worringer, Wilhelm (1927) [1911]. "The Latent Gothic in Early Northern Ornament". In Read, Herbert Edward (ed.).

Form in Gothic . Fine art library. Translated by Read, Herbert Edward (5 ed.). London: Putnam. pp.

38– 39 . Retrieved 10 August 2025 .

[...] when the psychologist of style [...] has once grasped the basic character of the Gothic will to form, he can detect this will to form as being active underground, as it were, even where, obstructed by more powerful conditions and hindered in its free expansion, it assumes a foreign disguise. He recognizes that this Gothic will to form dominates, not externally, but internally, Romanesque art, Merovingian art, and the art of the Migration period, in short the whole course of Northern and Central European art. [...] the art of the entire Western world, in so far as it had no direct share in antique Mediterranean culture, was in its inmost essence Gothic and remained so until the Renaissance [...].

^ Stokstad (2005), 544.

^ Émile Mâle , The Gothic Image, Religious Art in France of the Thirteenth Century , pp. 165–8, English trans of 3rd edn, 1913, Collins, London (and many other editions) — a classic work on French Gothic church art.

^ "Gothic art" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 22 June 2017 .

^ a b c d History of Architecture Super Review . Research & Education Assoc.

ISBN 978-0-7386-6996-0 .

^ E. S. de Beer, Gothic: Origin and Diffusion of the Term; The Idea of Style in Architecture in Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes , Vol.11, 1948, pp. 143–62 ^ Vasari, Giorgio (1 January 1960).

Vasari on Technique. Being the Introduction to the Three Arts of Design, Architecture, Sculpture and Painting, Prefixed to the Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects . Dover Publications.

ISBN 978-0-486-20717-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ The art of the sublime: principles of Christian art and architecture by Roger Homan p. 70 [1] ^ Kirsten Trampedach: Introduction to Danish Wall Paintings – Conservation Ethics and Methods of Treatment. National Museum of Denmark Archived 24 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 6 September 2009.

^ Coe, 8–11 ^ Stokstad (2005), 540.

^ a b c d Stokstad (2005), 541.

^ Stokstad (2005), 542.

^ Lane, Barbara G, The Altar and the Altarpiece, Sacramental Themes in Early Netherlandish Painting , Harper & Row, 1984, ISBN 0-06-430133-8 analyses all these works in detail. See also the references in the articles on the works.

^ Honour and Fleming, 297–300; Henderson, 55, 82–84 ^ Pope-Hennessy, 11 ^ Olson, 11–24; Honour and Fleming, 304; Henderson, 41 ^ Snyder, 65–69 ^ Snyder, 305–311 ^ [2] V&A Museum feature on the Nottingham alabaster Swansea Altarpiece ^ Calkins, 193–198 ^ Cherry, 25–48; Henderson, 134–141 ^ Stokstad (2005), 537.

^ a b c d e f Stokstad (2005), 539.

^ Cherry (2003), 204 References [ edit ] Calkins, Robert G.; Monuments of Medieval Art , Dutton, 1979, ISBN 0525475613 Cherry, John.

The Holy Thorn Reliquary , 2010, British Museum Press (British Museum objects in focus), ISBN 0-7141-2820-1 Cherry, John, in Marks, Richard and Williamson, Paul, eds.

Gothic: Art for England 1400–1547 , 2003, V&A Publications, London, ISBN 1-85177-401-7 Focillon, Henri (1980).

The Art of the West in the Middle Ages: Vol. 2 - Gothic . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0801491924 .

Henderson, George.

Gothic , 1967, Penguin, ISBN 0-14-020806-2 Hugh Honour and John Fleming, A World History of Art , 1st edn. 1982 (many later editions), Macmillan, London, page refs to 1984 Macmillan 1st edn. paperback.

ISBN 0333371852 Olson, Roberta J.M.

, Italian Renaissance Sculpture , 1992, Thames & Hudson (World of Art), ISBN 978-0-500-20253-1 Pope-Hennessy, John, Introduction to Italian Sculpture, Volume 1, Italian Gothic Sculpture , 1955, Fourth Edition 1996, Phaidon Press, ISBN 0-7148-3014-3 Robinson, James, Masterpieces of Medieval Art , 2008, British Museum Press, ISBN 978-0-7141-2815-3 Rudolph, Conrad , ed., A Companion to Medieval Art: Romanesque and Gothic in Northern Europe , 2006, ISBN 978-1405198783 Rudolph, Conrad, "Inventing the Gothic Portal: Suger, Hugh of Saint Victor, and the Construction of a New Public Art at Saint-Denis", Art History 33 (2010) 568–595 Rudolph, Conrad, "Inventing the Exegetical Stained-Glass Window: Suger, Hugh, and a New Elite Art", Art Bulletin 93 (2011) 399–422 Snyder, James .

Northern Renaissance Art , 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0136235964 External links [ edit ] Gothic art , from ArtCyclopedia.com Gothic art , from Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Gothic art ( Archived 2009-10-31), from Microsoft Encarta .

Gothic art Archived 5 March 2005 at the Wayback Machine , from The Columbia Encyclopedia , Sixth Edition. 2001.

Gothic art , Museumsportal Schleswig-Holstein Gothic art , from "A World History of Art" and [3] .

"Gothic: Art for England 1400–1547" .

Victoria and Albert Museum . Retrieved 8 June 2007 .

The Pietà in French late Gothic sculpture: regional variations , a book from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Gothic art v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rhtnh
Cached time: 20250817051906
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.670 seconds
Real time usage: 0.886 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4131/1000000
Revision size: 35730/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 168411/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7036/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 93814/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.377/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15653147/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  675.388      1 -total
 19.02%  128.448      1 Template:Reflist
 14.48%   97.792      6 Template:Cite_book
 13.68%   92.407      4 Template:Navbox
 13.19%   89.100      1 Template:Western_art_movements
 11.32%   76.449      1 Template:Langx
 10.23%   69.076      1 Template:Short_description
  9.23%   62.311      5 Template:No_source
  8.54%   57.678      5 Template:Namespace_detect
  7.84%   52.927      2 Template:Commons Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:894938:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051906 and revision id 1305116642. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gothic_art&oldid=1305116642 " Categories : Gothic art Medieval art Catholic art by period Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from January 2025 Commons link from Wikidata Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 04:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gothic art 87 languages Add topic

