Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Related terms 2 Geology Toggle Geology subsection 2.1 Past 2.2 Present 2.3 Future 3 Extreme points Toggle Extreme points subsection 3.1 Mainland 3.2 Including islands 3.3 Elevation 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Subregional groupings 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Afro-Eurasia 102 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް ཇོང་ཁ Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Furlan Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Ladino Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça တႆး ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray Wolof 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Landmass consisting of Africa, Asia, and Europe Afro-Eurasia Show national borders Hide national borders, Caspian Sea and most African Great Lakes Flat map Area 85,135,000 km 2 (32,871,000 sq mi) Population 6.7 billion (2019) Population density 78.7/km 2 (204.2/sq mi) Demonym Afro-Eurasian, Afroeurasian, Eurafrasian Countries 146 countries 8 de facto states Dependencies 11 dependencies 5 territories Time zones UTC−01:00 – UTC+12:00 Part of Earth Afro-Eurasia (also Afroeurasia and Eurafrasia ) is a landmass comprising the continents of Africa , Asia , and Europe .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The terms are compound words of the names of its constituent parts. Afro-Eurasia has also been called the " Old World ", in contrast to the " New World " referring to the Americas .

Afro-Eurasia encompasses 85,135,000 km 2 (32,871,000 sq mi), 57% of the world's land area, and has a population of approximately 6.7 billion people, roughly 86% of the world population . Together with mainland Australia , they comprise the vast majority of the land in the world's Eastern Hemisphere . The Afro-Eurasian mainland is the largest and most populous contiguous landmass on Earth .

Related terms [ edit ] The following terms are used for similar concepts: Ecumene : a term from classical antiquity for the world as was known to ancient Greek scholars, which was limited to Europe and parts of Africa and Asia.

Old World : a term from the Age of Discovery which, for European explorers, contrasted their previously known world from the New World of the Americas .

World Island : a term coined by H.J. Mackinder in his " The Geographical Pivot of History " (1904) and used in geopolitical contexts.

[ 3 ] Mackinder defines the World Island as the large contiguous landmass, technically excluding islands such as the British Isles , the Japanese Archipelago , Madagascar , and the Malay Archipelago .

[ 4 ] "Afro-Eurasia" generally includes those islands usually considered parts of Africa , Asia , and Europe .

Geology [ edit ] Further information: African plate , Arabian plate , Eurasian plate , Indo-Australian plate , and Somali plate Although Afro-Eurasia is typically considered to comprise two or three separate continents , it is not a proper supercontinent . Instead, it is the largest present part of the supercontinent cycle .

[ 5 ] Past [ edit ] The oldest part of Afro-Eurasia is probably the Kaapvaal craton , which together with Madagascar and parts of the Indian subcontinent and western Australian continent formed part of the first supercontinent Vaalbara or Ur around 3 billion years ago . It has made up parts of every supercontinent since. At the breakup of Pangaea around 200 million years ago , the North American and Eurasian plates together formed Laurasia while the African plate remained in Gondwana , from which the Indian plate split off. Upon impact with the Eurasian plate, the Indian plate created southern Asia around 50 million years ago and began the formation of the Himalayas . Around the same time, the Indian plate also fused with the Australian plate .

The Arabian plate broke off of Africa around 30 million years ago and impacted the Iranian plate between 19 and 12 million years ago during the Miocene , ultimately forming the Alborz and Zagros chains of Iranian plate . After this initial connection of Afro-Eurasia, the Betic corridor along the Gibraltar Arc closed a little less than 6 million years ago in the Messinian , fusing northwest Africa and Iberia together. This led to the nearly complete desiccation of the Mediterranean Basin , the Messinian salinity crisis . Eurasia and Africa were then again separated with the Zanclean Flood around 5.33 million years ago refilling the Mediterranean Sea through the Strait of Gibraltar .

Present [ edit ] Today, the Eurasian plate and African plate dominate their respective continents. However, the Somali plate covers much of eastern Africa, creating the East African Rift . In the eastern Mediterranean, the Aegean Sea plate , Anatolian plate and Arabian plate also form a boundary with the African plate, which incorporates the Sinai Peninsula , Gulf of Aqaba and the coastal Levant via the Dead Sea transform . Eurasia also includes the Indian plate , Burma plate , Sunda plate , Yangtze plate , Amur plate and Okhotsk plate , with the North American plate incorporating the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug in the Russian Far East .

Conventionally, Africa is joined to Eurasia only by a relatively narrow land bridge (which has been split by the Suez Canal at the Isthmus of Suez ) and remains separated from Europe by the straits of Gibraltar and Sicily .

Future [ edit ] Paleogeologist Ronald Blakey has described the next 15 to 100 million years of tectonic development as fairly settled and predictable.

[ 6 ] In that time, Africa is expected to continue drifting northward. It will close the Strait of Gibraltar , [ 7 ] quickly evaporating the Mediterranean Sea .

[ 8 ] No supercontinent will form within the settled time frame, however, and the geologic record is full of unexpected shifts in tectonic activity that make further projections "very, very speculative".

[ 6 ] Three possibilities are known as Novopangaea , Amasia , and Pangaea Proxima .

[ 9 ] In the first two, the Pacific closes and Africa remains fused to Eurasia, but Eurasia itself splits as Africa and Europe spin towards the west; in the last, the trio spin eastward together as the Atlantic closes, creating land borders with the Americas .

Extreme points [ edit ] This is a list of the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location as well as the highest and lowest elevations on Afro-Eurasia.

Mainland [ edit ] Easternmost point By longitude — 180th meridian , Russia On a continuous eastbound path – Cape Dezhnev , Russia Northernmost point – Cape Chelyuskin , Russia Southernmost point – Cape Agulhas , South Africa Westernmost point – Pointe des Almadies , Senegal Including islands [ edit ] Easternmost point – Big Diomede † , Russia Northernmost point – Cape Fligeli , Rudolf Island , Franz Josef Land , Russia Southernmost point – Cape Agulhas , South Africa . If the Prince Edward Islands are included in Africa, then Marion Island is the southernmost point at 46°54'S.

Westernmost point – Santo Antão , Cape Verde † The 180th meridian passes through Asia, so this point is in the Western Hemisphere and is Asia’s easternmost point on a continuous path.

Elevation [ edit ] Highest point – Mount Everest , China–Nepal border ; 8,848.86 m (29,031.7 ft) above mean sea level Lowest point on land – shores of the Dead Sea , between Israel , West Bank and Jordan ; 430.5 m (1,412 ft) below mean sea level See also [ edit ] Geography portal Africa portal Asia portal Europe portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Afro-Eurasia .

Extreme points of Earth Extreme points of Africa Extreme points of Eurasia Extreme points of Asia Extreme points of Europe Geography of Africa Geography of Asia Geography of Europe Indo-Mediterranean , argued to be central within Afro-Eurasia until 1000 AD [ 10 ] Intermediate Region The Geographical Pivot of History Subregional groupings [ edit ] Afro-Asia Eurasia Eurafrica Afro-Eurasia Pacific References [ edit ] ^ "This Big Era and the Three Essential Questions" .

whfua.history.ucla.edu . University of California, Los Angeles.

For more than five millennia the population of Afroeurasia had grown steadily, forming larger and more complex political units such as the Han Chinese, Persian Achaemenid, and Roman empires.

^ "Eurafrasia - WorldWeb dictionary definition" .

WordWeb .

^ Mackinder, Halford John .

The Geographical Pivot of History .

^ See Francis P. Sempa, Mackinder's World ^ Based upon 2019 population estimates from https://population.un.org/wpp/ ^ a b Manaugh, Geoff (23 September 2013).

"What Did the Continents Look Like Millions of Years Ago?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 22 July 2014 .

^ "Future World" .

www.scotese.com .

^ Cloud, Preston (1988).

Oasis in space. Earth history from the beginning . New York: W. W. Norton & Company Inc. p. 440.

ISBN 0-393-01952-7 .

Only the inflow of Atlantic water maintains the present Mediterranean level. When that was shut off sometime between 6.5 to 6 MYBP, net evaporative loss set in at the rate of around 3,300 cubic kilometers yearly. At that rate, the 3.7 million cubic kilometres of water in the basin would dry up in scarcely more than a thousand years, leaving an extensive layer of salt some tens of meters thick and raising global sea level about 12 meters.

^ Williams, Caroline; Nield, Ted (20 October 2007).

"Pangaea, the comeback" .

New Scientist . Archived from the original on 13 April 2008 . Retrieved 28 September 2009 .

^ Burke, Edmund (2009).

"Islam at the Center: Technological Complexes and the Roots of Modernity" .

Journal of World History .

20 (2): 186.

ISSN 1045-6007 .

JSTOR 40542756 .

External links [ edit ] Interactive scholarly edition, with critical English translation and multimodal resources mashup (publications, images, videos) Engineering Historical Memory .

v t e Continents of Earth Africa Antarctica Asia Australia Europe North America South America Afro-Eurasia Americas Eurasia Oceania Prehistoric supercontinents Columbia Gondwana Kenorland Laurasia Nena Pangaea Pannotia Rodinia Ur Vaalbara Other prehistoric continents Amazonia Arctica Asiamerica Atlantica Avalonia Baltica Chilenia Cimmeria Congo Craton Cuyania East Antarctica Euramerica Kalaharia Kazakhstania Laramidia Laurentia North China Pampia Sahul Siberia South China Submerged continent / lands and microcontinents Beringia Cathaysia Iceland Davis Strait Doggerland Great Australian Bight Jan Mayen Kerguelen Plateau Madagascar Mauritia Rockall Basin Sahul Seychelles Sunda Zealandia Possible future supercontinents Amasia Aurica Novopangaea Pangaea Proxima Mythical , lost , and hypothesised continents Atlantis Hyperborea Kumari Kandam Lemuria Meropis Mu Terra Australis Subcontinents Alaska Arabia Central America Eastern Africa Eastern Siberia Greenland (Territory) Indian Subcontinent See also: World portal Regions of the world Continental fragment Category Chronology of continents Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Afro-Eurasia&oldid=1290366110 " Categories : Afro-Eurasia Eastern Hemisphere Supercontinents Geography of Africa Geography of Asia Geography of Europe Extreme points of Earth Extreme points of Asia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages move-protected due to vandalism Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 10:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Afro-Eurasia 102 languages Add topic

