Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Religious Beliefs 3 Works 4 Philosophy 5 See also 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri 7 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Français Kurdî ไทย Тоҷикӣ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 9th-century Persian mathematician, astronomer and philosopher Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Personal life Born 9th century Nishapur (circa 9th century) Died 9th/10th century Main interest(s) Mathematics , Astronomy , medicine , science and philosophy Notable work(s) Hasti , Ketab-e jalil, Ketab-e athir, Senior posting Influenced Nasir Khusraw , Biruni , Razi Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri ( Persian : ابوالعباس ایرانشهری ) was a 9th-century Persian [ 1 ] [ 2 ] philosopher, mathematician , natural scientist, historian of religion, astronomer and author.

[ 3 ] According to traditional sources, he is the first figure in the wider Muslim world to be associated with philosophy after the advent of Islam .

[ 4 ] Life [ edit ] He was born in Nishapur (modern Khorasan in Iran), the city also known as Iranshahr, hence his title Iranshahri.

[ 3 ] According to Nasir Khusraw , Iranshahri taught Rhazes and Biruni ancient Iranian philosophy .

Religious Beliefs [ edit ] According to Al-Biruni his rare impartiality was rooted in his lack of dependence on a particular religion. He created a religion and invited others to that.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] He authored [ 3 ] several books and treatises in Arabic and in Persian .  All the books written, some of which are mentioned in passing by Biruni and Nasir Khusraw , have been lost.

He wrote three books; Jalil , Athir , and Masael u'ttabi'a , about philosophy and wisdom. Abulma'ali states that Iranshahri brought a new religion with a Persian book and named his miracle Hasti (existence). According to Biruni , he was knowledgeable about Christianity , Zoroastrianism , Manichaeism , Hinduism , and Shamanism .

Philosophy [ edit ] According to Abu'l Ma'ali, the author of bayan al-Adyan, Iranshahri considered himself a Prophet and wrote a book in Persian which he claimed have received a divine revelation by the angel called Hasti (Existence).

[ 3 ] He believed in the unity of all religions and considered existing differences among them the results of special interests (ḡarażμ) [ what language is this?

] of their followers.

[ 3 ] According to Biruni , Iranshahri had said that God took covenant from light and darkness on the days of Nowruz and Mehragan , which may reflect Zurvanite influence.

[ 3 ] According to Nasir Khusraw , Iranshahri had expressed philosophical concepts in religious terms in such books as Ketab-e jalil and Ketab-e athir, and had led people to the true religion and the understanding of monotheism .

[ 3 ] He maintained that God was always a creator, and there was not a time when he was non-creative (u-rā ṣonʿ nabud) before He turned into being creative.  According to him, it is requisite that He always be creator, then it is necessary for that in which His creation appeared to be eternal (qadim).  His creation makes its appearance (padid-āyanda ast) in Matter (hayulā), and therefore, Matter, a sign of the apparent power of God , is eternal; and since Matter, which is eternal, requires the existence of Space (makān), it follows that Space should be eternal too.

[ 3 ] His ideas on time were that time, world, and duration (zamān dahr wa moddat) are names whose meanings are derived from the same essence (jawhar).

[ 3 ] He also philosophized that Time, a substance in motion and restless (jawhar-e ravanda wa biqarār), is the sign of God's knowledge, in the same way that Space is the sign of His power; motion is the sign of His action, and the being (jesm) is the sign of His ability, and every one of these signs is infinite and eternal.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Rhazes al-Biruni Iranian philosophy Islamic philosophy Natural philosophy Nasir Khusraw Henry Corbin Notes [ edit ] ^ Henry Corbin, "The voyage and the messenger: Iran and philosophy", North Atlantic Books, 1998. pg 72.

^ Janos, Damien (2018-12-01).

"al-Īrānshahrī, Abū l-ʿAbbās" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Daryoush Kargar and EIr, "IRĀNŠAHRI" in Encyclopaedia Iranica.  Accessed via online in Nov, 2010 at: [1] ^ Seyyed Hossain Nasr, "Philosophy and Cosmology," in Frye, ed., The Cambridge History of Iran, pp 421.  Quote: "the first person mentioned in traditional sources as having devoted himself to philosophy in the Islamic period is Abu'l-Abbas Iranshahri, who flourished in the 3rd/9th century.." ^ Abu rihan, Al-Biruni.

Critical study of what India says, whether accepted by reason or refused, Volume One . pp. 4, 5.

External links [ edit ] An article on him in Persian on Great Encyclopaedia of Islam (published in Iran) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abu_al-Abbas_Iranshahri&oldid=1254299886 " Categories : Mathematicians from Nishapur Philosophers from Nishapur 9th-century Iranian mathematicians 9th-century Iranian philosophers 9th-century Iranian astronomers Astronomers of the medieval Islamic world Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox religious biography without religion parameter Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with unidentified words Articles with unidentified words from February 2024 This page was last edited on 30 October 2024, at 10:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri 7 languages Add topic

