Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Academic staff 2 Heads of Department 3 Research themes 4 Research groups 5 Spinout companies 6 Alumni and former staff 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′13″N 0°07′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2036°N 0.1201°E ﻿ / 52.2036; 0.1201 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Department of the University of Cambridge Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy (DMSM) 27 Charles Babbage Road, Cambridge, new site of MSM since 2013 Location Cambridge , United Kingdom Affiliations University of Cambridge Website www .msm .cam .ac .uk The Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy (DMSM) is a large research and teaching division of the University of Cambridge . Since 2013 it has been located in West Cambridge , having previously occupied several buildings on the New Museums Site in the centre of Cambridge .

Following the changes to academic titles in 2021/2022 at the University of Cambridge, [ 1 ] the academic staff of the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy no longer use the academic titles of Reader and Lecturer.  The list below reflects the new academic titles.

Academic staff [ edit ] As of October 2022 [update] Professorial staff include: [ 2 ] Serena Best , CBE, FREng, Professor of Materials Science Ruth Cameron , Professor of Materials Science Manish Chhowalla , Goldsmiths' Professor of Materials Science Judith Driscoll , FREng, Professor of Materials Science Caterina Ducati , Professor of Nanomaterials Rachel Evans , Professor of Materials Chemistry James Elliott, Professor of Macromolecular Materials Science Lindsay Greer, Professor of Materials Science Louise Hirst, Professor of Materials Physics (jointly appointed with the Cavendish Laboratory) Nick Jones, Professor of Metallurgy Sohini Kar-Narayan , Professor of Device & Energy Materials Neil Mathur , Professor of Materials Physics Paul Midgley , FRS, Professor of Materials Science (Current Head of Department) Rachel Oliver , FREng, Professor of Materials Science Chris Pickard, Sir Alan Cottrell Professor of Materials Science Cathie Rae , Professor of Superalloys Emilie Ringe , Professor of Synthetic and Natural Nanomaterials (jointly appointed with the Department of Earth Sciences) Howard Stone, Tata Steel Professor of Metallurgy Jason WA Robinson , Professor of Materials Physics Heads of Department [ edit ] R.S Hutton - 1944 Wesley Austin 1945-1958 Sir Alan Cottrell FRS 1958-1966 Sir Robert Honeycombe FREng FRS 1966-84 Derek Hull FREng FRS 1984-1991 Sir Colin Humphreys , CBE FREng FRS 1991-1996 Alan Windle FRS 1996-2000 Derek Fray FRS FREng 2000-2005 Alan Lindsay Greer 2005-2013 Mark Blamire 2013-2018 Paul Midgley FRS 2018-2020 Ruth Cameron , James Elliott, and Jason Robinson 2020-  (current) [ 3 ] Research themes [ edit ] Current research spans seven themes in which there are current materials challenges to overcome: [ 4 ] Aerospace materials Information Communication Technologies Innovative Characterisation Materials Discovery Materials for Energy and Sustainability Materials for Healthcare Novel Design and Processing Research groups [ edit ] Stair Case of Arup Tower, part of the former site of MSM, at the New Museums Site , Pembroke Street, Cambridge .

Research is organised into the following groups.

[ 5 ] Device Materials Group Electron Microscopy Group Cambridge Centre for Gallium Nitride Hybrid Materials Group Macromolecular Materials Laboratory Centre for Materials Physics Materials Theory Group Cambridge Centre for Medical Materials Microstructural Kinetics Group Optical Nanomaterials Group Photoactive Materials Group Rolls-Royce University Technology Centre in Advanced Materials Space Voltaics Group Spinout companies [ edit ] 2019 - Barocal Ltd - developing new heating and cooling technologies to satisfy low-carbon requirements [ 6 ] 2018 - Plastometrex Ltd - Profilometry-based Indentation Plastometry (PIP) - a revolutionary new approach to the mechanical testing of metals [ 7 ] 2018 - Porotech - specialising in the development of Gallium Nitride material technology [ 8 ] 2015 - Paragraf Ltd - novel deposition of graphene onto semiconductors 2010 - CamGaN (now part of Plessey) - GaN on Silicon LED technology (low cost, low energy lighting) 2007 - Inotec AMD - innovative topical oxygen therapy for wound healing 2004 - Q-flo (merged with Plasan, CNT fibres now commercialised by Tortech) - ultra-long CNT fibres 2004 - Camfridge - energy-efficient and gas-free magnetic cooling 2001 - Metalysis  - commercialisation of the FFC Cambridge Process . Reduction of metal oxides and ores into pure metals and alloys 1989 - CMD Ltd (became part of Accelerys, now part of Biovia Dassault Systems) - X-ray modelling software Alumni and former staff [ edit ] Notable alumni and former staff include: Sir Harry Bhadeshia FRS FREng Alan Cottrell , FRS, [ 9 ] Robert W. Cahn FRS, [ 10 ] Robert Honeycombe [ 11 ] Derek Fray FRS FREng Sir Colin Humphreys , CBE FREng FRS Alan Windle FRS Charles Heycock FRS Sir Graeme Davies FREng William Bonfield CBE FRS FREng Michael F. Ashby CBE FRS FREng Julia King, Baroness Brown of Cambridge DBE FREng See also [ edit ] DoITPoMS Department of Materials, University of Oxford Department of Materials, Imperial College London References [ edit ] ^ "Reports - Cambridge University Reporter 6582" .

^ People in the Department of Materials Science & Metallurgy , University of Cambridge ^ "New Head of Department announced" .

Department of Materials Science & Metallurgy . 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 12 March 2024 .

^ Materials Challenges in Materials Science & Metallurgy , University of Cambridge ^ Research groups – A to Z list , University of Cambridge ^ "Pioneering innovation in zero-carbon heating and cooling" .

Barocal .

^ "Materials testing startup Plastometrex raises seed round | Cambridge Network" .

^ "LinkedIn Login, Sign in | LinkedIn" .

^ Smallman, R. E.; Knott, J. F. (2013).

"Sir Alan Cottrell FRS FREng. 17 July 1919 -- 15 February 2012" .

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

59 : 93– 124.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.2012.0042 .

^ Doherty, R. (2007). "RETROSPECTIVE: Robert W. Cahn (1924-2007) and David Turnbull (1915-2007)".

Science .

317 (5834): 56– 57.

doi : 10.1126/science.1145490 .

PMID 17615332 .

S2CID 38060682 .

^ Smallman, R. E. (2009).

"Sir Robert William Kerr Honeycombe KBE. 2 May 1921--14 September 2007" .

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

55 : 91– 106.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.2008.0020 .

v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category 52°12′13″N 0°07′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2036°N 0.1201°E ﻿ / 52.2036; 0.1201 Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Department_of_Materials_Science_and_Metallurgy,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1289377422 " Categories : Departments in the Faculty of Physics and Chemistry, University of Cambridge Materials science institutes Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter Pages using infobox university with the affiliations parameter Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

