Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Author 3.2 Editor 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents George I. Mavrodes 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1926–2019) George I. Mavrodes (November 23, 1926 – July 31, 2019) was an American philosopher and Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the University of Michigan .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Mavrodes received his B.S. degree (1945) from Oregon State College , his B.D. degree (1953) from Western Baptist Theological Seminary , and his M.A. (1960) and PhD (1961) degrees in philosophy from the University of Michigan.

[ 2 ] He retired on March 31, 1995, being named professor emeritus of philosophy after thirty three years at the University of Michigan.

[ 3 ] Work [ edit ] Mavrodes is the author of Belief in God: A Study in the Epistemology of Religion (1970) and Revelation in Religious Belief (1988). He has nearly one hundred articles covering such topics as revelation , omnipotence , miracles , resurrection , personal identity and survival of death , and faith and reason , as well as ethics and social policy issues that intersect with religion and morality—abortion, pacifism, the just war, and nuclear deterrence. Mavrodes has served as president of the Society for Philosophy of Religion and the Society of Christian Philosophers , and as a member of the executive committee of the American Theological Society . Mavrodes has held editorial positions with American Philosophical Quarterly , Faith and Philosophy , and The Reformed Journal .

One of his more widely studied works is titled "Religion and the Queerness of Morality", where he questions whether genuine moral obligation could make sense in a world as described in Russell's "A Free Man's Worship".

He distinguished two major ways of understanding evolution .  The first is the "naturalistic" way of understanding evolution as "explicable entirely in terms of natural law without reference to a divine intention or intervention."  But a "theistic" understanding of evolution holds that "there was a divine teleology in this process, a divine direction at each crucial stage in accordance with divine plan or intention."  In other words, a theistic understanding of evolution holds that although evolution occurred, God still directed evolution.  Evolution is merely the tool of God's design.  Evolution, and even the great struggle for existence that "selects" some animals to survive and others to die, is the instrument with which God designs human beings and other animals. On this view, Darwinian evolution is consistent with the belief that God, through evolution, produced human beings for a purpose.  Other philosophers, such as Henri Bergson and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin , have also argued that the process of evolution is not blind and random, but directed and purposeful.

Bibliography [ edit ] Author [ edit ] Belief in God: A Study in the Epistemology of Religion (Random House, 1970) Revelation in Religious Belief (Temple University Press, 1988) Editor [ edit ] Problems and Perspectives in the Philosophy of Religion (Allyn and Bacon Inc., 1967) The Rationality of Belief in God (Prentice Hall, 1970) See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ "George Mavrodes Obituary – Visitation & Funeral Information" .

memorials.niefuneralhomes.com . Archived from the original on 5 September 2019 . Retrieved 27 September 2019 .

^ "Memoir – Faculty History Project" .

um2017.org . Archived from the original on 23 April 2018 . Retrieved 22 April 2018 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-07-25 . Retrieved 2013-08-03 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) External links [ edit ] University of Michigan Faculty page v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_I._Mavrodes&oldid=1226055042 " Categories : 1926 births 2019 deaths American Christians American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers Christian philosophers American critics of atheism Oregon State University alumni Presidents of the Society of Christian Philosophers Theistic evolutionists University of Michigan alumni University of Michigan faculty Western Seminary alumni Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2024, at 08:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George I. Mavrodes 1 language Add topic

