Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Assembly of Gondwana 2 Rifting 3 Modern tectonics 4 References Toggle the table of contents Madagascar plate 3 languages Italiano Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tectonic plate formerly part of the supercontinent Gondwana The Madagascar plate or Madagascar block is a tectonic plate holding the island of Madagascar . It was once attached to the Gondwana supercontinent and later the Indo-Australian plate .

Rifting in the Somali Basin began at the end of the Carboniferous 300 million years ago, as a part of the Karoo rift system . The initiation of the Gondwana breakup, and transform faulting along the Davie Fracture Zone, occurred in the Toarcian (about 182 million years ago) following the eruption of the Bouvet (Karoo) mantle plume. At this time, East Gondwana comprising the Antarctic , Madagascar, Indian , and Australian plates, began to separate from the African plate . East Gondwana then began to break apart about 115–120 million years ago when India began to move northward.

[ 1 ] Between 84 and 95 million years ago rifting separated Seychelles and India from Madagascar.

Since its formation, the Madagascar block has moved roughly in conjunction with Africa, and thus there are questions as to whether the Madagascar plate should be still considered a separate plate.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Assembly of Gondwana [ edit ] Madagascar was formerly located in the central part of the supercontinent Gondwana. It contains part of the East African Orogen , which formed in the Neoproterozoic to Cambrian assembly of the Gondwana. This heavily influenced the geology of central and northern Madagascar.

[ 4 ] The entire island can be divided into four tectonic and geologic units: [ 5 ] the Antongil block, the Antananarivo block, the Bekily Belt in the south, and the Bemarivo Belt in the far north.

The Antongil Block is characterized by a 3.2 Ga gneiss intruded by granite that has undergone greenschist facies metamorphism .

The Antananarivo Block contains 2.5 Ga gneiss layered with younger granitoids and gabbros . It has metamorphosed to granulite facies conditions.

The Bemarivo Belt contains two regions, metasedimentary gneisses in the southern part and granitic domes in the north.

The Bekily Belt is made up of mostly sedimentary protoliths and granulite and upper amphibolite grade gneisses.

The blocks in the northern part of the island are made up of Archean cratonic material.

[ 5 ] The Antongil block has been linked with the Dharwar Formation of India, however the Antananarivo block to the west has been too heavily altered to link easily to another continent.

[ 5 ] The central part of the island contains metasediments from African and Indian continental shelves. This is the Itremo Group, which also contains intrusions of material from the Antongil block. The Itremo sheet was folded in the amalgamation of Madagascar ~700 Mya, and now contains upright folds, divergent reverse faults , and strike-slip faults.

[ 4 ] Rifting [ edit ] The Madagascar plate experienced two major rifting events during the break-up of Gondwana. First, it separated from Africa about 160 Mya (million years ago), then from the Seychelles and India 66–90 Mya.

[ 6 ] The first rifting event, separation from Somalia and the rest of Africa, caused displacement along the Davie Ridge, in the Mozambique Channel to the west of the islands, a now extinct transform . The rifting is also associated with extensive deformation as well as volcanism in the late Cretaceous and Cenozoic ( Eocene to Miocene ).

The second separation caused volcanism in the southern part of the island as well as further south, such as on Marion Island .

[ 6 ] The volcanism was so extensive that in the late Cretaceous Madagascar may have been entirely covered in flood basalts from volcanism associated with this second rifting event.

[ 6 ] It was at this point in the end of the Cretaceous that Madagascar became entirely isolated from any other continent.

Modern tectonics [ edit ] Madagascar remains seismically and volcanically active. The most seismically active area is beneath the Ankaratra Plateau in the centre of the island, which experienced magnitude 5.2 and 5.5 earthquakes in 1985 and 1991. The Aloatra-Ankay rift to the north of the plateau is also seismically active, as well as the Davie Ridge off the coast, which is an extension of the East African Rift Zone.

[ 7 ] The Ankaratra Plateau contains a major volcanic field with volcanic cones and extensive flows. It was active from the Neogene to the Quaternary. To the northwest, there are the recently active Comoro Islands , which are hypothesized to be related to a hot spot.

[ 6 ] The Madagascar plate now moves mostly in conjunction with the African plate, so some believe it should not be still considered an independent plate.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Plummer, P. S., and E. R. Belle (1995), Mesozoic tectono–stratigraphic evolution of the Seychelles microcontinent, Sedimentary Geology , 96, 73–91.

^ Timothy M. Kusky; Erkan Toraman & Tsilavo Raharimahefa (2006). "The Great Rift Valley of Madagascar: An extension of the Africa–Somali diffusive plate boundary?".

^ Timothy M. Kusky; Erkan Toraman; Tsilavo Raharimahefa; Christine Rasoazanamparany (2010). "Active tectonics of the Alaotra–Ankay Graben System, Madagascar: Possible extension of Somalian–African diffusive plate boundary?".

Gondwana Research .

18 ( 2– 3): 274– 294.

doi : 10.1016/j.gr.2010.02.003 .

^ a b Collins, Alan S., and Brian F. Windley. "The tectonic evolution of central and northern Madagascar and its place in the final assembly of Gondwana." The Journal of Geology 110.3 (2002): 325–339.

^ a b c Wit, Maarten J. de. "Madagascar: heads it's a continent, tails it's an island." Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 31.1 (2003): 213–248.

^ a b c d e Kusky, Timothy M., Erkan Toraman, and Tsilavo Raharimahefa. "The Great Rift Valley of Madagascar: An extension of the Africa–Somali diffusive plate boundary?." Gondwana Research 11.4 (2007): 577–579.

^ Grimison, Nina L., and Wang‐Ping Chen. "Earthquakes in the Davie Ridge‐Madagascar region and the southern Nubian‐Somalian plate boundary." Journal of Geophysical Research : Solid Earth (1978–2012) 93.B9 (1988): 10439-10450.

v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Major African geological formations Plates Major plates: African plate Minor plates: Somali plate Microplates: Lwandle plate Madagascar plate Rovuma plate Seychelles plate Victoria Microplate Cratons and shields Arabian-Nubian Shield Congo Craton Kaapvaal Craton Kalahari Craton Saharan Metacraton Tanzania Craton Tuareg Shield West African Craton Zimbabwe Craton Shear zones Aswa Dislocation Broodkop Shear Zone Central African Shear Zone Chuan Shear Zones Foumban Shear Zone Kandi Fault Zone Mwembeshi Shear Zone Todi Shear Zone Western Meseta Shear Zone Orogens Alpine Orogen Cape Fold Belt Damara Orogen East African Orogen Eburnean Orogen Gondwanide Orogen Kibaran Orogen Kuunga Orogen Mauritanide Belt Pan-African orogens Terra Australis Orogen Rifts Afar Triangle Anza trough Bahr el Arab rift Benue Trough Blue Nile rift East African Rift Gulf of Suez Rift Lamu Embayment Melut Basin Muglad Basin Red Sea Rift Sangha Aulacogen Atbara rift Urema Valley West and Central African Rift System White Nile rift Sedimentary basins Angola Basin Aoukar Blue Nile Basin Chad Basin Congo Basin Douala Basin El Djouf Karoo Basin Gabon Basin Iullemmeden Basin Kufra Basin Murzuq Basin Niger Delta Basin Ogaden Basin Orange River Basin Ouled Abdoun Basin Owambo Basin Reggane Basin Rio del Rey Basin Sirte Basin Somali Coastal Basin Taoudeni Basin Tanzania Coastal Basin Tindouf Basin Turkana Basin Mountain ranges Aïr Mountains Atlas Mountains Aurès Mountains Bambouk Mountains Blue Mountains Cameroon line Central Pangean Mountains Chaillu Mountains Drakensberg Eastern Arc Mountains Eastern Rift mountains Ethiopian Highlands Great Escarpment Great Karas Mountains Guinea Highlands Hoggar Mountains Imatong Mountains Jebel Uweinat Loma Mountains Mandara Mountains Marrah Mountains Mitumba Mountains Nuba Mountains Rif Mountains Rwenzori Mountains Sankwala Mountains Serra da Leba Serra da Chela Teffedest Mountains Tibesti Mountains Inselbergs (aka koppie) Anti-Atlas Mount Gorongosa Jugurtha Tableland Mount Mabu Mulanje Massif Mont Niénokoué Wase Rock Zuma Rock List of inselbergs Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Madagascar_plate&oldid=1295043314 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of Africa Geology of India Geology of Madagascar Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 10:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Madagascar plate 3 languages Add topic

