Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In practice Toggle In practice subsection 1.1 Spin-outs 1.2 Informal promotion 1.3 IP policies 2 Organizations Toggle Organizations subsection 2.1 Technology transfer offices 2.2 Technology and Innovation Support Centers 2.3 Science technology parks 2.4 Technology incubators 2.5 IP marketplaces 3 Government and intellectual property support Toggle Government and intellectual property support subsection 3.1 Partnership intermediaries 4 During COVID-19 pandemic 5 Drawbacks 6 See also 7 Sources 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Technology transfer 34 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català ChiShona Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių 日本語 Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of disseminating technology Technology transfer ( TT ), also called transfer of technology ( TOT ), is the process of transferring (disseminating) technology from the person or organization that owns or holds it to another person or organization, in an attempt to transform inventions and scientific outcomes into new products and services that benefit society.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Technology transfer is closely related to (and may arguably be considered a subset of) knowledge transfer .

A comprehensive definition of technology transfer today includes the notion of collaborative process as it became clear that global challenges could be resolved only through the development of global solutions. Knowledge and technology transfer plays a crucial role in connecting innovation stakeholders and moving inventions from creators to public and private users.

[ 3 ] Intellectual property (IP) is an important instrument of technology transfer, as it establishes an environment conducive to sharing research results and technologies.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Analysis in 2003 showed that the context, [ 6 ] or environment, and motives of each organization involved will influence the method of technology transfer employed. The motives behind the technology transfer were not necessarily homogenous across organization levels, especially when commercial and government interests are combined.

[ 7 ] The protection of IP rights enables all parties, including universities and research institutions to ensure ownership of the scientific outcomes of their intellectual activity, and to control the use of IP in accordance with their mission and core values. IP protection gives academic institutions capacity to market their inventions, attract funding, seek industrial partners and assure dissemination of new technologies through means such as licensing or creation of start-ups for the benefit of society.

[ 8 ] In practice [ edit ] Technology transfers may occur between universities , businesses (of any size, ranging from small , medium , to large ), governments , across geopolitical borders , both formally and informally, and both openly and secretly. Often it occurs by concerted effort to share skills , knowledge , technologies, manufacturing methods, samples, and facilities among the participants.

While the Technology Transfer process involves many activities, which can be represented in many ways, in reality, technology transfer is a fluid and dynamic process that rarely follows a linear course.

[ 2 ] Typical steps include: Knowledge creation Disclosure Assessment and evaluation IP protection Fundraising and technology development Marketing Commercialization Product development, and Impact.

Technology transfer aims to ensure that scientific and technological developments are accessible to a wider range of users who can then further develop and exploit the technology into new products, processes, applications, materials, or services. It is closely related to (and may arguably be considered a subset of) knowledge transfer . Horizontal transfer is the movement of technologies from one area to another.

Transfer of technology is primarily horizontal. Vertical transfer occurs when technologies are moved from applied research centers to research and development departments.

[ 9 ] Spin-outs [ edit ] Spin-outs are used where the host organization does not have the necessary will, resources, or skills to develop new technology.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Often these approaches are associated with raising of venture capital (VC) as a means of funding the development process, a practice common in the United States and the European Union .

Research spin-off companies are a popular vehicle of commercialization in Canada , where the rate of licensing of Canadian university research remains far below that of the US. Local venture capital organizations such as the Mid-Atlantic Venture Association (MAVA) also sponsor conferences at which investors assess the potential for commercialization of technology.

Technology brokers are people who discovered how to bridge the emergent worlds and apply scientific concepts or processes to new situations or circumstances.

[ 12 ] A related term, used almost synonymously, especially in Europe, is "technology valorisation ". While conceptually the practice has been utilized for many years (in ancient times, Archimedes was notable for applying science to practical problems), the present-day volume of research, combined with high-profile failures at Xerox PARC and elsewhere [ citation needed ] , has led to a focus on the process itself.

Whereas technology transfer can involve the dissemination of highly complex technology from capital-intensive origins to low-capital recipients (and can involve aspects of dependency and fragility of systems), it also can involve appropriate technology , not necessarily high-tech or expensive, that is better disseminated, yielding robustness and independence of systems.

Informal promotion [ edit ] Technology transfer is also promoted through informal means, such as at conferences organized by various groups, including the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation and the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM) , and at "challenge" competitions by organizations such as the Center for Advancing Innovation in Maryland. AUTM represents over 3,100 technology transfer professionals, and more than 800 universities, research centers, hospitals, businesses and government organizations.

The most frequently used informal means of technology transfer are through education, studies, professional exchange of opinions, movement of people, seminars, workshops. .

There are numerous professional associations and TTO Networks enhancing different forms of collaboration among technology managers in order to facilitate this "informal" transfer of best practices and experiences.

In addition to AUTM, other regional and international associations include the Association of European Science and Technology Transfer Professionals (ASTP), the Alliance of Technology Transfer Professionals (ATTP), Licensing Executives Society (LES), Praxis Auril and others. There are also national Technology transfer associations and networks, such as the National Association of Technology Transfer Offices in Mexico (Red OTT Mexico), the Brazilian Forum of Innovation and Technology Transfer Managers (FORTEC), the Alliance of TechTransfer Professionals of the Philippines (AToP), the South African Research and Innovation Management Association (SARIMA), and other associations.

They promote cooperation in technology transfer and the exchange of best practices and experiences among professionals, as today international technology transfer is considered one of the most effective ways to bring people together to find solutions to global problems such as COVID-19, climate change or cyber-attacks.

IP policies [ edit ] Universities and research institutions seeking to partner with industry or other organizations can adopt an institutional intellectual property policy for effective intellectual property management and technology transfer. Such policies provide structure, predictability, and an environment, in which commercialization partners (industrial sponsors, consultants, non-profit organizations, SMEs, governments) and research stakeholders (researchers, technicians, students, visiting researchers, etc.) can access and share knowledge, technology and IP. National IP strategies are measures taken by a government to realize its IP policy objectives.

[ 13 ] Organizations [ edit ] A research result may be of scientific and commercial interest, but patents are normally only issued for practical processes, and so someone—not necessarily the researchers—must come up with a specific practical process.

[ 14 ] Another consideration is commercial value; for example, while there are many ways to accomplish nuclear fusion , the ones of commercial value are those that generate more energy than they require to operate. The process to commercially exploit research varies widely. It can involve licensing agreements or setting up joint ventures and partnerships to share both the risks and rewards of bringing new technologies to market.  Other corporate vehicles, e.g. spin-outs, are used where the host organization does not have the necessary will, resources, or skills to develop new technology.  Often these approaches are associated with raising of venture capital (VC) as a means of funding the development process. Research spin-off companies are a popular vehicle of commercialization in Canada, where the rate of licensing of Canadian university research remains far below that of the US.

[ 15 ] Scholars Jeffrey Stoff and Alex Joske have argued that the Chinese Communist Party 's united front "influence apparatus intersects with or directly supports its global technology transfer apparatus." [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Technology transfer offices [ edit ] Many universities and research institutions, and governmental organizations now have an Office of Technology Transfer (TTO, also known as "Tech Transfer" or "TechXfer") dedicated to identifying research that has potential commercial interest and strategies for how to exploit it.

[ 18 ] Technology Transfer Offices are usually created within a university in order to manage IP assets of the university, and the transfer of knowledge and technology to industry. Sometimes, their mandate includes any interaction or contractual relation with the private sector, or other responsibilities, depending on the mission of the institutions. Common names for such offices differ. Some examples include Technology Licensing Office (TLO), Technology Management Office, Research Contracts and IP Services Office, Technology Transfer Interface, Industry Liaisons Office, IP and Technology Management Office, and Nucleus of Technological Innovation.

[ 19 ] Technology transfer offices may work on behalf of research institutions, governments, and even large multinationals.  Where start-ups and spin-outs are the clients, commercial fees are sometimes waived in lieu of an equity stake in the business.  As a result of the potential complexity of the technology transfer process, technology transfer organizations are often multidisciplinary, including economists, engineers, lawyers, marketers and scientists. The dynamics of the technology transfer process have attracted attention in their own right, and there are several dedicated societies and journals.

Technology and Innovation Support Centers [ edit ] Technology and Innovation Support Centers [ 20 ] [ 21 ] (TISCs) help innovators access patent information, scientific and technical literature and search tools and databases and make more effective use of these resources to promote innovation, technology transfer, commercialization and utilization of technologies. The WIPO TISCs program currently supports over 80 countries. WIPO supports its member states in establishing and developing TISCs in universities and other institutions in numerous countries around the world. Services offered by TISCs may include: access to online patent and non-patent (scientific and technical) resources and IP-related publications; assistance in searching and retrieving technology information; training in database search; on-demand searches (novelty, state-of-the-art and infringement); monitoring technology and competitors; basic information on industrial property laws, management and strategy, and technology commercialization and marketing.

Science technology parks [ edit ] Science and technology parks (STP) are territories usually affiliated with a university or a research institution, which accommodate and foster the growth of companies based therein through technology transfer and open innovation.

Technology incubators [ edit ] Technology business incubators (TBIs) are organizations that help startup companies and individual entrepreneurs develop their businesses by providing a range of services, including training, brokering and financing.

IP marketplaces [ edit ] Intellectual Property marketplaces are Internet-based platforms that allow innovators to connect with potential partners and/or clients. For example, online platform WIPO GREEN enable collaborations in specific areas of knowledge transfer and facilitate matchmaking between technology providers and technology seekers.

Government and intellectual property support [ edit ] There has been a marked increase in technology transfer intermediaries specialized in their field since 1980, stimulated in large part by the Bayh–Dole Act and equivalent legislation in other countries, which provided additional incentives for research exploitation. Due to the increasing focus on technology transfer there are several forms of intermediary institutions at work in this sector, from TTOs to IP 'trolls' that act outside the Bayh–Dole Act provisions. Due to the risk of exploitation, intellectual property policy, training and systems support for technology transfer by government, research institutes and universities, have been international and regionally-focused organisation, such as the World Intellectual Property Organisation [ 22 ] [ 23 ] and the European Union .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Partnership intermediaries [ edit ] The U.S. government's annual budget funds over $100 billion in research and development activity, which leads to a continuous pipeline of new inventions and technologies from within government laboratories.

[ 26 ] Through legislation including the Bayh–Dole Act , Congress encourages the private sector to use those technologies with commercial potential through technology transfer mechanisms such as Cooperative Research and Development Agreements, Patent License Agreements, Educational Partnership Agreements, and state/local government partnerships.

The term "partnership intermediary" means an agency of a state or local government—or a nonprofit entity owned, chartered, funded, or operated by or on behalf of a state or local government—that assists, counsels, advises, evaluates, or otherwise cooperates with small business firms; institutions of higher education defined in section 201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 USC § 1141 [a]); or educational institutions within the meaning of section 2194 of Title 10, United States Code, that need or can make demonstrably productive use of technology-related assistance from a federal laboratory, including state programs receiving funds under cooperative agreements entered into under section 5121 of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 (15 USC § 2781).

[ 27 ] During COVID-19 pandemic [ edit ] Technology transfer had a direct impact on contributing to global public health issues, by enabling global access to COVID-19 vaccines .

[ 28 ] During 2021, vaccine developers concluded over 200 technology transfer agreements. One example was AstraZeneca concluding the licensing and technology transfer agreements on AstraZeneca with the Serum Institute of India and with Daiichi Sankyo of Japan to supply vaccines for COVID-19 , which were developed in collaboration with the University of Oxford . In this process Intellectual Property was part of the solution and an important tool for facilitation of affordable global access to COVID 19 treatments – as it was the case in two licensing agreements between Medicines Patent Pool (MPP) and pharmaceutical companies Merck and Pfizer .

[ 29 ] Drawbacks [ edit ] Despite incentives to move research into production, the practical aspects are sometimes difficult to perform in practice.  Using DoD technology readiness levels as a criterion (for example), research tends to focus on TRL (technology readiness level) 1–3 while readiness for production tends to focus on TRL 6–7 or higher.  Bridging TRL-3 to TRL-6 has proven to be difficult in some organizations.  Attempting to rush research (prototypes) into production (fully tested under diverse conditions, reliable, maintainable, etc.) tends to be more costly and time-consuming than expected.

[ 30 ] Power political and realpolitik incentives in technology transfer are cognized to be negative factors in destructive applications.

[ 31 ] Technology transfer to dictatorial regimes is thought to be disruptive for the scientific purposes.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Bayh–Dole Act Business incubator Diffusion of innovations Discovery (observation) Licensing Executives Society International New product development Open innovation Prior art Technology assessment Technology licensing office (TLO) Thousand Talents Program Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-4.0. Text taken from Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer​ , WIPO.

References [ edit ] ^ Bozeman, Barry (1 April 2000). "Technology transfer and public policy: a review of research and theory".

Research Policy .

29 (4): 627– 655.

doi : 10.1016/S0048-7333(99)00093-1 .

(subscription required) ^ a b "What is technology transfer?" .

Competence Centre on Technology Transfer . European Commission. 30 January 2020 . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ CASE STUDIES ON COOPERATION AND EXCHANGE BETWEEN R&D INSTITUTIONS IN DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (PDF) . Fourteenth Session of Committee on Development and Intellectual Property (CDIP), Geneva, November 10 to 14, 2014.

World Intellectual Property Organization . 23 September 2014. CDIP/14/INF/9.

^ "What is Tech Transfer, Anyway?" . Washington, D.C.: AUTM . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ Cannady, Cynthia (September 2006).

"Technology Transfer and Development" .

WIPO Magazine . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ Kremic, Tibor (April 2003). "Technology Transfer: A Contextual Approach".

The Journal of Technology Transfer .

28 (2). Springer: 149– 158.

doi : 10.1023/A:1022942532139 .

S2CID 152744672 .

(subscription required) ^ "Technology Transfer in Countries in Transition: Policy and Recommendations" (PDF) .

WIPO.int . August 2012 . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ "Project on Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer: Common Challenges - Building Solutions (Recommendations 19, 25, 26 and 28)" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ Grosse, Robert (1996). "International Technology Transfer in Services".

Journal of International Business Studies .

27 (4): 782.

doi : 10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8490153 .

JSTOR 155512 .

S2CID 166609098 .

^ "Successful Technology Transfer through a Spin-off Company" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ "Licence or Spin" .

Technology Transfer Innovation . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ Hargadon, Andrew.

Harvard Business School Working Knowledge for Business Leaders Archived 2017-03-17 at the Wayback Machine , August 4, 2003.

^ "IP Policies for Universities and Research Institutions" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2022-05-05 .

^ Miron-Shatz, Talya; Shatz, Itamar; Becker, Stefan; Patel, Jigar; Eysenbach, Gunther (6 August 2014).

"Promoting Business and Entrepreneurial Awareness in Health Care Professionals: Lessons From Venture Capital Panels at Medicine 2.0 Conferences" .

Journal of Medical Internet Research .

16 (8): e3390.

doi : 10.2196/jmir.3390 .

PMC 4129187 .

PMID 25100579 .

^ "State of The Nation 2008 - Canada's Science, Technology and Innovation System" . Archived from the original on 2009-05-12 . Retrieved 2009-09-02 .

^ Stoff, Jeffrey (3 August 2020), Hannas, William C.; Tatlow, Didi Kirsten (eds.), "China's Talent Programs" , China’s Quest for Foreign Technology (1 ed.), Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, pp.

38– 54, doi : 10.4324/9781003035084-4 , ISBN 978-1-003-03508-4 , OCLC 1153338764 , S2CID 225397660 , archived from the original on 3 July 2023 , retrieved 22 March 2023 ^ Joske, Alex ; Stoff, Jeffrey (2020-08-03), Hannas, William C.; Tatlow, Didi Kirsten (eds.), "The United Front and Technology Transfer" , China’s Quest for Foreign Technology (1 ed.), Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, pp.

258– 274, doi : 10.4324/9781003035084-20 , ISBN 978-1-003-03508-4 , OCLC 1153338764 , S2CID 225395399 , archived from the original on 2020-11-22 , retrieved 2020-11-26 ^ "Database of Intellectual Property Policies from Universities and Research Institutions" .

www.wipo.int . Archived from the original on 2021-08-15 . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ "Guidelines for Customization of the IP Policy Template" .

wipo.int . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ "Technology and Innovation Support Centers" .

WIPO .

^ "Technology and Innovation Support Center (TISC)" .

www.nipo.gov.lk . Retrieved 2022-05-04 .

^ "IP for Innovators" .

wipo.int . Retrieved 31 Dec 2021 .

^ "Supporting Technology and Knowledge Transfer" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ "Technology Transfer" .

knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ "Resources | Knowledge for policy" .

knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ Sargent, John F. Jr. (January 25, 2018).

"Federal Research and Development Funding: FY2018" (PDF) .

Congressional Research Service .

^ "15 U.S. Code § 3715 - Use of partnership intermediaries" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 2019-05-29 .

^ Promoting Access to Medical Technologies and Innovation: Intersections between public health, intellectual property and trade (PDF) . World Intellectual Property Organization. August 2021.

ISBN 978-92-805-3319-4 . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ "Access to COVID-19 treatments and the Medicines Patent Pool: Here's Why it Matters and How IP Makes it Possible" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ "Assessments of Selected Weapon Programs" (PDF) .

^ Calhoun, Craig; Derluguian, Georgi (2011).

The Deepening Crisis: Governance Challenges after Neoliberalism . New York and London: Social Science Research Council and New York University Press. pp.

109– 133.

ISBN 9780814772812 .

External links [ edit ] Special Report：Methodological and Technological issues in Technology Transfer Archived 2021-01-20 at the Wayback Machine ( IPCC ) The Journal of Technology Transfer Technology Transfer Systems in the United States and Germany: Lessons and Perspectives (1997) Beatty, Edward (2003). "Approaches to Technology Transfer in History and the Case of Nineteenth-Century Mexico".

Comparative Technology Transfer and Society .

1 (2): 167– 197.

doi : 10.1353/ctt.2003.0013 .

S2CID 146644966 .

The WIPO IP Toolkit for Universities and research institutions European Union Database of Technology Transfer Country reports v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technology_transfer&oldid=1306152562 " Categories : Technology transfer Intellectual property law Knowledge transfer Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Free-content attribution Free content from WIPO This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technology transfer 34 languages Add topic

