Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Scientific goals 3 Payload of the Beaver Rover Toggle Payload of the Beaver Rover subsection 3.1 MASSur Seismic Sensor 3.2 Ground Penetrating Radar 3.3 TC Corer 4 Payload of the Northern Light Lander Toggle Payload of the Northern Light Lander subsection 4.1 Aurora Spectrometer 4.2 Argus Spectrometer 4.3 Camera systems 4.4 MASSur Seismic Sensors 4.5 Environmental sensors 5 Tracking 6 Landing site 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Northern Light (spacecraft) 7 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cancelled Canadian Mars lander and rover mission Northern Light Northern Light Lander on Mars (artist's impression) Mission type Mars rover Operator Northern Light Consortium Website www .marsrocks .ca Spacecraft properties Manufacturer Thoth Technology Landing mass 35 kilograms (77 lb) 6 kilograms (13 lb) lander Start of mission Launch date cancelled Northern Light was a concept mission for a robotic mission to Mars that would consist of a lander and a rover, being studied by a consortium of Canadian universities, companies and organisations.  The primary contractor for the spacecraft was Thoth Technology Inc.

The spacecraft would consist of four parts: an apogee kick engine to provide orbital injection for a cruise vehicle that carries the Northern Light lander and the Beaver Rover to a direct rendezvous with Mars using a Hohmann transfer orbit . Atmospheric entry would be achieved by a heat shield, parachute and airbag deployment system.  
The lander would transfer the rover to the Martian surface. Once deployed on the Martian surface, the lander contacts Earth directly to the 46 m parabolic antenna located at the Algonquin Radio Observatory .

The Beaver Rover was proposed to have a maximum range of 1000 metres (0.62 mile) from the landing site. It would have operated under battery, utilizing tools and sensors to investigate surface rocks that may contain the presence of photosynthetic life.

History [ edit ] The project officially started in 2001, and its project leader was Ben Quine, from York University , Canada. York University has participated in the Canadian Space Program and has designed several space research instruments and applications currently used by NASA , including the meteorological station on board the Phoenix Mars lander .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Partners in this Mars project were York University , University of Alberta , University of Toronto , University of Waterloo , University of Winnipeg , University of Western Ontario , University of Saskatchewan , University of New Brunswick , McGill University and Simon Fraser University .

[ 3 ] The mission control for the period after it lands on Mars, would have been headquartered at York University.

[ 4 ] The cost was estimated at $20 million, or possibly less if another country shares the rocket.

[ 4 ] The Canadian Space Agency confirmed it knows of the project, but has no involvement in it.

[ 4 ] In 2014, a crowd sourcing campaign to support the mission was launched on Indiegogo and YouTube in order to raise $1.1 million Canadian dollars for development of the flight hardware, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] but the drive raised only $10,012.

[ 7 ] Scientific goals [ edit ] There are four primary goals for the mission: [ 8 ] Search for life on Mars Search for water on Mars Investigate Martian electromagnetic radiation environment and atmospheric properties Prepare for the international effort of a Mars sample return mission and a human mission to Mars Payload of the Beaver Rover [ edit ] The rover system was required for geological surface exploration and for subsurface imaging. With a mass of approximately 6 kg (13.2 lb), the rover would operate under its own power and have a range of roughly 1 km (0.62 mi). The rover would be equipped with a visible camera for manoeuvering and surface exploration, as well as a Point Spectrometer and microscope camera for geological survey. A ground-penetrating radar would explore the Martian subsurface and  look for water; an active vibrator and receiver would use short, sub-millisecond pulses to conduct an acoustic study of the subsurface. For immediate subsurface exploration, the rover would be equipped with a rock grinding tool.

MASSur Seismic Sensor [ edit ] The MASSur Seismic Sensor, developed by the University of Calgary would have provided depth profiles of the Martian surface.  Specifically, a seismometer would conduct tests to determine the rigidity and elasticity of the Martian topsoil as well as its rock properties. Sediments, permafrost , and water may all have distinct signatures. This seismic system would use a vibrational source and elastic-wave receivers ( accelerometers ) on both the lander and on the Beaver Rover. The redundancy of lander and rover apparatus, ensures that some primary science objectives can be met without rover deployment.

Ground Penetrating Radar [ edit ] The Ground-Penetrating Radar (GPR) would have utilized a 200 MHz radar to provide fine-scale, sub-surface imaging to a depth of 20 m (65 ft) on loose aggregate and up to 100 m (328 ft) on permafrost or ice. The concept design shares several systems with the seismic instruments.

[ 9 ] TC Corer [ edit ] The corer would be capable of drilling up to 10 mm into surface rocks. This tool would be used in conjunction with the Aurora spectrometer and microscope to examine the near-surface composition and to look for biosignatures of near-surface life. The core would have been contributed to the mission from Hong Kong . The flight model instrument has an estimated mass of 350 g.

Payload of the Northern Light Lander [ edit ] Aurora Spectrometer [ edit ] The proposed spectrometer has a wavelength coverage of 625 nm to 2500 nm and observes the whole sky. The instrument would measure variations in spectral irradiance which can be utilized to determine aerosol and atmospheric composition including the concentration of carbon dioxide, the major constituent of the Martian atmosphere. It would also carry out angular dependency of radiation influx in the atmosphere. The Aurora instrument has a mass of 450 g.

[ 9 ] Argus Spectrometer [ edit ] Similar in design to the Argus 1000 spectrometer flown on CanX-2 , the radiometer would be the primary equipment of the Northern Light lander making measurements of spectral rock reflectance. The spectrometer has a mass of 240 g.

[ 9 ] Camera systems [ edit ] The camera systems on the lander would have the capability of narrow and wide field surveys.
The narrow field survey would have provided a very high resolution, panoramic view of the landing site. Colour filters would perform some spectral mapping and mineral identification of the surrounding soil; the camera would also perform limited atmospheric and astronomical observations.

[ 9 ] Colour images of Earth would have been obtained.

The wide field survey would provide an overall colour view of the lander's surroundings to help rover deployment and route planning.

MASSur Seismic Sensors [ edit ] Similar specifications as those on the Beaver Rover.

Environmental sensors [ edit ] Environmental sensors would monitor environmental conditions at the landing site. Various instruments would have measured UV rays , oxidising substances , air pressure, air temperature, dust impact, wind velocity, and ground vibration.  These sensors would have a combined mass of 130 g. Flight models were previously developed for Britain's Beagle 2 lander.

Tracking [ edit ] The entry system would have been tracked and targeted utilizing a combination of Doppler radar and very long baseline interferometry . This data would processed by a high-resolution orbital model that utilizes high-precision ephemeris to predict spacecraft location and trajectory.

Upon launch, tracking would commence at the Algonquin Radio Observatory . After orbital injection, the spacecraft would be contacted periodically to obtain system status and to determine trajectory. As the package reaches the Matrian thermosphere continuous tracking would commence in order to verify mechanism deployment during descent.

[ 10 ] Landing site [ edit ] The landing site would have been determined from one of three options by crowd sourcing campaign.  One option was a dry 'sea', within 5 km of a basin formation.

See also [ edit ] Robotic spacecraft References [ edit ] ^ Experiment aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour . York U press release. Retrieved 2008-05-22 ^ NASA Phoenix Mission to Mars . York U press release. Retrieved 2008-05-22.

^ "University of Alberta joins mission to Mars" .

The Edmonton Journal . August 22, 2007. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012 . Retrieved 2009-07-27 .

^ a b c "Mission to Mars to be 100% Canadian" .

The Ottawa Citizen . CanWest MediaWorks Publications Inc. August 22, 2007. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012 . Retrieved 2009-08-01 .

^ [1] . Mission video on YouTube ^ "Northern Light Canadian Mars micro-rover and lander aim for launch" .

CBC News . November 4, 2014 . Retrieved 2014-11-13 .

^ [2] . Northern Light Indiegogo campaign ^ "Four Science Themes" . Thoth Technology Inc. 2009. Archived from the original on 2009-11-11 . Retrieved 2009-07-29 .

^ a b c d "Northern Light Instrumentation" . Thoth Technology Inc. 2009. Archived from the original on 2009-11-11 . Retrieved 2009-07-28 .

^ "The Algonquin Radio Observatory (ARO)" . Thoth Technology Inc. 2009. Archived from the original on 2009-11-11 . Retrieved 2009-07-28 .

External links [ edit ] Northern Light's official mission website at marsrocks.ca .

Thoth Technology - A Canadian mission to Mars v t e Spacecraft missions to Mars List of missions to Mars List of Mars orbiters List of artificial objects on Mars Active Flybys Psyche ‡ (2023, flyby in 2026) Orbiters 2001 Mars Odyssey Mars Express Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter timeline MAVEN ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter Hope Tianwen-1 orbiter Rovers Curiosity Mars Science Laboratory timeline Perseverance Mars 2020 timeline Past Flybys Mars 1 † Mariner 4 Zond 2 † Mariner 6 and 7 Mars 6 Mars 7 Rosetta ‡ Dawn ‡ Mars Cube One Europa Clipper ‡ Hera ‡ Orbiters Mars 2 Mars 3 Mariner 9 Mars 4 † Mars 5 Viking program Viking 1 Viking 2 Phobos program Phobos 1 † Phobos 2 † Mars Observer † Mars Global Surveyor Nozomi † Mars Climate Orbiter † Mangalyaan Landers Mars 2 † Mars 3 † Mars 6 † Mars 7 † Viking 1 Viking 2 Mars Pathfinder Mars Polar Lander † / Deep Space 2 † Beagle 2 † Phoenix ExoMars Schiaparelli † InSight Tianwen-1 lander Rovers PrOP-M † Sojourner Mars Exploration Rover Spirit timeline Opportunity timeline Zhurong Aircraft Ingenuity helicopter flights Mars 2020 Failed launches Mars 1M No.1 1M No.2 2MV-4 No.1 2MV-3 No.1 Mariner 3 Mars 2M No.521 2M No.522 Mariner 8 Mars 3MS No.170 Mars 96 Fobos-Grunt / Yinghuo-1 Future Planned EscaPADE (2025) Tera-hertz Explorer (TEREX) (mid 2020s) Martian Moons eXploration (MMX) (2026) Mangalyaan-2 (2026) Tianwen-3 (2028) Rosalind Franklin (2028) MBR Explorer ‡ (2028, flyby in 2031) NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return Mars Sample Recovery Helicopters Kazachok Proposed MAGGIE SpaceX Mars program Mars-Grunt Cancelled or not developed Aerial Regional-scale Environmental Survey Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection DePhine Icebreaker Life Marsokhod Mars 4NM & 5NM Mars 5M (Mars-79) Mars-Aster Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C) Mars Geyser Hopper Mars Exploration Ice Mapper Mars One Mars Micro Orbiter Mars Surveyor Lander Mars Telecommunications Orbiter MELOS rover MetNet NetLander Northern Light Next Mars Orbiter PADME Phootprint Sample Collection for Investigation of Mars (SCIM) Sky-Sailor SpaceX Red Dragon Vesta Voyager Mars Exploration Concepts Flyby Orbiter Landing Atmospheric entry Rover Aircraft Sample return Human mission Permanent settlement Colonization Terraforming Strategies Mars Scout Program Mars Exploration Program Mars Exploration Joint Initiative Mars Next Generation Advocacy The Mars Project The Case for Mars Inspiration Mars Mars Institute Mars Society Mars race Missions are ordered by launch date. Sign † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned.

‡ indicates use of the planet as a gravity assist en route to another destination.

v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Northern_Light_(spacecraft)&oldid=1193473386 " Categories : Missions to Mars Cancelled astrobiology space missions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 January 2024, at 00:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Northern Light (spacecraft) 7 languages Add topic

