Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and composition 2 History 3 Economy 4 Netherlands 5 Flanders 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Seventeen Provinces 46 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Union of states in the 16th-century Low Countries This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Seventeen Provinces" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Seventeen Provinces Zeventien Provinciën ( Dutch ) Dix-Sept Provinces ( French ) Diecisiete Provincias ( Spanish ) 1549–1581 Cross of Burgundy Coat of arms Map of the Netherlands in 1555, with the Seventeen Provinces highlighted in color. States which may be geographically considered part of the Netherlands, but which were not part of the Habsburg Netherlands shown in light grey.

Status Personal union of Imperial fiefs Capital Brussels Common languages Dutch Low Saxon Frisian Walloon Luxembourgish French Religion Catholic (official) Protestant Government Monarchy Historical era Early modern period • Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 1549 • Dutch Act of Abjuration 1581 ISO 3166 code NL Preceded by Succeeded by Habsburg Netherlands Dutch Republic Spanish Netherlands The Seventeen Provinces ( Dutch : Zeventien Provinciën , French : Dix-Sept Provinces , Spanish : Diecisiete Provincias ) was a term used to describe the Spanish Netherlands before the Dutch Revolt , when they were at their largest extent. They covered most of the Low Countries , i.e., what is now the Netherlands , Belgium , Luxembourg , and most of the French departments of Nord ( French Flanders and French Hainaut ) and Pas-de-Calais ( Artois ).

The Seventeen Provinces arose from the Burgundian Netherlands , a number of fiefs held by the House of Valois-Burgundy and inherited by the House of Habsburg in 1482, and held by Habsburg Spain from 1556. Starting in 1512, the Provinces formed the major part of the Burgundian Circle . In 1581, many of these provinces seceded to form what would eventually become the Dutch Republic .

Definition and composition [ edit ] As the term "province" did not denote a specific administrative unit, but rather was a term of convenience, different authors chose and still choose to make sense of the intricate patchwork of fiefdoms across Early Modern Europe in different ways, meaning that not only is there no agreed upon definition of which provinces were among the seventeen, some even disagree on the number seventeen itself.

The Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 , which established the Netherlands as a cohesive administrative entity, lists the following provinces: Duchy of Brabant Duchy of Guelders and the County of Zutphen Duchy of Limburg (listed as "Limburg, Valkenburg , County of Dalhelm [ nl ] and Lands of Overmaas ", the latter terms covering lands which were condominia of Brabant and the Prince-Bishopric of Liège ) Duchy of Luxembourg County of Artois County of Flanders County of Hainaut County of Holland County of Namur County of Zeeland Lordship of Frisia Lordship of Malines Lordships of Overyssel and Groningen Lordship of Utrecht Castellany of Lille [ nl ] and the Bailick of Douai and Orchies [ nl ] (part of the County of Flanders ) This totals fifteen provinces, but by counting Zutphen and Groningen separately, the number increases to seventeen, this is thought to be the origin of the number, though others attribute it Christian significance.

[ 1 ] In any case it is a rather arbitrary one and even contemporary sources disagree on the composition and number of provinces. The Margraviate of Antwerp in particular was often counted as a fully-fledged province, while other lists omit it, counting it as part of Brabant.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Some lists count the Tournaisis as a province, while others lump it together with Lillie, Douai and Orchies as " Walloon Flanders ", despite there being no record of such a name having been used in 16th century. Some modern lists may retroactively include the Territory of Drenthe [ nl ] , which was considered a province within the Dutch Republic , as one of the Seventeen Provinces.

History [ edit ] History of the Low Countries Frisii Belgae Cana– nefates Chamavi , Tubantes Gallia Belgica (55 BC– c.

5th AD) Germania Inferior (83– c.

5th ) Salian Franks Batavi unpopulated (4th– c.

5th ) Saxons Salian Franks (4th– c.

5th ) Frisian Kingdom ( c.

6th –734) Frankish Kingdom (481–843) — Carolingian Empire (800–843) Austrasia (511–687) Middle Francia (843–855) West Francia (843–) Kingdom of Lotharingia (855– 959) Duchy of Lower Lorraine (959–) Frisia Frisian Freedom (11–16th century) County of Holland (880–1432) Bishopric of Utrecht (695–1456) Duchy of Brabant (1183–1430) Duchy of Guelders (1046–1543) County of Flanders (862–1384) County of Hainaut (1071–1432) County of Namur (981–1421) P.-Bish.

of Liège (980–1794) Duchy of Luxem- bourg (1059–1443) Burgundian Netherlands (1384–1482) Habsburg Netherlands (1482–1795) ( Seventeen Provinces after 1543 ) Dutch Republic (1581–1795) Spanish Netherlands (1556–1714) Austrian Netherlands (1714–1795) United States of Belgium (1790) R. Liège (1789–'91) Batavian Republic (1795–1806) Kingdom of Holland (1806–1810) associated with French First Republic (1795–1804) part of First French Empire (1804–1815) Princip. of the Netherlands (1813–1815) Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815–1830) Gr D. L.

(1815–) Kingdom of the Netherlands (1839–) Kingdom of Belgium (1830–) Gr D. of Luxem- bourg (1890–) Map of the Low Countries in 1477 The Seventeen Provinces originated from the Burgundian Netherlands . The dukes of Burgundy systematically became the lords of different provinces.

Mary I of Valois, Duchess of Burgundy was the last of the House of Burgundy .

Mary married Archduke Maximilian in 1477, and the provinces were acquired by the House of Habsburg on her death in 1482, with the exception of the Duchy of Burgundy itself, which, with an appeal to Salic law , had been reabsorbed into France upon the death of Mary's father, Charles the Bold . Maximilian and Mary's grandson, Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and king of Spain, eventually united all 17 provinces under his rule, the last one being the Duchy of Guelders , in 1543.

Most of these provinces were fiefs of the Holy Roman Empire . Two provinces, the County of Flanders and the County of Artois, were originally French fiefs, but sovereignty was ceded to the Empire in the Treaty of Cambrai in 1529.

On 15 October, 1506, in the palace of Mechelen, the future Charles V was recognized as Heer der Nederlanden ("Lord of the Netherlands"). Only he and his son ever used this title. The Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 determined that the Provinces should remain united in the future and inherited by the same monarch.

After Charles V's abdication in 1555, his realms were divided between his son, Philip II of Spain , and his brother, Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor . The Seventeen Provinces went to his son, the king of Spain.

Conflicts between Philip II and his Dutch subjects led to the Eighty Years' War , which started in 1568. The seven northern provinces gained their independence as a republic called the Seven United Provinces . They were: the Lordship of Groningen and of the Ommelanden the Lordship of Friesland the Lordship of Overijssel the Duchy of Guelders (except its upper quarter ) and the County of Zutphen the Prince-Bishopric, later Lordship of Utrecht the County of Holland the County of Zeeland The southern provinces, Flanders, Brabant, Namur, Hainaut, Luxembourg and the others, were restored to Spanish rule due to the military and political talent of the Duke of Parma , especially at the Siege of Antwerp (1584–1585) . Hence, these provinces became known as the Spanish Netherlands .

The County of Drenthe, surrounded by the other northern provinces, became de facto part of the Seven United Provinces, but had no voting rights in the Union of Utrecht and was therefore not considered a province.

The northern Seven United Provinces kept parts of Limburg, Brabant, and Flanders during the Eighty Years' War (see Generality Lands ), which ended with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648.

Artois and parts of Flanders and Hainaut ( French Flanders and French Hainaut ) were ceded to France in the course of the 17th and 18th centuries.

Economy [ edit ] By the mid-16th century, the Margraviate of Antwerp (Duchy of Brabant) had become the economic, political, and cultural centre of the Netherlands after its capital had shifted from the nearby Lordship of Mechelen to the city of Brussels .

Bruges (County of Flanders) had already lost its prominent position as the economic powerhouse of northern Europe, while Holland was gradually gaining importance in the 15th and 16th centuries.

However, after the revolt of the seven northern provinces (1568), the Sack of Antwerp (1576), the Fall of Antwerp (1584–1585), and the resulting closure of the Scheldt river to navigation, a large number of people from the southern provinces emigrated north to the new republic. The centre of prosperity moved from cities in the south such as Bruges, Antwerp , Ghent , and Brussels to cities in the north, mostly in Holland, including Amsterdam , The Hague , and Rotterdam .

Netherlands [ edit ] Main article: Netherlands (terminology) Leo Belgicus map To distinguish between the older and larger Low Countries of the Netherlands from the current country of the Netherlands, Dutch speakers usually drop the plural for the latter. They speak of Nederland in the singular for the current country and of de Nederlanden in the plural for the integral domains of Charles V.

In other languages, this has not been adopted, though the larger area is sometimes known as the Low Countries in English.

The fact that the term Netherlands has such different historical meanings can sometimes lead to difficulties in expressing oneself correctly. For example, composers from the 16th century are often said to belong to the Dutch School ( Nederlandse School ). Although they themselves would not have objected to that term at that time, nowadays it may wrongly create the impression that they were from the current Netherlands. In fact, they were almost exclusively from current Belgium.

Flanders [ edit ] The same confusion exists around the word Flanders . Historically, it applied to the County of Flanders , corresponding roughly with the present-day provinces of West Flanders , East Flanders and French Flanders . However, when the Dutch-speaking population of Belgium sought more rights in the 19th century, the word Flanders was reused, this time to refer to the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium, which is larger and contains only part of the old county of Flanders (see Flemish Movement ). Therefore, the territory of the County of Flanders and that of present-day Flanders do not fully match: French Flanders belonged to the County of Flanders, but is today part of France.

Zeelandic Flanders belonged to the County of Flanders, but is today part of the Netherlands.

Tournai and the Tournaisis was some period considered as part of the County of Flanders, but is today part of Wallonia.

The present-day Belgian province of Flemish Brabant belongs to present-day Flanders, but was part of the Duchy of Brabant .

The present-day Belgian province of Antwerp belongs to present-day Flanders, but was part of the Duchy of Brabant .

The present-day Belgian province of Limburg belongs to present-day Flanders, but was part of the Prince-Bishopric of Liège .

This explains, for instance, why the province of East Flanders is not situated in the east of present-day Flanders.

See also [ edit ] Governors of the Habsburg Netherlands The Netherlands (disambiguation) Burgundian Netherlands Pan-Netherlands French Flemish Benelux References [ edit ] ^ "The invention of the Dutchman" . Leiden University. 20 March 2007. Archived from the original on 17 May 2011 . Retrieved 9 August 2020 .

^ Arnold Hermann Ludwig Heeren (1834).

A Manual of the History of the Political System of Europe and Its Colonies . p. 65.

^ "De namen van de Zeventien Provinciën (image)" .

Engelfriet . Archived from the original on 5 April 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2023 .

^ "Ruzie met de Raad van State leidde tot de 80-jarige oorlog" . 13 January 2005. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 12 July 2023 .

^ "Wapens van de Zeventien Provinciën, Abraham de Bruyn (mogelijk), naar Chrispijn van den Broeck, 1582" .

Rijksmuseum . Archived from the original on 12 July 2023 . Retrieved 12 July 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seventeen Provinces .

Map of the Seventeen Provinces (1555) v t e Burgundian Circle (1512–1797) of the Holy Roman Empire Seventeen Provinces of Habsburg Netherlands Seceded 1581 Drenthe (since 1548) Friesland Groningen (since 1548) Guelders ( Veluwe Quarter , Nijmegen Quarter and Zutphen ) (since 1548) Holland Overijssel (since 1548) Utrecht (since 1548) Zeeland Remained Antwerp Artois 2 Brabant Flanders Guelders ( Upper Quarter ) (since 1548) Hainaut Limburg Luxemburg (since 1548) Mechelen Namur County Burgundy 3 Cities Besançon 3 Dependent territories Breda 1 1 until 1648 ; 2 until 1659 ; 3 until 1678 .
Circles est. 1500: Bavarian , Swabian , Upper Rhenish , Lower Rhenish–Westphalian , Franconian , (Lower) Saxon Circles est. 1512: Austrian , Burgundian , Upper Saxon , Electoral Rhenish · Unencircled territories v t e Belgium articles History Gallia Belgica Prince-Bishopric of Liège Burgundian Netherlands Southern Netherlands Spanish Netherlands Austrian Netherlands Brabant Revolution United Kingdom of the Netherlands Long nineteenth century Belgian Revolution Crisis of 1870 Empire World War I invasion occupation World War II invasion occupation Royal Question Congo Crisis State reform Geography Climate Extreme points Lakes Mountains Rivers Subdivisions Politics Constitution Elections Executive Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Judiciary Military Monarchy Parliament Political parties Prime Minister Economy 2008–2009 financial crisis Banking Central bank Communications Energy Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Science and technology Society Abortion Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Honours Irreligion Languages Media People Prostitution Religion Culture Architecture Art Cinema Comics Cuisine Beer wine waffle Flag Literature Music Public holidays Sport Television World Heritage Sites Outline Index Category Portal v t e Netherlands articles Part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands History Germanic tribes Roman Era Frisii , Chamavi , Batavi , Cananefates Migration Period Saxons , Frisians , Franks Dorestad , Utrecht Development urban centers Frisian Kingdom Frankish Kingdom Middle Francia Lower Lorraine Flanders , Holland , Frisian Freedom Brabant , Guelders Holy Roman Empire Burgundian Netherlands Habsburg Netherlands Renaissance Seventeen Provinces Spanish Netherlands Eighty Years' War Dutch Republic Golden Age Batavian Revolution Batavian Republic Kingdom of Holland Incorporation Principality United Kingdom World War II Nazi invasion Dutch Liberation Day Proclamation of Indonesian Independence Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands Same-sex marriage Great Recession European debt crisis Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 Coronavirus pandemic Geography Birds Cities Delta Works Earthquakes Extreme points Flood control Gas field Islands Lakes Mammals Mountains and hills Regions Rivers Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta Volcanoes World Heritage Sites Zuiderzee Works Politics Abortion Cabinet Climate change Constitution Corruption Demographics Drug policy Education Elections Euthanasia Health care Homelessness Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Immigration Law Enforcement Law Firms Monarch Municipalities Provinces Republicanism Parliament Political parties Prime Minister Military Water boards Economy AEX index Central bank Energy Euronext Polder model Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Cycling Public transport Rail transport Road transport Culture Architecture Art Cannabis Cinema Cuisine Wine Customs and etiquette Decorations and medals Irreligion Languages Literature Media Music Orders of knighthood People Pornography Prostitution Public holidays Religion Sport Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag Lion Terminology Outline Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seventeen_Provinces&oldid=1305532257 " Categories : Seventeen Provinces Habsburg Netherlands Former states in the Low Countries Early modern history of Luxembourg Historical regions States of the Holy Roman Empire 1540s in the Habsburg Netherlands 1550s in the Habsburg Netherlands 1560s in the Habsburg Netherlands 1570s in the Habsburg Netherlands 1580s in the Habsburg Netherlands States and territories established in 1549 States and territories disestablished in 1581 1549 establishments in the Holy Roman Empire 1581 establishments in the Holy Roman Empire 16th-century establishments in the Habsburg Netherlands Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parameters Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seventeen Provinces 46 languages Add topic

