Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Role in neo-Aristotelian ontology 3 Role in truthmaker theory 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Grounding (metaphysics) 2 languages فارسی 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This page is currently being merged .

After a discussion , consensus to merge this page with Metaphysical grounding was found. You can help implement the merge by following the merging instructions and the resolution on the discussion .

Process started in July 2025 .

Dependence of one object's existence on the existence of something else Grounding is a topic in metaphysics . Consider an ordinary physical object , such as a table, and the atoms it is made of. Without the atoms, the table would not exist ; thus, the table's existence depends on the existence of the atoms. This kind of dependence is called "grounding" to distinguish it from other kinds of dependence, such as the dependence of an effect on its cause . It is sometimes called metaphysical or ontological dependence .

Grounding can be characterized as a relation between a ground and a grounded entity . The ground exists on a more fundamental level than the grounded entity, in the sense that the grounded entity depends for its existence or its properties on its ground. According to the neo-Aristotelian approach to ontology, the goal of ontology is to determine which entities are fundamental and how the non-fundamental entities depend on them.

Overview [ edit ] A distinction is typically made between grounding relations and other dependence relations, such as causation [ 1 ] or realization. Grounding is often considered to be a form of non-causal determination or priority.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] According to some in favor of the idea, things which are less fundamental are grounded in things that are more fundamental.

[ 4 ] In chess, for example, if the king is in checkmate, this situation holds because the king is in check and has no legal moves. The fact that the king is in checkmate depends on the fact that the king is in check and has no legal moves. In other words, the first fact is grounded in the second fact.

[ citation needed ] As another example, consider the property of being either even or prime. The number 4 has this property because it is even. Here "because" does not express a causal relation (where the cause precedes the effect in time). It expresses a grounding relation. The fact that the number 4 is even or prime is grounded in the fact that 4 is even. In other words, the first fact obtains in virtue of the second fact.

Role in neo-Aristotelian ontology [ edit ] According to the neo-Aristotelian approach to ontology , the goal of ontology is to determine which entities are fundamental and how the non-fundamental entities depend on them.

[ 5 ] Fundamentality can be expressed in terms of grounding. For example, according to Aristotle, substances have the highest degree of fundamentality because they exist in themselves. Properties, on the other hand, are less fundamental because they depend on substances for their existence.

[ 6 ] In this example, properties are grounded in substances.

[ citation needed ] Role in truthmaker theory [ edit ] The notion of grounding has been used to analyze the relation between truthmakers and truthbearers.

[ 7 ] The basic idea is that truthbearers (like beliefs, sentences or propositions) are not intrinsically true or false but that their truth depends on something else. For example, the belief that water freezes at 0 °C is true in virtue of the fact that water freezes at 0 °C. In this example, the freezing-fact is the truthmaker of the freezing-belief. Expressed in terms of grounding: the truth of the freezing-belief is grounded in the existence of the freezing-fact.

References [ edit ] ^ Bernstein, Sara (2016).

"Grounding Is Not Causation" .

Philosophical Perspectives .

30 (1): 21– 38.

doi : 10.1111/phpe.12074 .

ISSN 1520-8583 .

^ Audi, Paul; Journal of Philosophy Inc. (2012). "Grounding: Toward a Theory of the In-Virtue-Of Relation".

Journal of Philosophy .

109 (12): 685– 711.

doi : 10.5840/jphil20121091232 .

ISSN 0022-362X .

^ Metaphysical Grounding: Understanding the Structure of Reality . Correia, Fabrice, Schnieder, Benjamin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2012.

ISBN 978-1-139-77670-7 .

OCLC 815970142 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Chalmers, David J., 1966- Manley, David Jeffrey. Wasserman, Ryan. (2013).

Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations of Ontology . Clarendon Press. pp.

347– 383.

ISBN 978-0-19-954600-8 .

OCLC 1051732160 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jonathan Schaffer (2009).

"On What Grounds What Metametaphysics" (PDF) . In Chalmers; Manley; Wasserman (eds.).

Metametaphysics . Oxford University Press. pp.

347– 83.

ISBN 978-0199546046 .

^ Cohen, S. Marc (2020).

"Aristotle's Metaphysics" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Koons, Robert C.; Pickavance, Timothy (2017). "3 Grounding, Ontological Dependence, and Fundamentality".

The Atlas of Reality: A Comprehensive Guide to Metaphysics . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-119-11611-0 .

External links [ edit ] Bliss, Ricki; Trogdon, Kelly.

"Metaphysical Grounding" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Schaffer, Jonathan. " On What Grounds What ." In David Manley, David J. Chalmers & Ryan Wasserman (eds.), Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations of Ontology . Oxford University Press. pp. 347–383 (2009).

Grounding. Bibliography edited by Kelly Trogdon.

Metaphysical Grounding: Annotated Bibliography edited by Raul Corazzon.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grounding_(metaphysics)&oldid=1298928521 " Category : Concepts in metaphysics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Pages currently being merged Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Grounding (metaphysics) 2 languages Add topic

