Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Models and sustainability 2 United Kingdom 3 United States Toggle United States subsection 3.1 Technical process 3.2 Intersection with politics 3.3 Integration with urban planning 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 General 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Transportation planning 18 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Монгол 日本語 Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Transport planning ) This article is about transport planning. For transport engineering, see transport engineering .

The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( June 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 1948 San Francisco roadway plan which inspired the Freeway Revolt Process of planning for movement of people and goods Transportation planning is the process of defining future policies, goals, investments , and spatial planning designs to prepare for future needs to move people and goods to destinations. As practiced today, it is a collaborative process that incorporates the input of many stakeholders including various government agencies, the public and private businesses. Transportation planners apply a multi-modal and/or comprehensive approach to analyzing the wide range of alternatives and impacts on the transportation system to influence beneficial outcomes.

Transportation planning is also commonly referred to as transport planning internationally, and is involved with the evaluation, assessment, design, and siting of transport facilities (generally streets , highways , bike lanes , and public transport lines).

Models and sustainability [ edit ] See also: Sustainable transport Chicago Transit Authority Chicago 'L' trains use elevated tracks for a portion of the system, known as the Loop , which is in the Chicago Loop community area. It is an example of the siting of transportation facilities that results from transportation planning.

A bypass the Old Town in Szczecin , Poland Transportation planning, or transport planning, has historically followed the rational planning model of defining goals and objectives, identifying problems, generating alternatives, evaluating alternatives, and developing plans. Other models for planning include rational actor , transit oriented development , satisficing , incremental planning , organizational process , collaborative planning , and political bargaining .

Planners are increasingly expected to adopt a multidisciplinary approach, especially due to the rising importance of environmentalism . For example, the use of behavioural psychology to persuade drivers to abandon their automobiles and use public transport instead. The role of the transport planner is shifting from technical analysis to promoting sustainability through integrated transport policies .

[ 1 ] For example, in Hanoi , the increasing number of motorcycles is responsible for not only environmental damage but also slowing down economic growth. In the long run, the plan is to reduce traffic through a change in urban planning . Through economic incentives and attractive alternatives experts hope to lighten traffic in the short run.

[ 2 ] While quantitative methods of observing transport patterns are considered foundation in transport planning, the role of qualitative and mixed-methods analysis and the use of critical analytical frameworks [ 3 ] has increasingly been recognized as a key aspect of transport planning practice which integrates multiple planning criteria in generating, evaluating, and selection policy and project options.

United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom , transport planning has traditionally been a branch of civil engineering .

[ citation needed ] In the 1950s and the 1960s, it was generally believed that the motor car was an important element in the future of transport as economic growth spurred on car ownership figures. The role of the transport planner was to match motorway and rural road capacity against the demands of economic growth. Urban areas would need to be redesigned for the motor vehicle or impose traffic containment and demand management to mitigate congestion and environmental impacts. The policies were popularised in a 1963 government publication, Traffic in Towns . The contemporary Smeed Report on congestion pricing was initially promoted to manage demand but was deemed politically unacceptable. In more recent times, the approach has been caricatured as "predict and provide" to predict future transport demand and provide the network for it, usually by building more roads .

The publication of Planning Policy Guidance 13 in 1994 (revised in 2001), [ 4 ] followed by A New Deal for Transport [ 5 ] in 1998 and the white paper Transport Ten Year Plan 2000 [ 6 ] again indicated an acceptance that unrestrained growth in road traffic was neither desirable nor feasible. The worries were threefold: concerns about congestion , concerns about the effect of road traffic on the environment (both natural and built ) and concerns that an emphasis on road transport discriminates against vulnerable groups in society such as the poor , the elderly and the disabled .

These documents reiterated the emphasis on integration: integration within and between different modes of transport integration with the environment integration with land use planning integration with policies for education , health and wealth creation.

This attempt to reverse decades of underinvestment in the transport system has resulted in a severe shortage of transport planners. It was estimated in 2003 that 2,000 new planners would be required by 2010 to avoid jeopardizing the success of the Transport Ten Year Plan.

In 2006, the Transport Planning Society defined the key purpose of transport planning as: to plan, design, deliver, manage and review transport, balancing the needs of society, the economy and the environment.

[ 7 ] The following key roles must be performed by transport planners: take account of the social, economic and environmental context of their work understand the legal , regulatory policy and resource framework within which they work understand and create transport policies, strategies and plans that contribute to meeting social, economic and environmental needs design the necessary transport projects, systems and services understand the commercial aspects of operating transport systems and services know about and apply the relevant tools and techniques must be competent in all aspects of management, in particular communications, personal skills and project management .

[ 7 ] The UK Treasury recognises and has published guidance on the systematic tendency for project appraisers to be overly optimistic in their initial estimates.

[ 8 ] United States [ edit ] A Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) map of the planned route of a parkway. During the 1930s, the CCC was actively involved in creating and improving roads throughout rural areas and parks Transportation planning in the United States is in the midst of a shift similar to that taking place in the United Kingdom, away from the single goal of moving vehicular traffic and towards an approach that takes into consideration the communities and lands through which streets, roads, and highways pass ("the context"). More so, it places a greater emphasis on passenger rail networks, which had been neglected until recently. This new approach, known as Context Sensitive Solutions (CSS), seeks to balance the need to move people efficiently and safely with other desirable outcomes, including historic preservation , environmental sustainability , and the creation of vital public spaces .

The initial guiding principles of CSS came out of the 1998 "Thinking Beyond the Pavement" conference [ 9 ] as a means to describe and foster transportation projects that preserve and enhance the natural and built environments, as well as the economic and social assets of the neighborhoods they pass through. CSS principles have since been adopted as guidelines for highway design in federal legislation.

[ 10 ] Also, in 2003, the Federal Highway Administration announced that under one of its three Vital Few Objectives (Environmental Stewardship and Streamlining) they set the target of achieving CSS integration within all state Departments of Transportation by September 2007.

[ 11 ] In recent years, there has been a movement to provide "complete" transportation corridors under the " complete streets " movement. In response to auto-centric design of transportation networks, complete streets encompass all users and modes of transportation in a more equitable manner.

[ 12 ] The complete streets movement entails many of the CSS principles as well as pedestrian, bicycle and older adult movements to improve transportation in the United States.

[ 12 ] These recent pushes for changes to the profession of transportation planning has led to the development of a professional certification program by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, the Professional Transportation Planner in 2007. In response an advanced form of certification - the Advanced Specialty Certification in Transportation Planning was developed by the American Planning Association thereafter in 2011. The Certified Transportation Planner credential is only available for those professional planners (AICP members) who have at a minimum of eight years of transportation planning experience.

Technical process [ edit ] Most regional transport planners employ what is called the rational model of planning. The model views planning as a logical and technical process that uses the analysis of quantitative data to decide how to best invest resources in new and existing transport infrastructure.

[ 13 ] Since World War II, this attitude in planning has resulted in the widespread use of travel modelling as a key component of regional transport planning. The models' rise in popularity can also be attributed to a rapid increase in the number of automobiles on the road, widespread suburbanization and a large increase in federal or national government spending upon transport in urban areas. All of these phenomena dominated the planning culture in the late 1940s, 1950s and 1960s. Regional transport planning was needed because increasingly cities were not just cities anymore, but parts of a complex regional system.

[ 14 ] The US process, according to Johnston (2004) and the FHWA and Federal Transit Administration (FTA) (2007), generally follows a pattern which can be divided into three different stages. Over the course of each of three phases, the metropolitan planning organization (MPO) is also supposed to consider air quality and environmental issues, look at planning questions in a fiscally constrained way and involve the public. In the first stage, called preanalysis, the MPO considers what problems and issues the region faces and what goals and objectives it can set to help address those issues. During this phase the MPO also collects data on wide variety of regional characteristics, develops a set of different alternatives that will be explored as part of the planning process and creates a list of measurable outcomes that will be used to see whether goals and objectives have been achieved. Johnston notes that many MPOs perform weakly in this area, and though many of these activities seem like the "soft" aspects of planning that are not really necessary, they are absolutely essential to ensuring that the models used in second phase are accurate and complete .

[ 14 ] The second phase is technical analysis. The process involves much technical maneuvering, but basically the development of the models can be broken down as follows. Before beginning, the MPO collects enormous amounts of data. This data can be thought of as falling into two categories: data about the transport system and data about adjacent land use. The best MPOs are constantly collecting this data.

[ 14 ] The actual analysis tool used in the US is called the Urban Transportation Modeling System (UTMS), though it is often referred to as the four-step process . As its nickname suggestions, UTMS has four steps: trip generation, trip distribution , mode choice and trip/route assignment. In trip generation, the region is subdivided into a large number of smaller units of analysis called traffic analysis zones (TAZs). Based on the number and characteristics of the households in each zone, a certain number of trips is generated. In the second step, trip distribution, trips are separated out into categories based on their origin and purpose: generally, these categories are home-based work, home-based other and non-home based. In each of three categories, trips are matched to origin and destination zones using the data that has been collected.

In mode choice , trips are assigned to a mode (usually auto or transit) based on what's available in a particular zone, the characteristics of the household within that zone and the cost of the mode for each mode in terms of money and time. Since most trips by bicycle or walking are generally shorter, they are assumed to have stayed within one zone and are not included in the analysis. Finally, in route assignment, trips are assigned to the network. As particular parts of the network are assigned trips, the vehicle speed slows down, so some trips are assigned to alternate routes in such a way that all trip times are equal. This is important because the ultimate goal is system-wide optimization, not optimization for any one individual. The finished product is traffic flows and speeds for each link in the network.

[ 14 ] Ideally, these models would include all the different behaviours that are associated with transport, including complex policy questions which are more qualitative in nature. Because of the complexity of transport issues, this is often not possible in practice. This results in models which may estimate future traffic conditions well, but are ultimately based on assumptions made on the part of the planner. Some planners carry out additional sub-system modelling on things like automobile ownership, time of travel, location of land development, location and firms and location of households to help to fill these knowledge gaps, but what are created are nevertheless models, and models always include some level of uncertainty.

[ 14 ] The post-analysis phase involves plan evaluation, programme implementation and monitoring of the results. Johnston notes that for evaluation to be meaningful it should be as comprehensive as possible. For example, rather than just looking at decreases in congestion, MPOs  should consider economic, equity and environmental issues.

[ 14 ] Intersection with politics [ edit ] Although a transportation planning process may appear to be a rational process based on standard and objective methodologies, it is often influenced by political processes. Transportation planning is closely interrelated to the public nature of government works projects. As a result, transportation planners play both a technical and a coordinating role. Politicians often have vastly differing perspectives, goals and policy desires. Transportation planners help by providing information to decision makers, such as politicians, in a manner that produces beneficial outcomes. This role is similar to transportation engineers, who are often equally influenced by politics in the technical process of transportation engineering design.

Integration with urban planning [ edit ] Transport isochrone maps are a measure of accessibility which can be used by urban planners to evaluate sites.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] American Planning Association (U.S.) Bicycle transportation planning and engineering Congestion management agency Fossil fuel lobby Green transport hierarchy Pedestrian zone Low-emission zone List of planning journals Permeability (spatial and transport planning) Professional transportation planner (U.S.) Transportation engineering Strategic environmental assessment Transport planning professional (UK) Urban freight distribution References [ edit ] ^ Southern, A. (2006), Modern-day transport planners need to be both technically proficient and politically astute, Local Transport Today , no. 448, 27 July 2006.

^ Hans-Heinrich Bass, Than Trung Nguyen (April 2013).

"Imminent Gridlock" . dandc.eu.

^ McLeod, Sam; Schapper, Jake H.M.; Curtis, Carey; Graham, Giles (February 2019). "Conceptualizing freight generation for transport and land use planning: A review and synthesis of the literature".

Transport Policy .

74 : 24– 34.

doi : 10.1016/j.tranpol.2018.11.007 .

hdl : 20.500.11937/71069 .

S2CID 158794278 .

^ Department for Communities and Local Government (2001), Planning Policy Guidance 13 ^ Department for Transport (1998), A New Deal for Transport ^ Department for Transport (2000), Transport Ten Year Plan 2000 ^ a b Transport Planning Society (2006), Draft National Occupational Standards for Transport Plan Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Green Book supplementary guidance: optimism bias" . HM Treasury. 21 April 2013 . Retrieved 27 January 2014 .

^ State of Maryland (1998), Summary of Thinking Beyond the Pavement conference Archived 21 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ U.S. Senate (2005), Senate Report 109-053 - Safe, Accountable, Flexible, and Efficient Transportation Equity Act OF 2005 Archived 15 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Federal Highway Administration (2003) FHWA's Vital Few Goals — Environmental Stewardship and Streamlining Archived 30 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b "National Complete Streets Coalition" .

^ Levy, J. M. (2011). Contemporary Urban Planning. Boston: Longman.

^ a b c d e f Johnston, R. A. (2004). The Urban Transportation Planning Process. In S. Hansen, & G. Guliano (Eds.), The Geography of Urban Transportation (pp. 115–138). The Guilford Press.

^ "Planning for Town Centres; Practice guidance on need, impact and the sequential approach" (PDF) .

Department for Communities and Local Government . December 2009 . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

^ "Transport Assessment; Guidelines for Development Proposals in Northern Ireland" (PDF) .

Department for Regional Development . 9 November 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2012 . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

^ "Technical Guidance on Accessibility Planning in Local Transport Plans" (PDF) . Local Transport Planning Network. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2007 . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

^ Barker, Kate (December 2006).

"Barker Review of Land Use Planning" (PDF) . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

General [ edit ] Kemp, Roger L., Cities and Cars: A Handbook of Best Practices , McFarland and Co., Inc., Publishers, Jefferson, NC, USA, and London, England, UK, (2007). ( ISBN 978-0-7864-2919-6 ).

External links [ edit ] Spatial Decision Support Knowledge Portal v t e Urban transportation planning Forecasting Land use forecasting Transportation forecasting Trip generation Trip distribution Mode choice Route assignment Modes favoured Automotive city Bicycle friendly Green transport hierarchy Transit-oriented development Pedestrian village Modal measurements Automobile dependency Bicycle counter Cycling mobility Modal share Passengers per hour per direction Public transport accessibility level Traffic count Walkability v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐cwjfw
Cached time: 20250812025431
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.489 seconds
Real time usage: 0.639 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1734/1000000
Revision size: 22184/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 84745/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1870/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 63367/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.281/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6883923/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  494.520      1 -total
 30.74%  152.001      1 Template:Reflist
 23.31%  115.272      6 Template:Navbox
 21.58%  106.701      7 Template:Cite_web
 15.65%   77.406      1 Template:Transportation-planning
 10.80%   53.432      1 Template:About
  9.28%   45.889      1 Template:Globalize
  8.24%   40.727      1 Template:Ambox
  7.53%   37.255      1 Template:Land-use_planning
  6.81%   33.661      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:75472:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812025431 and revision id 1292832070. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transportation_planning&oldid=1292832070 " Categories : Transportation planning Urban planning Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with limited geographic scope from June 2009 Use dmy dates from January 2015 Use American English from January 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 02:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transportation planning 18 languages Add topic

