Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Light microscopy applications Toggle Light microscopy applications subsection 1.1 The light's path 1.2 Advantages and disadvantages 1.3 Use in computing 2 Transmission electron microscope applications Toggle Transmission electron microscope applications subsection 2.1 Conventional dark-field imaging 2.2 Weak-beam imaging 2.3 Low- and high-angle annular dark-field imaging 2.4 Digital dark-field analysis 3 See also 4 Footnotes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Dark-field microscopy 20 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Laboratory technique This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dark-field microscopy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Red blood cells as seen by dark-field microscopy Dark-field microscopy , also called dark-ground microscopy , describes microscopy methods, in both light and electron microscopy , which exclude the unscattered beam from the image. Consequently, the field around the specimen (i.e., where there is no specimen to scatter the beam) is generally dark.

In optical microscopes a darkfield condenser lens must be used, which directs a cone of light away from the objective lens. To maximize the scattered light-gathering power of the objective lens, oil immersion is used and the numerical aperture (NA) of the objective lens must be less than 1.0. Objective lenses with a higher NA can be used but only if they have an adjustable diaphragm, which reduces the NA. Often these objective lenses have a NA that is variable from 0.7 to 1.25.

[ 1 ] Light microscopy applications [ edit ] A cross-section of a nematode , photographed with an oil dark field condenser with a numerical aperture of 1.40 In optical microscopy , dark-field describes an illumination technique used to enhance the contrast in unstained samples . It works by illuminating the sample with light that will not be collected by the objective lens and thus will not form part of the image. This produces the classic appearance of a dark, almost black, background with bright objects on it.  Optical dark fields usually done with an condenser that features a central light-stop in front of the light source to prevent direct illumination of the focal plane, and at higher numerical apertures may require oil or water between the condenser and the specimen slide to provide an optimal refractive index .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The light's path [ edit ] Diagram illustrating the light path through a dark-field microscope The steps are illustrated in the figure where an inverted microscope is used.

Light enters the microscope for illumination of the sample.

A specially sized disc, the patch stop (see figure), blocks some light from the light source, leaving an outer ring of illumination. A wide phase annulus can also be reasonably substituted at low magnification.

The condenser lens focuses the light towards the sample.

The light enters the sample. Most is directly transmitted, while some is scattered from the sample.

The scattered light enters the objective lens, while the directly transmitted light simply misses the lens and is not collected due to a direct-illumination block (see figure).

Only the scattered light goes on to produce the image, while the directly transmitted light is omitted.

Advantages and disadvantages [ edit ] Dark-field microscopy produces an image with a dark background Operating principles of dark-field and phase-contrast microscopies Dark-field microscopy is a very simple yet effective technique and well suited for uses involving live and unstained biological samples, such as a smear from a tissue culture or individual, water-borne, single-celled organisms.

[ 4 ] Considering the simplicity of the setup, the quality of images obtained from this technique is impressive.

One limitation of dark-field microscopy is the low light levels seen in the final image. This means that the sample must be very strongly illuminated, which can cause damage to the sample.

Dark-field microscopy techniques are almost entirely free of halo or relief-style artifacts typical of differential interference contrast microscopy . This comes at the expense of sensitivity to phase information.

The interpretation of dark-field images must be done with great care, as common dark features of bright-field microscopy images may be invisible, and vice versa. In general the dark-field image lacks the low spatial frequencies associated with the bright-field image, making the image a high-passed version of the underlying structure.

While the dark-field image may first appear to be a negative of the bright-field image, different effects are visible in each. In bright-field microscopy, features are visible where either a shadow is cast on the surface by the incident light or a part of the surface is less reflective, possibly by the presence of pits or scratches. Raised features that are too smooth to cast shadows will not appear in bright-field images, but the light that reflects off the sides of the feature will be visible in the dark-field images.

Comparison of transillumination techniques used to generate contrast in a sample of tissue paper (1.559 μm/pixel when viewed at full resolution) Dark-field illumination, sample contrast comes from light scattered by the sample Bright-field illumination, sample contrast comes from attenuation of light in the sample Cross-polarized light illumination, sample contrast comes from rotation of polarized light through the sample Phase-contrast illumination, sample contrast comes from interference of different path lengths of light through the sample Use in computing [ edit ] Dark-field microscopy has recently been applied in computer mouse pointing devices to allow the mouse to work on transparent glass by imaging microscopic flaws and dust on the glass's surface.

Transmission electron microscope applications [ edit ] Main article: transmission electron microscopy Weak-beam DF of strain around nuclear track cores Dark-field studies in transmission electron microscopy play a role in the study of crystals and crystal defects, as well as in the imaging of individual atoms.

Conventional dark-field imaging [ edit ] Briefly, imaging [ 5 ] involves tilting the incident illumination until a diffracted, rather than the incident, beam passes through a small objective aperture in the objective lens back focal plane. Dark-field images, under these conditions, allow one to map the diffracted intensity coming from a single collection of diffracting planes as a function of projected position on the specimen and as a function of specimen tilt.

In single-crystal specimens, single-reflection dark-field images of a specimen tilted just off the Bragg condition allow one to "light up" only those lattice defects, like dislocations or precipitates, that bend a single set of lattice planes in their neighborhood. Analysis of intensities in such images may then be used to estimate the amount of that bending. In polycrystalline specimens, on the other hand, dark-field images serve to light up only that subset of crystals that are Bragg-reflecting at a given orientation.

Animation: dark-field imaging of crystals Digital dark-field simulation of 2 nm metal particles on a nano-cylinder This animation illustrates movement of an aperture (centered in the orange figure at left) over the power spectrum (a digital substitute for the back focal-plane's optical diffraction pattern) shown with the DC peak (or unscattered beam) below center. Only nanocrystals with projected periodicities that diffract into the aperture light up in the dark-field image at right. The aperture is moving by 1.25° increments around the ring associated with diffraction from gold 2.3 Å (111) lattice spacings.

Weak-beam imaging [ edit ] Main article: Weak-beam dark-field microscopy Digital dark-field image of internal twins Weak-beam imaging involves optics similar to conventional dark-field, but uses a diffracted beam harmonic rather than the diffracted beam itself. In this way, much higher resolution of strained regions around defects can be obtained.

Low- and high-angle annular dark-field imaging [ edit ] Annular dark-field imaging requires one to form images with electrons diffracted into an annular aperture centered on, but not including, the unscattered beam. For large scattering angles in a scanning transmission electron microscope , this is sometimes called Z -contrast imaging because of the enhanced scattering from high-atomic-number atoms.

Digital dark-field analysis [ edit ] This a mathematical technique intermediate between direct and reciprocal (Fourier-transform) space for exploring images with well-defined periodicities, like electron microscope lattice-fringe images. As with analog dark-field imaging in a transmission electron microscope, it allows one to "light up" those objects in the field of view where periodicities of interest reside. Unlike analog dark-field imaging it may also allow one to map the Fourier-phase of periodicities, and hence phase gradients, which provide quantitative information on vector lattice strain.

See also [ edit ] Annular dark-field imaging Light field microscopy Wavelets Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Nikon: Darkfield Illumination ^ Abramowitz, Mortimer; Davidson, Michael W.

"Specialized Microscopy Techniques - Darkfield Illumination" .

Microscopy Resource Center . Olympus LS . Retrieved 24 October 2024 .

^ Murray, R. G. E.; Robinow, Carl F. (30 April 2014).

"Light Microscopy" (PDF) . pp.

15– 16.

doi : 10.1128/9781555817497.ch1 .

ISBN 978-1-68367-161-9 . Retrieved 24 October 2024 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ; Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "Darkfield Illumination" .

evidentscientific.com . Retrieved 2025-01-10 .

^ P. Hirsch, A. Howie, R. Nicholson, D. W. Pashley and M. J. Whelan (1965/1977) Electron microscopy of thin crystals (Butterworths/Krieger, London/Malabar FL) ISBN 0-88275-376-2 .

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Dark-field microscopy Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dark-field microscopy .

Nikon - Stereomicroscopy > Darkfield Illumination Molecular Expressions Darkfield Illumination Primer Gage SH . 1920.

Modern dark-field microscopy and the history of its development .

Transactions of the American Microscopical Society 39(2):95–141.

Dark field and phase contrast microscopes (Université Paris Sud) v t e Optical microscopy Microscope Optical microscopy Illumination and contrast methods Bright-field microscopy Köhler illumination Dark-field microscopy Phase contrast Quantitative phase-contrast microscopy Differential interference contrast (DIC) Dispersion staining Second harmonic imaging (SHIM) 4Pi microscope Structured illumination Sarfus Interference reflection microscopy (IRM/RICM) Raman Fluorescence methods Fluorescence microscopy Confocal microscopy Multiphoton microscopy ( Two-photon , Three-photon ) Image deconvolution Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRF) Lightsheet microscopy (LSFM/SPIM) Lattice light-sheet microscopy Sub-diffraction limit techniques Diffraction limit Stimulated emission depletion (STED) Photo-activated localization microscopy (PALM/STORM) Near-field (NSOM/SNOM) Category Commons v t e Electron microscopy Basics Electron microscope History Micrograph Microscope Timeline of microscope technology Electron interaction with matter Auger effect Bremsstrahlung Electron diffraction Electron scattering Kikuchi lines Secondary electrons X-ray fluorescence Instrumentation Detectors for transmission electron microscopy Electron gun Everhart–Thornley detector Field electron emission Field emission gun Magnetic lens Stigmator Microscopes EM Cryo-EM EPMA Liquid-Phase EM Low-energy EM Photoemission EM SEM Environmental  SEM CryoSEM Confocal SEM SEM-XRF TEM Cryo-TEM Cryo-ET EFTEM HRTEM STEM 4D STEM Aberration-Corrected TEM Techniques 4D STEM Annular dark-field imaging Cathodoluminescence Charge contrast imaging CBED cryoEM Dark-field microscopy EDS EBSD TKD ECCI EELS EBIC Electron holography Electron tomography FIB FEM Immune electron microscopy Geometric phase analysis PINEM Precession electron diffraction Serial block-face scanning electron microscopy WDXS WBDF Others Developers Albert Crewe Bodo von Borries Dennis Gabor Ernst G. Bauer Ernst Ruska Gerasimos Danilatos Harald Rose James Hillier Manfred von Ardenne Max Knoll Maximilian Haider Nestor J. Zaluzec Ondrej Krivanek Thomas Eugene Everhart Vernon Ellis Cosslett Vladimir K. Zworykin Manufacturers FEI Company Hitachi High-Technologies JEOL Leica Nion Company TESCAN Thermo Fisher Scientific Zeiss Software CASINO CrysTBox EM Data Bank EMsoft Digital Micrograph Direct methods IUCr MTEX Multislice Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐ctqj2
Cached time: 20250812020645
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.382 seconds
Real time usage: 0.527 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1079/1000000
Revision size: 11930/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 65110/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 855/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 41370/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.237/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5605117/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  438.345      1 -total
 26.17%  114.734      1 Template:Reflist
 24.16%  105.888      4 Template:Navbox
 21.75%   95.360      1 Template:Optical_microscopy
 19.37%   84.908      2 Template:Cite_web
 15.56%   68.207      1 Template:Refimprove
 14.92%   65.404      1 Template:Short_description
 14.21%   62.270      1 Template:Ambox
  9.34%   40.961      2 Template:Side_box
  8.60%   37.714      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6302360:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020645 and revision id 1296488807. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dark-field_microscopy&oldid=1296488807 " Categories : Electron microscopy Optical microscopy techniques Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 errors: missing title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2017 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 09:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dark-field microscopy 20 languages Add topic

