Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Jivas 2.2 Moksha (liberation) 3 Avidya 4 Influence 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Dvaita Vedanta 22 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių മലയാളം Nederlands Português Русский संस्कृतम् Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of thought in Hinduism Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Part of a series on Vaishnavism Supreme deity Vishnu / Krishna / Rama Important deities Dashavatara Matsya Kurma Varaha Narasimha Vamana Parasurama Rama Balarama Krishna Buddha Kalki Other forms Dhanvantari Guruvayurappan Hayagriva Jagannath Mohini Nara-Narayana Prithu Shrinathji Venkateshvara Vithoba Consorts Lakshmi Bhumi Sita Radha Rukmini Alamelu Related Garuda Hanuman Shesha Shasta Holy scriptures Vedas Upanishads Vaikhanasa Pancharatra Bhagavad Gita Mahabharata Ramayana Harivamsa Divya Prabandha Gita Govinda Puranas Vishnu Bhagavata Naradiya Garuda Padma Agni Sampradayas Sri ( Vishishtadvaita , Akshar Purushottam Darshan ) Rudra ( Śuddhādvaita ) Kumara ( Dvaitadvaita ) Brahma ( Tattvavada or ( Dvaita )), Acintyabhedabheda ) Others Ekasarana Dharma Mahanubhava Pranami Radha Vallabha Ramsnehi Sant Mat Vaishnava-Sahajiya Warkari Teachers—acharyas Chaitanya Chakradhara Dadu Dayal Harivansh Jayatirtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvara Kabir Madhavdev Madhvacharya Manavala Mamunigal Namadeva Nammalvar Nathamuni Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Padmanabha Tirtha Pillai Lokacharya Purandara Dasa Raghuttama Tirtha Raghavendra Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ravidas Satyanatha Tirtha Satyabhinava Tirtha Satyabodha Tirtha Satyadharma Tirtha Satyadhyana Tirtha Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Swaminarayan Sripadaraja Tukaram Tulsidas Vallabha Vedanta Desika Vidyapati Vishnuswami Viṭṭhalanātha Vyasatirtha Vadiraja Tirtha Yamunacharya Sri Kantha Krishnamacharyulu Annamacharya Bhadrachala Ramadasu Related traditions Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Munitraya Krishnaism Jagannathism Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Gaudiya ISKCON Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Mahanam v t e Part of a series on Dvaita Saints Madhvacharya Padmanabha Tirtha Narahari Tirtha Akshobhya Tirtha Jayatirtha Sripadaraja Vyasatirtha Vadiraja Tirtha Raghuttama Tirtha Vijayindra Tirtha Sudhindra Tirtha Satyanatha Tirtha Raghavendra Tirtha Sumatindra Tirtha Haridasas Purandara Dasa Kanaka Dasa Vijaya Dasa Gopala Dasa Jagannatha Dasa Literature List of works by Madhvacharya List of works by Jayatirtha List of works by Vijayindra Tirtha List of works by Raghuttama Tirtha List of works by Vadiraja Tirtha List of works by Satyanatha Tirtha Mathas Ashta Mathas of Udupi Uttaradi Math Vyasaraja Math Raghavendra Matha Sripadaraja Matha Holy places Mantralayam Pajaka Udupi Tirupati Kumbakonam Nava Brindavana Hinduism portal v t e Madhvacharya , who propounded the philosophy of Dvaita Vedanta Dvaita Vedanta ( / ˈ d v aɪ t ə v eɪ ˈ d ɑː n t ə / ); (originally known as Tattvavada ; IAST : Tattvavāda ), is a sub-school in the Vedanta tradition of Hindu philosophy . The term Tattvavada literally means "arguments from a realist viewpoint". The Tattvavada (Dvaita) Vedanta sub-school was founded by the 13th-century Indian philosopher -saint Madhvacharya .

[ 1 ] Madhvacharya believed in three entities: God , jiva (soul), and jada ( maya , matter).

[ 2 ] The Dvaita Vedanta believes that God and the individual souls ( jīvātman ) exist as distinct realities, and these are dependent, being said that Vishnu (Narayana) is independent ( svatantra ), and Souls are dependent ( paratantra ) on him.

The Dvaita school contrasts with the other two major sub-schools of Vedanta, the Advaita Vedanta of Adi Shankara which posits nondualism —that ultimate reality ( Brahman ) and human soul ( Ātman ) are identical and all reality is interconnected oneness, and Vishishtadvaita of Ramanuja which posits qualified nondualism—that ultimate reality ( Brahman ) and human soul are different but with the potential to be identical.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Sanyasis of the Dvaita Vedanta tradition belong to the ēkadaṇḍi order.

[ 5 ] Etymology [ edit ] Dvaita (द्वैत) is a Sanskrit word that means "duality, dualism".

[ 6 ] The term refers to any premise, particularly in theology on the material and the divine, where two principles (truths) or realities are posited to exist simultaneously and independently.

[ 6 ] [ 1 ] . Madvacharya's "Dvaita" differs from dualism as generally understood. Whereas dualism generally is understood as two independent and equal entities — good and evil eternally fighting for supremacy, for Madhvacharya, duality lies in classification of the entire spectrum of reality into two parts: independent entity: Creator Benefactor and Destroyer of the Universe which is One the dependent reality: all else is dependent on Him Indologist B. N. Krishnamurti Sharma says: "The English term Dualism is inadequate to express the full content and depth of meaning that Madhva has put into the term Dvaita , as it is to be implied to his system. Even the Sanskrit word Dvaita is not literally capable of expressing more than the fundamental principles accepted.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] B. N. K. Sharma suggested the term Svatantra-Advitiya-Brahmavāda as an alternative name for Madhva's system, explaining that it emphasizes both the transcendence and immanence of Brahman, directly conveying what Madhva and his commentators like Jayatirtha often stress: the unique supremacy of God (the infinite) alongside the dependent reality of souls and matter (the finite). Sharma says, Satyadhyana Tirtha of Uttaradi Math approved this terminology and would be terminologically balanced with other Vēdantic systems like Nirviśeṣādvaita , śuddhādvaita , and Viśiṣṭādvaita .

[ 7 ] Quoting the term Advitīyatva , Sharma notes that Madhva, in his Chandogya Bhashya, interprets it as denoting the "absence of peer and superior" to Brahman. This interpretation implicitly affirms the existence of "lesser reals", individual souls and matters, subordinate to God's sovereignty. Sharma further states that verses like " नेह नानास्ति किंचना are understood as negating some internal distinctions ( nānātva ) in Brahman. The only internal distinctions that are logically conceivable in Brahman, are those of attributes. The adjunct Svatantra would thus serve to emphasize the transcendence of the supreme over the other reals and its immanence in them and show how the conception of Brahman, here, differs from the Nirviśeṣādvaita of Adi Shankara . It would also lay direct emphasis on the primacy of the supreme as the Para-Siddhanta of the Madhva's thought, and put the teachings about the finite in their proper place as constituting the Apara-Siddhānta (subsidiary truths)".

[ 7 ] Aluru Venkata Rao opines that the term Dvaita is not suitable for Madhva's philosophy, hence it should not be used.

[ 9 ] Instead, he suggests to use the term Pūrnabrahmavāda .

[ 10 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Vaishnavism Supreme deity Vishnu / Krishna / Rama Important deities Dashavatara Matsya Kurma Varaha Narasimha Vamana Parasurama Rama Balarama Krishna Buddha Kalki Other forms Dhanvantari Guruvayurappan Hayagriva Jagannath Mohini Nara-Narayana Prithu Shrinathji Venkateshvara Vithoba Consorts Lakshmi Bhumi Sita Radha Rukmini Alamelu Related Garuda Hanuman Shesha Shasta Holy scriptures Vedas Upanishads Vaikhanasa Pancharatra Bhagavad Gita Mahabharata Ramayana Harivamsa Divya Prabandha Gita Govinda Puranas Vishnu Bhagavata Naradiya Garuda Padma Agni Sampradayas Sri ( Vishishtadvaita , Akshar Purushottam Darshan ) Rudra ( Śuddhādvaita ) Kumara ( Dvaitadvaita ) Brahma ( Tattvavada or ( Dvaita )), Acintyabhedabheda ) Others Ekasarana Dharma Mahanubhava Pranami Radha Vallabha Ramsnehi Sant Mat Vaishnava-Sahajiya Warkari Teachers—acharyas Chaitanya Chakradhara Dadu Dayal Harivansh Jayatirtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvara Kabir Madhavdev Madhvacharya Manavala Mamunigal Namadeva Nammalvar Nathamuni Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Padmanabha Tirtha Pillai Lokacharya Purandara Dasa Raghuttama Tirtha Raghavendra Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ravidas Satyanatha Tirtha Satyabhinava Tirtha Satyabodha Tirtha Satyadharma Tirtha Satyadhyana Tirtha Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Swaminarayan Sripadaraja Tukaram Tulsidas Vallabha Vedanta Desika Vidyapati Vishnuswami Viṭṭhalanātha Vyasatirtha Vadiraja Tirtha Yamunacharya Sri Kantha Krishnamacharyulu Annamacharya Bhadrachala Ramadasu Related traditions Bhagavatism Vaikhanasas Pancharatra Tenkalai Vadakalai Munitraya Krishnaism Jagannathism Haridasa Sahajiya Baul Pushtimarg Gaudiya ISKCON Ramanandi Kapadi Balmiki Kabir panth Dadu panth Mahanam v t e Dvaita Vedanta is a dualistic interpretation of the Vedas systematized by the 13th-century Indian philosopher -saint Madhvacharya , which espouses dualism by theorizing the existence of two separate realities. The first and the only independent reality ( svatantra-tattva ), states the Dvaita school, is that of Vishnu as the ultimate reality ( Brahman ) and Supreme God .

[ 11 ] Vishnu is the supreme Self , in a manner similar to the monotheistic God in other major religions.

[ 12 ] He is believed to be almighty, eternal, [ 13 ] always existing, everlasting, all-knowing, and compassionate.

[ 14 ] The second reality is that of dependent ( asvatantra-tattva or paratantra ) but equally real universe that exists with its own separate essence. Everything that is composed of the second reality, such as individual soul, matter, and the like exist with their own separate reality. The distinguishing factor of this philosophy, as opposed to monistic Advaita Vedanta , is that God takes on a personal role and is seen as a real eternal entity that governs and controls the universe.

[ 15 ] Like Ramanuja , for Madhvacharya too, Vishnu is the One Independent Supreme principle. But this is not sectarian; For Madhva, words like "Narayana", "Vishnu", etc, when etymologically derived, give the meaning of transcendence, immanence, abode of infinite auspicious attributes,infinite bliss, etc.  Madhvacharya posits God as being personal and saguna , that is endowed with attributes and qualities (in human terms, which are not believed to be able to fully describe God).

[ 16 ] To Madhvacharya, the metaphysical concept of Brahman in the Vedas was Vishnu. He stated: " Brahmaśabdaśca Viṣṇaveva ", that Brahman can only refer to Vishnu . Scriptures which say different are declared as non-authoritative by him.

[ 17 ] For Madhvacharya, Vishnu was not just any other deva , but rather the one and only Supreme Being .

[ 18 ] [ 2 ] According to him, the devas are souls of deceased persons who were rewarded for good deeds by being reincarnated into the heavenly worlds and carrying out the will of God, [ 19 ] which would also be the case with Vayu and Lakshmi .

[ 20 ] He also believes that devas are mortal, and that some of them could sink into lower stages of existence after death.

[ 19 ] Therefore, he believes that only God (Vishnu) should be worshipped through devas, and that worshipping devas on their own behalf is an apostasy which emerged during Treta Yuga , and did not yet exist during Satya Yuga .

[ 21 ] According to him, this must also be noticed regarding murtis .

[ 22 ] .

The Reals This system admits of a two-fold classification of "Reals"- into the Independent and Dependent reality; the Independent Reality is One,  and is Vishnu. The dependent reality comprises all else- the jivas, the jadas and also the abhava padarthas.

The Brahman Brahman is Vishnu, He is Supreme, abode of auspicious attributes, free from blemishes, and Infinite in every sense of the term. There is no gradation of Brahman into Saguna and Nirguna; Nirguna is understood as being free from all kinds of imperfections and is itself a guna (attribute) of the Supreme.

Jivas [ edit ] The jivas are eternal and infinite in number. Therefore, for the jivas, Creation is the obtainment of visheshas- the bodies in successive births.

The individual souls ( jiva ) are depicted as reflections, images or shadows of the divine (bimba-pratibimba), but never in any way (even after moksha , or liberation) identical with the divine. Being a reflection of God, each jiva has a nature with some characteristics (truth, conscious, bliss) of God in varying degree which is under the influence of karma in bondage and expands to its distinct full intrinsic capacity in moksha . Liberated jivas do not attain equality with Brahman and also are not equal to each other.

[ 23 ] Jivas are qualitatively different from each other and have an intrinsic svabhava- nature that impels them into karma, good or evil.

Jadas The jadas are the other dependent reality is subject to the cycle of creation and dissolution.

Five fundamental, eternal and real differences are described in Dvaita school: [ 11 ] [ 2 ] [ 24 ] Between the individual souls (or jīvātman) and God (paramathma or Vishnu).

Between matter (inanimate, insentient) and God.

Between individual souls (jīvātman).

Between matter and jīvātman.

Between various types of matter.

The theory of five differences is that "the jiva is different from every other entity including all jivas ".

[ 23 ] These five differences are said to explain the nature of the universe. The world is called prapañca ( pañca "five") by the Dvaita school for this reason.

Madhva differed significantly from traditional Hindu beliefs owing to his concept of eternal damnation . According to him, there are three different classes of souls: One class, Mukti-yogyas , which would qualify for liberation , another, the Nitya-samsarins , which would be subject to eternal rebirth or eternal transmigration and a third class, Tamo-yogyas , which would be condemned to eternal hell ( Andhatamisra ).

[ 23 ] Moksha (liberation) [ edit ] Moksha (liberation) therefore is described as the realization that all finite reality is essentially dependent on the Supreme.

[ 11 ] God is believed to have shown the way to attain moksha through several avatars .

[ 13 ] Bhakti Yoga is an essential part of Dvaita Vedanta. By devotion to God and God's grace, jiva attains moksha . Moksha is the expression and manifestation of the innate bliss in the soul that has been all along covered by ajnana and bondage. While Divine Grace is a must for this, Mukti is not possible without jnana (Jnanenaiva paramam padam- Sri Madhvacharya in Anubhashya, a small metric composition on the Brahmasutras). However, the concept of jnana differs significantly from that of other schools; Jnana may be described as a direct knowledge and vision (aparokshajnana) of the indwelling form of the Lord through study of scriptures, righteous living spanning births and devotion to the Lord with full understanding of his transendental attributes. However, bad karma results in condemnation from God.

[ 15 ] Sadhana and Liberation According to Madhvacharya, the jiva is unaware of its real nature due to ignorance ( avidyā ) caused by maya , and thus, is unable to realize its expression of intrinsic attributes.

[ 23 ] Some jivas are predestined to attain moksha , while others are predestined to eternally suffer.

[ 25 ] . While this may seem cruel, it is actually a corollary of the three-fold classification of the svabhava or the intrinsic nature of the jivas.

Liberation for each jiva means realizing its innate bliss by removal of covering of maya . Liberation can only be achieved by the grace of God with self-effort on the part of the jiva . Practicing vairāgya allows Mukti-yogyas ( jivas qualified for liberation) to gain freedom from worldly attachments and develop faith in God. Self-effort which makes a jiva worthy for liberation involves karma (good work), Jnana Yoga (knowledge) and Bhakti Yoga (devotion).

S ādhaka performs such sadhana through śravaṇa , manana and nididhyasana . Madhva also placed a great importance on a Guru's guidance and blessings to understand the jnana from scriptures. According to Madhva, śravaṇa and manana are the only means for nidhiyasana. This sadhana leads the sadhaka to aparoksa-jnana (spiritual realisation) and liberation through grace of God.

[ 23 ] Thus the path to liberation consists of: Jnana, bhakti, jnana and bhakti again.

righteous living study of shastras and obtaining indirect knowledge of God, reflection and meditation on His infinite auspicious attributes and as benefactor of all of the Universe Love of God( paroksha jnana and bhakti) Direct vision of God (aparokshajnana) that cuts all karma except prarabhdha sadhana continues and at the end of the Brahma-kalpa, shedding of all coils including the last- the linga deha and entering Vaikunta.

Avidya [ edit ] Dvaita philosophers challenge the Advaita Vedanta view that ignorance explains the appearance of multiplicty in a singular, unchanging reality. Madhva questions the possibility of liberation if both the universe and ignorance are mere illusions connected to Brahman. Madhva further argues that there is no similarity between Brahman and the cosmos to justify such an illusion.

[ 26 ] Madhva questions the idea that avidya is unique to individual selves, arguing that if individuality itself is a misconception, then avidya must also inherently belong to Brahman. He also criticizes the idea of an unreal feature superimposed on Brahman by Advaitins to explain individual differences, seeing it as circular: if ignorance creates this feature, then ignorance must be part of Brahman, making differences and ignorance real, contradicting the foundational goal of liberation in Advaita philosophy.

[ 26 ] Influence [ edit ] Dvaita Vedanta and Madhvacharya 's historical influence in Hinduism, state Kulandran and Kraemer, has been salutary, but not extensive.

[ 27 ] According to Sharma, the influence of Dvaita Vedanta ideas have been most prominent on the Chaitanya school of Bengal Vaishnavism , [ 28 ] and in Assam .

[ 29 ] Madhva's theology influenced later scholars such as Nimbarka , Vallabha , and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu . B.N.K. Sharma notes that Nimbarka's theology is a loose réchauffé of Madhva's in its most essential aspects.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Madhvacharya Madhwa Brahmins Dvaita literature Madhavendra Puri Gaudiya Vaishnavism Achintya Bheda Abheda Brahma-Madhva-Gaudiya Sampradaya References [ edit ] ^ a b Jeaneane D. Fowler (2002).

Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism . Sussex Academic Press. pp.

340– 343.

ISBN 978-1-898723-94-3 .

^ a b c Stoker, Valerie (2011).

"Madhva (1238-1317)" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 29 February 2016 .

^ Jeaneane D. Fowler (2002).

Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism . Sussex Academic Press. pp.

238– 243, 288– 293, 340– 343.

ISBN 978-1-898723-94-3 .

^ James Lochtefeld (2002), The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Volume 1 & 2, Rosen Publishing, ISBN 0-8239-2287-1 , pages 12-13, 213-214, 758-759 ^ Sharma 2000 , p. 525.

^ a b Sir Monier Monier-Williams, Dvaita , A Sanskrit-English Dictionary: Etymologically and Philologically Arranged with Special Reference to Cognate Indo-European Languages, Oxford University Press (Reprinted: Motilal Banarsidass ), ISBN 978-8120831056 , page 507.

^ a b c Sharma 2000 , p. 5.

^ Chang 1991 , p. 36.

^ Shivnarayan Joshi Shivji (1 January 1992).

A Critique of Indian Dualism . Scientific Publishers.

ISBN 9788172330224 .

Alur Venkat Rao opines that the term Dvaita is not suitable for Madhva's philosophy, hence it should not be used.

^ Chen-chi Chang (1991).

A Treasury of Mahāyāna Sūtras: Selections from the Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 36.

ISBN 978-8120809369 .

Alur Venkatarao of Dharwar gave Madhva's philosophy the name "Pūrnabrahmavāda".

^ a b c Fowler 2002 , pp. 340–344.

^ Michael Myers (2000), Brahman: A Comparative Theology, Routledge, ISBN 978-0700712571 , pages 124-127 ^ a b Helmuth von Glasenapp : Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, Geistesströmungen des Ostens vol. 2, Bonn 1923, Einleitung (p. *1-2).

^ Glasenapp: Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, p. 32.

^ a b Etter 2006 , pp. 59–60.

^ Glasenapp: Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, p. 30–31.

^ Glasenapp: Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, p. 28–29.

^ Bryant, Edwin (2007).

Krishna : A Sourcebook (Chapter 15 by Deepak Sarma) . Oxford University Press. p. 358.

ISBN 978-0195148923 .

^ a b Glasenapp: Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, p. 67–68.

^ Glasenapp: Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, p. 75.

^ Glasenapp: Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, p. 71.

^ Glasenapp: Madhva's Philosophie des Vishnu-Glaubens, p. 85.

^ a b c d e Tapasyananda, Swami.

Bhakti Schools of Vedanta pg. 173-187.

^ James Lochtefeld (2002), Madhva, The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Vol. 1: A–M, Rosen Publishing.

ISBN 978-0823931798 , page 396 ^ Sarma, Deepak (2003).

An introduction to Mādhva Vedānta . Ashgate world philosophies series. Aldershot: Ashgate. p. 56.

ISBN 978-0-7546-0637-6 .

^ a b Bartley, C. J. (2011).

An introduction to Indian philosophy . London; New York: Continuum. pp.

191– 192.

ISBN 978-1-84706-448-6 .

^ Sabapathy Kulandran and Hendrik Kraemer (2004), Grace in Christianity and Hinduism, James Clarke, ISBN 978-0227172360 , pages 177-179 ^ Sharma 1962 , pp. 22–23.

^ Sharma 2000 , pp. xxxii–xxxiii, 514–516.

^ Sharma 2000 , p. 453.

Sources [ edit ] Etter, Christopher (2006).

A Study of Qualitative Non-Pluralism . iUniverse.

ISBN 978-0-595-39312-1 .

Fowler, Jeaneane D. (2002).

Perspectives of Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Hinduism . Sussex Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-898723-93-6 .

Sharma, B. N. Krishnamurti (1962).

Philosophy of Śrī Madhvācārya . Motilal Banarsidass (2014 Reprint).

ISBN 978-8120800687 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Sharma, B. N. Krishnamurti (2000).

A History of the Dvaita School of Vedānta and Its Literature, 3rd Edition . Motilal Banarsidass (2008 Reprint).

ISBN 978-8120815759 .

Chang, Chen-chi (1991), A Treasury of Mahāyāna Sūtras: Selections from the Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra , Motilal Banarsidass Publ., ISBN 9788120809369 External links [ edit ] Tatvavada v t e Hinduism topics Glossary Index Timeline Philosophy Concepts Brahman Om Ishvara Atman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Puruṣārthas Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Niti Ahimsa Asteya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Dāna Damah Dayā Akrodha Schools Āstika : Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Dvaita Advaita Vishishtadvaita Nāstika : Charvaka Texts Classification Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Aitareya Kaushitaki Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Maitrayaniya Shvetashvatara Chandogya Kena Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Natyaveda Sthapatyaveda Vedanga Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other Bhagavad Gita Agamas Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Minor Upanishads Arthashastra Nitisara Dharmaśāstra Manusmriti Nāradasmṛti Yājñavalkya Smṛti Sutras Stotras Subhashita Tantras Yoga Vasistha Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Sangam literature Tirumurai Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Thiruppugal Thirukkural Kamba Ramayanam Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abhirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Vedarthasamgraha Deities Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kartikeya Krishna Rama Surya Varuna Vayu more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Bhumi Durga Kali Mahavidya Matrika Radha Rukmini Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Practices Worship Temple Murti Puja Bhakti Japa Bhajan Naivedhya Yajna Homa Tapas Dhyāna Tirthatana Sanskaras Garbhadhana Pumsavana Simantonayana Jatakarma Namakarana Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyarambha Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyeshti Varnashrama Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Vaishya Shudra Ashrama Brahmacharya Grihastha Vanaprastha Sannyasa Festivals Diwali Holi Shivaratri Raksha Bandhan Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami Ganesh Chaturthi Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Pongal Makar Sankranti New Year Bihu Gudi Padwa Pahela Baishakh Puthandu Vaisakhi Vishu Ugadi Kumbh Mela Haridwar Nashik Prayag Ujjain Ratha Yatra Teej Vasant Panchami Others Other Svādhyāya Namaste Bindi Tilaka Related Hindus Etymology List Denominations Law Calendar Anti-Hindu sentiment Criticism Hindu gurus and sants Hindu studies Iconography Mythology Nationalism Hindutva Persecution Pilgrimage sites India Relations with other religions Baháʼí Buddhism Islam Jainism Judaism Sikhism Theosophy Glossary Hinduism by country Hindu temples List Architecture Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dvaita_Vedanta&oldid=1301655954 " Categories : Dualism in cosmology Dvaita Vedanta Vedanta Schools and traditions in ancient Indian philosophy Hindu philosophical concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from March 2015 Use dmy dates from March 2015 CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 01:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dvaita Vedanta 22 languages Add topic

