Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Background 3 Three-age system 4 Historiography 5 World history 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Periodization 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Latina Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Categorizing the past into named blocks of time For periodization in sport, see Sports periodization .

This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Human history ↑ Prehistory ( Stone Age ) ( Pleistocene epoch ) Holocene Timelines Neolithic – Contemporary ( 10,000 BCE – present ) Age of the human race Recorded history ( Common Era ) Earliest records Protohistory Proto-writing Ancient Copper Age Bronze Age Iron Age Axial Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Africa North America South America Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe Postclassical Timeline Africa Americas Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe Renaissance Modern Early modern Late modern Contemporary Africa North America South America Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe See also Age of Discovery Modernity Postmodernity Futurology Political history ↓ Future v t e In historiography , periodization is the process or study of categorizing the past into discrete, quantified, and named blocks of time for the purpose of study or analysis.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This is usually done to understand current and historical processes, and the causality that might have linked those events.

Periodizations can provide a convenient segmentation of time, wherein events within the period might consist of relatively similar characteristics. However, determining the precise beginning and ending of any 'period' is often arbitrary, since it has changed over time and over the course of history. Systems of periodization are more or less arbitrary, yet it provides a framework to help us understand them. Periodizing labels are continually challenged and redefined, but once established, period "brands" are so convenient that many are hard to change.

History [ edit ] The practice of dividing history into ages or periods is as early as the development of writing, and can be traced to the Sumerian 
 period . The Sumerian King List , dating to the second millennium BC —and for most parts it is not considered historically accurate—is "periodized" into dynastic regnal eras . The classical division into a Golden Age , Silver Age , Bronze Age , Heroic Age , and Iron Age goes back to Hesiod in the 8th – 7th century BC.

One Biblical periodization scheme commonly used in the Middle Ages was Saint Paul 's theological division of history into three ages: the first before the age of Moses (under nature); the second under Mosaic law (under law); the third in the age of Christ (under grace). But perhaps the most widely discussed periodization scheme of the Middle Ages was the Six Ages of the World , written by the early 5th century AD, [ 3 ] where every age was a thousand years counting from Adam to the present, with the present time (in the Middle Ages) being the sixth and final age.

Background [ edit ] Periodizing blocks might overlap, conflict or contradict one another. Some have a cultural usage (the " Gilded Age "), others refer to prominent historical events ('the Interwar period ), while others are defined by decimal numbering systems ('the 1960s', 'the 17th century'). Other periods are named from influential individuals (the ' Napoleonic Era ', the ' Victorian Era ', and the ' Porfiriato ').

Some of these usages will also be geographically specific. This is especially true of periodizing labels derived from individuals or ruling dynasties, such as the Jacksonian Era in America, the Meiji Era in Japan, or the Merovingian Period in France. Cultural terms may also have a limited reach. Thus the concept of the " Romantic period " is largely meaningless outside the Western world of Europe and European-influenced cultures. Likewise, 'the 1960s', though technically applicable to anywhere in the world according to Common Era numbering, has a certain set of specific cultural connotations in certain countries. For this reason, it may be possible to say such things as "The 1960s never occurred in Spain". This would mean that the sexual revolution , counterculture , youth rebellion and so on never developed during that decade in Spain's conservative Roman Catholic culture and under Francisco Franco 's authoritarian regime. The historian Arthur Marwick mentions that "the 1960s' began in the late 1950s and ended in the early 1970s". This was because the cultural and economic conditions that define the meaning of the period covers more than the accidental fact of a 10-year block beginning with the number 6. This extended usage is termed the 'long 1960s'. This usage derives from other historians who have adopted labels such as " the long 19th century " (1789–1914) to reconcile arbitrary decimal chronology with meaningful cultural and social phases.

Eric Hobsbawm has also argued for what he calls " the short twentieth century ", encompassing the period from the First World War through to the end of the Cold War .

Periodizing terms often have negative or positive connotations that may affect their usage. This includes Victorian , which often negatively suggests sexual repression and class conflict. Other labels such as Renaissance have strongly positive characteristics. As a result, these terms sometimes extend in meaning. Thus the English Renaissance is often used for a period largely identical to the Elizabethan Period or reign of Elizabeth I , and begins some 200 years later than the Italian Renaissance . However the Carolingian Renaissance is said to have occurred during the reign of the Frankish king Charlemagne , and his immediate successors, and the Macedonian Renaissance occurred in the Eastern Roman Empire . Other examples, neither of which constituted a "rebirth" in the sense of revival, are the American Renaissance of the 1820s–1860s, referring mainly to literature, and the Harlem Renaissance of the 1920s, referring mainly to literature but also to music and the visual arts.

Petrarch conceived of the idea of a European " Dark Age " which later evolved into the tripartite periodization of Western history into Ancient , Post-classical and Modern .

The conception of a 'rebirth' of Classical Latin learning is first credited to the Italian poet Petrarch (1304–1374), the father of Renaissance Humanism , but the conception of a rebirth has been in common use since Petrarch's time. The dominant usage of the word Renaissance refers to the cultural changes that occurred in Italy that culminated in the High Renaissance around 1500–1530. This concept applies dominantly to the visual arts, and the work of Michelangelo , Raphael , and Leonardo da Vinci . Secondarily it is applied to other arts, but it is questionable whether it is useful to describe a phase in economic, social and political history. Many professional historians now refer to the historical periods commonly known as the Renaissance and the Reformation as the start of the Early Modern Period , which extends much later. There is a gradual change in the courses taught and books published to correspond to the change in period nomenclature, which in part reflects differences between social history and cultural history . The new nomenclature suggests a broader geographical coverage and a growing attention to the relationships between Europe and the wider world.

The term Middle Ages also derives from Petrarch . He was comparing his own period to the Ancient or Classical world , seeing his time as a time of rebirth after a dark intermediate period, the Middle Ages. The idea that the Middle Ages was a middle phase between two other large scale periodizing concepts, Ancient and Modern, still persists. It can be subdivided into the Early , High and Late Middle Ages . The term Dark Ages is no longer in common use among modern scholars because of the difficulty of using it neutrally, though some writers have attempted to retain it and divest it of its negative connotations. The term "Middle Ages" and especially the adjective medieval can also have a negative ring in colloquial use, but does not carry over into academic terminology. However, other terms, such as Gothic architecture , used to refer to a style typical of the High Middle Ages have largely lost the negative connotations they initially had, acquiring new meanings over time (see Gothic architecture and Goth subculture ).

The Gothic and the Baroque were both named during subsequent stylistic periods when the preceding style was unpopular. The word "Gothic" was applied as a pejorative term to all things Northern European and, hence, barbarian, probably first by Giorgio Vasari . He coined the term "Gothic" in an effort to describe (particularly architecture) what he found objectionable. The word baroque —derived from similar words in Portuguese, Spanish, or French—literally refers to an irregular or misshapen pearl. Its first use outside the field of jewellery manufacture was in the early 18th century, as a criticism of music that was viewed as over-complicated and rough. Later, the term was also used to describe architecture and art.

[ 4 ] The Baroque period was first designated as such in the 19th century, and is generally considered to have begun around 1600 in all media.

Music history places the end of the period in the year 1750 with the death of J. S. Bach , while art historians consider the main period to have ended significantly earlier in most areas.

Three-age system [ edit ] Main article: Three-age system In archeology , the usual method for periodization of the distant prehistoric past is to rely on changes in material culture and technology, such as the Stone Age , Bronze Age and Iron Age and their sub-divisions also based on different styles of material remains. Despite the development over recent decades of the ability through radiocarbon dating and other scientific methods to give actual dates for many sites or artefacts, these long-established schemes seem likely to remain in use. In many cases neighbouring cultures with writing have left some history of cultures without it, which may be used. The system further underwent subdivisions, including the 1865 partitioning of the Stone Age into Palaeolithic , Mesolithic and Neolithic periods by John Lubbock .

[ 5 ] Historiography [ edit ] Main article: Historiography Some events or short periods of change have such a drastic effect on the cultures they affect that they form a natural break in history. These are often marked by the widespread use of both pre- and post- phrases centered on the event, as in pre-Reformation and post-Reformation , or pre-colonial and post-colonial . Both pre-war and post-war are still understood to refer to World War II , though at some future point the phrases will need to be altered to make that clear.

World history [ edit ] Example of periodizations in history Several major periods that English-speaking and Germanic historians may use are: Prehistory Ancient history Late antiquity Post-classical history Early modern period Modern history [ 6 ] (sometimes the nineteenth century and modern are combined) [ 6 ] Contemporary history In French and Romance-language historiography, the early modern period is labelled "modern" ( Spanish : edad moderna ) and the late modern and contemporary periods are grouped as "contemporary" ( Spanish : edad contemporánea ).

[ 7 ] Although post-classical is synonymous with the Middle Ages of Western Europe, the term post-classical is not necessarily a member of the traditional tripartite periodization of Western European history into 'classical', 'middle' and 'modern'.

Some popularized periodizations using the terms long or short by historians are: Long eighteenth century Long nineteenth century Short twentieth century See also [ edit ] List of time periods List of archaeological periods Regnal year Geological era Cosmological epoch Japanese era name Chronological dating Second Hundred Years' War References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Adam Rabinowitz. " It's about time: historical periodization and Linked Ancient World Data ". Institute for the Study of the Ancient World Papers, 2014.

Archived 17 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Definition of periodization" .

Dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 August 2022 .

^ Alexander, David C. (2008).

Augustine's Early Theology of the Church: Emergence and Implications, 386–391 . Peter Lang. p. 219.

ISBN 978-1-4331-0103-8 .

^ Pasiscla, Claude V., "Baroque" in Grove Music Online, Oxford Music Online. Accessed Feb 2014.

^ "John Lubbock's "Pre-Historic Times" is Published (1865)" . History of Information.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2017 . Retrieved 27 December 2016 .

^ a b Stearns, Peter N.

(2017). "Periodization in World History: Challenges and Opportunities". In R. Charles Weller (ed.).

21st-Century Narratives of World History: Global and Multidisciplinary Perspectives . Palgrave.

ISBN 978-3-319-62077-0 .

^ Martínez Carreras, José Urbano (1980).

"Historia del Mundo Contemporáneo : concepto, caracteres y periodización" (PDF) .

Revista de bachillerato (in Spanish) (14): 21.

hdl : 11162/72870 .

ISSN 0210-4687 . Retrieved 11 March 2025 .

[...] el concepto de Edad Contemporánea. Así el profesor JOVER (4) expone cómo este nuevo concepto historiográfico de origen francés se extendió fácilmente en la historiografía francesa y latina-y en este caso se encuentra la española-donde tuvo general aceptación, mientras que por el contrario encontró una clara resistencia a su adaptación por parte de la historiografía anglosajona y germana que no acabó por asimilar totalmente la noción de «contemporaneidad» tal como era formulada.

[[...] the concept of Contemporary Age. Thus professor Jover (4) explains how this new historiographic concept of French provenance spread easily in French and Romance historiography-including in this case the Spanish one-where it was generally accepted, while, contrarily it met clear resistance to its adaptation by a part of English-speaking and Germanic historiography, which did not quite assimilate the notion of "contemporararity" as it was formulated.] Sources [ edit ] Lawrence Besserman, ed., The Challenge of Periodization: Old Paradigms and New Perspectives , 1996, ISBN 0-8153-2103-1 . See Chapter 1 for an overview of the postmodernist position on periodization.

Bentley, J. H. 1996. Cross-Cultural Interaction and Periodization in World History.

American Historical Review (June): 749–770.

Grinin, L.

2007. Periodization of History: A theoretic-mathematical analysis. In: History & Mathematics Archived 6 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Moscow: KomKniga/URSS. pp. 10–38.

ISBN 978-5-484-01001-1 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Periodization at Wikiquote Media related to Periodization at Wikimedia Commons v t e Periodization Concepts Periodization Historiography Types of eras Golden Age Silver age Systems Six Ages of the World Three-age system Ages of Man Hesiod Ovid The General Crisis Lists of periods List of archaeological periods List of time periods Timeline of European exploration Historical ages Stone Age Iron Age Paleolithic Mesolithic Neolithic Chalcolithic Bronze Age Societies Indus Valley civilisation Periodization of ancient Egypt Capitalism pre-Columbian Peru Specific eras World history Ancient history Hellenistic period Middle Ages Renaissance Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment Early modern period Late modern period Victorian Era Age of Imperialism Industrial Revolution Postcolonial Age Industrial Age Information Age Calendar units Long eighteenth century Long nineteenth century The Sixties (20th century) Societal Belle Époque Gilded Age The General Crisis Interregnum (England) Arts and culture Classical era Beat Generation Modernism Postmodern era Related List of timelines Category Commons v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology v t e History of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e History of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e History of Europe Prehistory Paleolithic Europe Neolithic Europe Bronze Age Europe Iron Age Europe Classical antiquity Classical Greece Roman Republic Hellenistic period Roman Empire Early Christianity Christianity in late antiquity Crisis of the Third Century Fall of the Western Roman Empire Late antiquity Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Francia Anglo-Saxon England Byzantine Empire Papal States Bulgarian Empire First Second Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Viking Age Kievan Rus' Crown of Aragon ( Aragon , Catalonia , Valencia , Majorca ) Holy Roman Empire High Middle Ages Republic of Florence Feudalism Crusades Mongol invasion Serbian Empire Late Middle Ages Black Death Hundred Years' War Kalmar Union Modern period Renaissance Early modern Christianity in the modern era Reformation Age of Discovery Baroque Grand Duchy of Tuscany Thirty Years' War Absolute monarchy Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Early modern France Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic British Empire Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Age of Enlightenment Great Divergence Industrial Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic Wars Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 World War I Russian Revolution Interwar period World War II Cold War European integration Euro area crisis COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine See also Art of Europe Bibliography of European history Genetic history of Europe History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region History of the European Union History of Western civilization Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe Crusading movement v t e History of North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e History of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e History of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Authority control databases National Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Periodization&oldid=1296139475 " Categories : Periodization History by period Historical eras History of Europe by period Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from November 2024 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 02:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Periodization 37 languages Add topic

