Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Career 2 Thought 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 Philosophy 3.2 On reading 3.3 On politics 3.4 Encounters with Carl Schmitt and Alexandre Kojève 3.5 Liberalism and nihilism 3.6 Strauss's interpretation of Plato's Republic 3.7 Strauss and Karl Popper 3.8 Ancients and Moderns 3.9 Strauss and Zionism 3.10 Religious belief 4 Reception and legacy Toggle Reception and legacy subsection 4.1 Reception by contemporaries 4.2 The Straussian school 4.3 The Chinese Straussians 5 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 5.1 Conservatism 5.2 Anti-historicism 5.3 Response to criticism 6 Bibliography 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Strauss family 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Leo Strauss 37 languages Afrikaans العربية تۆرکجه Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Straussianism ) American political philosopher (1899–1973) Leo Strauss BVO Born ( 1899-09-20 ) 20 September 1899 Kirchhain , Regierungsbezirk Kassel , Province of Hesse-Nassau , Kingdom of Prussia , German Empire Died 18 October 1973 (1973-10-18) (aged 74) Annapolis , Maryland , U.S.

Spouse Miriam Bernsohn Strauss Awards Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Academic background Alma mater University of Marburg University of Hamburg University of Freiburg Columbia University Thesis On the Problem of Knowledge in the Philosophical Doctrine of F. H. Jacobi (1921) Doctoral advisor Ernst Cassirer Academic work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School or tradition Continental philosophy Neo-Kantianism (early) Modern Platonism (later) Straussian hermeneutics Notable students Stanley Rosen Main interests Metaphysics Epistemology History of philosophy (especially Greek , Islamic , Jewish and continental philosophy ) Philosophy of religion Political philosophy Notable works Persecution and the Art of Writing Thoughts on Machiavelli History of Political Philosophy Notable ideas List Noetic heterogeneity [ 1 ] The ends of politics and philosophy as irreducible to one another The unresolvable tension between reason and revelation Criticism of positivism , moral relativism , historicism , liberalism , and nihilism Ancient liberalism The distinction between esoteric and exoteric writing Reopening the quarrel of the ancients and the moderns Reductio ad Hitlerum Leo Strauss [ a ] (September 20, 1899 – October 18, 1973) was an American scholar of political philosophy . Born in Germany to Jewish parents, Strauss later emigrated to the United States . He spent much of his career as a professor of political science at the University of Chicago , where he taught several generations of students and published fifteen books.

Trained in the neo-Kantian tradition with Ernst Cassirer and immersed in the work of the phenomenologists Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger , Strauss authored books on Spinoza and Hobbes , and articles on Maimonides and Al-Farabi . In the late 1930s, his research focused on the texts of Plato and Aristotle , retracing their interpretation through medieval Islamic and Jewish philosophy , and encouraging the application of those ideas to contemporary political theory.

Biography [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Strauss was born on September 20, 1899, in the small town of Kirchhain in Hesse-Nassau , a province of the Kingdom of Prussia (part of the German Empire ), to Jennie Strauss, née David, and Hugo Strauss. According to Allan Bloom 's 1974 obituary in Political Theory , Strauss "was raised as an Orthodox Jew ", but the family does not appear to have completely embraced Orthodox practice.

[ 2 ] Strauss himself noted that he came from a "conservative, even orthodox Jewish home", but one which knew little about Judaism except strict adherence to ceremonial laws. His father and uncle operated a farm supply and livestock business that they inherited from their father, Meyer (1835–1919), a leading member of the local Jewish community.

[ 3 ] After attending the Kirchhain Volksschule and the Protestant Rektoratsschule, Leo Strauss was enrolled at the Gymnasium Philippinum (affiliated with the University of Marburg ) in nearby Marburg (from which Johannes Althusius and Carl Joachim Friedrich also graduated) in 1912, graduating in 1917. He boarded with the Marburg cantor Strauss (no relation), whose residence served as a meeting place for followers of the neo-Kantian philosopher Hermann Cohen . Strauss served in the German army during World War I from July 5, 1917, to December 1918.

Strauss subsequently enrolled in the University of Hamburg , where he received his doctorate in 1921; his thesis, On the Problem of Knowledge in the Philosophical Doctrine of F. H. Jacobi ( Das Erkenntnisproblem in der philosophischen Lehre Fr. H. Jacobis ), was supervised by Ernst Cassirer . He also attended courses at the Universities of Freiburg and Marburg, including some taught by Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger . Strauss joined a Jewish fraternity and worked for the German Zionist movement, which introduced him to various German Jewish intellectuals, such as Norbert Elias , Leo Löwenthal , Hannah Arendt and Walter Benjamin . Benjamin was and remained an admirer of Strauss and his work throughout his life.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Strauss's closest friend was Jacob Klein but he also was intellectually engaged with Gerhard Krüger —and also Karl Löwith , Julius Guttmann , Hans-Georg Gadamer , and Franz Rosenzweig (to whom Strauss dedicated his first book), as well as Gershom Scholem , Alexander Altmann , and the Arabist Paul Kraus , who married Strauss's sister Bettina (Strauss and his wife later adopted Paul and Bettina Kraus's child when both parents died in the Middle East ). With several of these friends, Strauss carried on vigorous epistolary exchanges later in life, many of which are published in the Gesammelte Schriften ( Collected Writings ), some in translation from the German. Strauss had also been engaged in a discourse with Carl Schmitt . However, after Strauss left Germany, he broke off the discourse when Schmitt failed to respond to his letters.

Career [ edit ] After receiving a Rockefeller Fellowship in 1932, Strauss left his position at the Higher Institute for Jewish Studies in Berlin for Paris . He returned to Germany only once, for a few short days twenty years later. In Paris, he married Marie (Miriam) Bernsohn, a widow with a young child, whom he had known previously in Germany. He adopted his wife's son, Thomas, and later his sister's child, Jenny Strauss Clay (later a professor of classics at the University of Virginia); he and Miriam had no biological children of their own. At his death, he was survived by Thomas, Jenny Strauss Clay, and three grandchildren. Strauss became a lifelong friend of Alexandre Kojève and was on friendly terms with Raymond Aron and Étienne Gilson . Because of the Nazis' rise to power, he chose not to return to his native country. Strauss found shelter, after some vicissitudes, in England, where, in 1935 he gained temporary employment at the University of Cambridge with the help of his in-law David Daube , who was affiliated with Gonville and Caius College . While in England, he became a close friend of R. H. Tawney and was on less friendly terms with Isaiah Berlin .

[ 7 ] The University of Chicago , the school with which Strauss is most closely associated Unable to find permanent employment in England, Strauss moved to the United States in 1937, under the patronage of Harold Laski , who made introductions and helped him obtain a brief lectureship. After a short stint as a research fellow in the Department of History at Columbia University , Strauss secured a position at The New School , where, between 1938 and 1948, he worked in the political science faculty and also took on adjunct jobs.

[ 8 ] In 1939, he served for a short term as a visiting professor at Hamilton College . He became a U.S. citizen in 1944, and in 1949 became a professor of political science at the University of Chicago , holding the Robert Maynard Hutchins Distinguished Service Professorship until he left in 1969.

In 1953, Strauss coined the phrase reductio ad Hitlerum , a play on reductio ad absurdum , suggesting that comparing an argument to one of Hitler 's, or "playing the Nazi card", is often a fallacy of irrelevance.

[ 9 ] In 1954, he met Karl Löwith and Hans-Georg Gadamer in Heidelberg and delivered a public speech on Socrates . He had received a call for a temporary lectureship in Hamburg in 1965 (which he declined for health reasons) and received and accepted an honorary doctorate from the University of Hamburg and the German Order of Merit via the German representative in Chicago. In 1969, Strauss moved to Claremont McKenna College (formerly Claremont Men's College) in California for a year, and then to St. John's College, Annapolis in 1970, where he was the Scott Buchanan Distinguished Scholar in Residence until his death from pneumonia in 1973.

[ 10 ] He was buried in Annapolis Hebrew Cemetery, with his wife Miriam Bernsohn Strauss, who died in 1985.

Psalm 114 was read in the funeral service at the request of family and friends.

[ 11 ] Thought [ edit ] Strauss's thought can be characterized by two main themes: the critique of modernity and the recovery of classical political philosophy. He argued that modernity, which emerged among the 15th century Italian city states particularly in the writings of Niccolò Machiavelli , was a radical break from the tradition of Western civilization , and that it led to a crisis of nihilism , relativism , historicism , and scientism . He claimed that modern political and social sciences, which were based on empirical observation and rational analysis, failed to grasp the essential questions of human nature, morality, and justice, and that they reduced human beings to mere objects of manipulation and calculation. He also criticized modern liberalism , which he saw as a product of modernity, for its lack of moral and spiritual foundations, and for its tendency to undermine the authority of religion, tradition, and natural law .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] To overcome the crisis of modernity, Strauss proposed a return to the classical political philosophy of the ancient Greeks and the medieval thinkers , who he believed had a deeper and more comprehensive understanding of human nature and society. He advocated a careful and respectful reading of the classical texts, arguing that their authors wrote in an esoteric manner, which he called " the art of writing ". He suggested that the classical authors hid their true teachings behind a surface layer of conventional opinions, in order to avoid persecution and to educate only the few who were capable of grasping them, and that they engaged in a dialogue with each other across the ages. Strauss called this dialogue " the great conversation ", and invited his readers to join it.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Strauss's interpretation of the classical political philosophy was influenced by his own Jewish background and his encounter with Islamic and Jewish medieval philosophy, especially the works of Al-Farabi and Maimonides . He argued that these philosophers, who lived under the rule of Islam , faced similar challenges as the ancient Greeks. He also claimed that these philosophers, who were both faithful to their revealed religions and loyal to the rational pursuit of philosophy, offered a model of how to reconcile reason and revelation , philosophy and theology, Athens and Jerusalem.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Views [ edit ] Philosophy [ edit ] For Strauss, politics and philosophy were necessarily intertwined. He regarded the trial and death of Socrates as the moment when political philosophy came into existence. Strauss considered one of the most important moments in the history of philosophy Socrates' argument that philosophers could not study nature without considering their own human nature , [ 14 ] which, in the words of Aristotle , is that of "a political animal." [ 15 ] However, he also held that the ends of politics and philosophy were inherently irreconcilable and irreducible to one another.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Strauss distinguished "scholars" from "great thinkers," identifying himself as a scholar. He wrote that most self-described philosophers are in actuality scholars, cautious and methodical. Great thinkers, in contrast, boldly and creatively address big problems. Scholars deal with these problems only indirectly by reasoning about the great thinkers' differences.

[ 18 ] In Natural Right and History , Strauss begins with a critique of Max Weber 's epistemology , briefly engages the relativism of Martin Heidegger (who goes unnamed) and continues with a discussion of the evolution of natural rights via an analysis of the thought of Thomas Hobbes and John Locke . He concludes by critiquing Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Edmund Burke . At the heart of the book are excerpts from Plato , Aristotle , and Cicero . Much of his philosophy is a reaction to the works of Heidegger . Indeed, Strauss wrote that Heidegger's thinking must be understood and confronted before any complete formulation of modern political theory is possible, and this means that political thought has to engage with issues of ontology and the history of metaphysics.

[ 19 ] Strauss wrote that Friedrich Nietzsche was the first philosopher to properly understand historicism , an idea grounded in a general acceptance of Hegelian philosophy of history . Heidegger, in Strauss's view, sanitized and politicized Nietzsche, whereas Nietzsche believed "our own principles, including the belief in progress, will become as unconvincing and alien as all earlier principles (essences) had shown themselves to be" and "the only way out seems to be ... that one voluntarily choose life-giving delusion instead of deadly truth, that one fabricate a myth." [ 20 ] Heidegger believed that the tragic nihilism of Nietzsche was itself a "myth" guided by a defective Western conception of Being that Heidegger traced to Plato. In his published correspondence with Alexandre Kojève , Strauss wrote that Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel was correct when he postulated that an end of history implies an end to philosophy as understood by classical political philosophy.

[ 21 ] On reading [ edit ] Strauss's study of philosophy and political discourses produced by the Islamic civilization —especially those of Al-Farabi (shown here) and Maimonides —was instrumental in the development of his theory of reading.

In the late 1930s, Strauss called for the first time for a reconsideration of the "distinction between exoteric (or public) and esoteric (or secret) teaching." [ 22 ] In 1952 he published Persecution and the Art of Writing , arguing that serious writers write esoterically, that is, with multiple or layered meanings, often disguised within irony or paradox, obscure references, even deliberate self-contradiction. Esoteric writing serves several purposes: protecting the philosopher from the retribution of the regime, and protecting the regime from the corrosion of philosophy; it attracts the right kind of reader and repels the wrong kind; and ferreting out the interior message is in itself an exercise of philosophic reasoning.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Taking his bearings from his study of Maimonides and Al-Farabi , and pointing further back to Plato's discussion of writing as contained in the Phaedrus , Strauss proposed that the classical and medieval art of esoteric writing is the proper medium for philosophic learning: rather than displaying philosophers' thoughts superficially, classical and medieval philosophical texts guide their readers in thinking and learning independently of imparted knowledge. Thus, Strauss agrees with the Socrates of the Phaedrus , where the Greek indicates that, insofar as writing does not respond when questioned, good writing provokes questions in the reader—questions that orient the reader towards an understanding of problems the author thought about with utmost seriousness. Strauss thus, in Persecution and the Art of Writing , presents Maimonides "as a closet nonbeliever obfuscating his message for political reasons".

[ 26 ] Strauss's hermeneutical argument [ 27 ] —rearticulated throughout his subsequent writings (most notably in The City and Man [1964])—is that, before the 19th century, Western scholars commonly understood that philosophical writing is not at home in any polity, no matter how liberal. Insofar as it questions conventional wisdom at its roots, philosophy must guard itself especially against those readers who believe themselves authoritative, wise, and liberal defenders of the status quo. In questioning established opinions, or in investigating the principles of morality, philosophers of old found it necessary to convey their messages in an oblique manner. Their "art of writing" was the art of esoteric communication. This was especially apparent in medieval times when heterodox political thinkers wrote under the threat of the Inquisition or comparably obtuse tribunals.

Strauss's argument is not that the medieval writers he studies reserved one exoteric meaning for the many ( hoi polloi ) and an esoteric, hidden one for the few (hoi oligoi), but that, through rhetorical stratagems including self-contradiction and hyperboles, these writers succeeded in conveying their proper meaning at the tacit heart of their writings—a heart or message irreducible to "the letter" or historical dimension of texts.

Explicitly following Gotthold Ephraim Lessing 's lead, Strauss indicates that medieval political philosophers, no less than their ancient counterparts, carefully adapted their wording to the dominant moral views of their time, lest their writings be condemned as heretical or unjust, not by "the many" (who did not read), but by those "few" whom the many regarded as the most righteous guardians of morality. It was precisely these righteous personalities who would be most inclined to persecute/ostracize anyone who was in the business of exposing the noble or great lie upon which the authority of the few over the many stands or falls.

[ 28 ] On politics [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e According to Strauss, modern social science is flawed because it assumes the fact–value distinction , a concept which Strauss found dubious. He traced its roots in Enlightenment philosophy to Max Weber , a thinker whom Strauss described as a "serious and noble mind". Weber wanted to separate values from science but, according to Strauss, was really a derivative thinker, deeply influenced by Nietzsche's relativism .

[ 29 ] Strauss treated politics as something that could not be studied from afar. A political scientist examining politics with a value-free scientific eye, for Strauss, was self-deluded.

Positivism , the heir to both Auguste Comte and Max Weber in the quest to make purportedly value-free judgments, failed to justify its own existence, which would require a value judgment.

[ 30 ] While modern-era liberalism had stressed the pursuit of individual liberty as its highest goal, Strauss felt that there should be a greater interest in the problem of human excellence and political virtue. Through his writings, Strauss constantly raised the question of how, and to what extent, freedom and excellence can coexist. Strauss refused to make do with any simplistic or one-sided resolutions of the Socratic question: What is the good for the city and man?

[ 31 ] Encounters with Carl Schmitt and Alexandre Kojève [ edit ] Two significant political-philosophical dialogues Strauss had with living thinkers were those he held with Carl Schmitt and Alexandre Kojève . Schmitt, who would later become, for a short time, the chief jurist of Nazi Germany, was one of the first important German academics to review Strauss's early work positively. Schmitt's positive reference for, and approval of, Strauss's work on Hobbes was instrumental in winning Strauss the scholarship funding that allowed him to leave Germany.

[ 32 ] According to Heinrich Meier 's interpretation, Strauss's critique and clarifications of The Concept of the Political led Schmitt to make significant emendations in its second edition. Writing to Schmitt in 1932, Strauss summarised Schmitt's political theology that "because man is by nature evil, he, therefore, needs dominion . But dominion can be established, that is, men can be unified only in a unity against—against other men. Every association of men is necessarily a separation from other men ... the political thus understood is not the constitutive principle of the state, of order, but a condition of the state." [ 33 ] But Robert Howse argues that there is no clear evidence to support these claims and  that the relationship between them was merely professional.

[ 34 ] Strauss, however, directly opposed Schmitt's position. For Strauss, Schmitt and his return to Thomas Hobbes helpfully clarified the nature of our political existence and our modern self-understanding. Schmitt's position was therefore symptomatic of the modern-era liberal self-understanding. Strauss believed that such an analysis, as in Hobbes's time, served as a useful "preparatory action," revealing our contemporary orientation towards the eternal problems of politics (social existence). However, Strauss believed that Schmitt's reification of our modern self-understanding of the problem of politics into a political theology was not an adequate solution. Strauss instead advocated a return to a broader classical understanding of human nature and a tentative return to political philosophy, in the tradition of the ancient philosophers.

[ 35 ] With Kojève, Strauss had a close and lifelong philosophical friendship. They had first met as students in Berlin. The two thinkers shared boundless philosophical respect for each other. Kojève would later write that, without befriending Strauss, "I never would have known ... what philosophy is".

[ 36 ] The political-philosophical dispute between Kojève and Strauss centered on the role that philosophy should and can be allowed to play in politics.

Kojève, a senior civil servant in the French government, was instrumental in the creation of the European Economic Community . He argued that philosophers should have an active role in shaping political events. Strauss, on the contrary, believed that philosophers should play a role in politics only to the extent that they can ensure that philosophy, which he saw as mankind's highest activity, can be free from political intervention.

[ 37 ] Liberalism and nihilism [ edit ] Strauss argued that liberalism in its modern form (which is oriented toward universal freedom as opposed to "ancient liberalism" which is oriented toward human excellence ), contained within it an intrinsic tendency towards extreme relativism , which in turn led to two types of nihilism : [ 38 ] The first was a "brutal" nihilism, expressed in Nazi and Bolshevik regimes. In On Tyranny , he wrote that these ideologies , both descendants of Enlightenment thought, tried to destroy all traditions, history, ethics, and moral standards and replace them by force under which nature and mankind are subjugated and conquered.

[ 39 ] The second type—the "gentle" nihilism expressed in Western liberal democracies —was a kind of value-free aimlessness and a hedonistic "permissive egalitarianism ," which he saw as permeating the fabric of contemporary American society.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In the belief that 20th-century relativism, scientism , historicism , and nihilism were all implicated in the deterioration of modern society and philosophy, Strauss sought to uncover the philosophical pathways that had led to this situation. The resultant study led him to advocate a tentative return to classical political philosophy as a starting point for judging political action.

[ 42 ] Strauss's interpretation of Plato's Republic [ edit ] According to Strauss, the Republic by Plato is not "a blueprint for regime reform" (a play on words from Karl Popper 's The Open Society and Its Enemies , which attacks The Republic for being just that). Strauss quotes Cicero : " The Republic does not bring to light the best possible regime but rather the nature of political things—the nature of the city." [ 43 ] Strauss argued that the city-in-speech was unnatural, precisely because "it is rendered possible by the abstraction from eros ".

[ 44 ] Though skeptical of "progress," Strauss was equally skeptical about political agendas of "return"—that is, going backward instead of forward. In fact, he was consistently suspicious of anything claiming to be a solution to an old political or philosophical problem. He spoke of the danger in trying finally to resolve the debate between rationalism and traditionalism in politics. In particular, along with many in the pre-World War II German Right, he feared people trying to force a world state to come into being in the future, thinking that it would inevitably become a tyranny .

[ 45 ] Hence he kept his distance from the two totalitarianisms that he denounced in his century, both fascists and communists.

Strauss and Karl Popper [ edit ] Strauss rejected Karl Popper 's views as illogical. He agreed with a letter of response to his request of Eric Voegelin to look into the issue. In the response, Voegelin wrote that studying Popper's views was a waste of precious time, and "an annoyance". Specifically about The Open Society and Its Enemies and Popper's understanding of Plato's The Republic , after giving some examples, Voegelin wrote: Popper is philosophically so uncultured, so fully a primitive ideological brawler, that he is not able even approximately to reproduce correctly the contents of one page of Plato. Reading is of no use to him; he is too lacking in knowledge to understand what the author says.

[ 46 ] Strauss proceeded to show this letter to Kurt Riezler , who used his influence in order to oppose Popper's appointment at the University of Chicago .

[ 47 ] Ancients and Moderns [ edit ] Strauss constantly stressed the importance of two dichotomies in political philosophy, namely Athens and Jerusalem ( reason and revelation ) and Ancient versus Modern. The "Ancients" were the Socratic philosophers and their intellectual heirs; the "Moderns" start with Niccolò Machiavelli . The contrast between Ancients and Moderns was understood to be related to the unresolvable tension between Reason and Revelation. The Socratics, reacting to the first Greek philosophers, brought philosophy back to earth, and hence back to the marketplace, making it more political.

[ 48 ] The Moderns reacted to the dominance of revelation in medieval society by promoting the possibilities of Reason. They objected to Aquinas's merger of natural right and natural theology , for it made natural right vulnerable to sideshow theological disputes.

[ 49 ] Thomas Hobbes , under the influence of Francis Bacon , re-oriented political thought to what was most solid but also most low in man—his physical hopes and fears—setting a precedent for John Locke and the later economic approach to political thought, as in David Hume and Adam Smith .

[ 50 ] Strauss and Zionism [ edit ] As a youth, Strauss belonged to the German Zionist youth group, along with his friends Gershom Scholem and Walter Benjamin . Both were admirers of Strauss and would continue to be throughout their lives.

[ 51 ] When he was 17, as he said, he was "converted" to political Zionism as a follower of Ze'ev Jabotinsky . He wrote several essays about its controversies but left these activities behind by his early twenties.

[ 52 ] While Strauss maintained a sympathetic interest in Zionism, he later came to refer to Zionism as "problematic" and became disillusioned with some of its aims.

Strauss taught at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem during the 1954–55 academic year . In his letter to a National Review editor, Strauss asked why Israel had been called a racist state by one of their writers. He argued that the author did not provide enough proof for his argument. He ended his essay with this statement: "Political Zionism is problematic for obvious reasons. But I can never forget what it achieved as a moral force in an era of complete dissolution. It helped to stem the tide of 'progressive' leveling of venerable, ancestral differences; it fulfilled a conservative function." [ 53 ] Religious belief [ edit ] Although Strauss accepted the utility of religious belief, there is some question about his religious views. He was openly disdainful of atheism [ 54 ] [ better source needed ] and disapproved of contemporary dogmatic disbelief, which he considered intemperate and irrational.

[ 55 ] However, like Thomas Aquinas , he felt that revelation must be subject to examination by reason.

[ 56 ] At the end of The City and Man , Strauss invites us to "be open to ... the question quid sit deus ["What is God?"]" (p. 241).

Edward Feser writes that "Strauss was not himself an orthodox believer, neither was he a convinced atheist . Since whether or not to accept a purported divine revelation is itself one of the 'permanent' questions, orthodoxy must always remain an option equally as defensible as unbelief." [ 57 ] In Natural Right and History , Strauss distinguishes a Socratic (Platonic, Ciceronian, Aristotelian) from a conventionalist (materialistic, Epicurean) reading of divinity, and argues that "the question of religion" (what is religion?) is inseparable from the question of the nature of civil society and civil authority. Throughout the volume he argues for the Socratic reading of civil authority and rejects the conventionalist reading (of which atheism is an essential component).

[ 58 ] This is incompatible with interpretations by Shadia Drury and other scholars who argue that Strauss viewed religion purely instrumentally.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Reception and legacy [ edit ] Reception by contemporaries [ edit ] Strauss's works were read and admired by thinkers as diverse as the philosophers Gershom Scholem , Walter Benjamin , [ 51 ] Hans-Georg Gadamer , [ 61 ] and Alexandre Kojève , [ 61 ] and the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan .

[ 61 ] Benjamin had become acquainted with Strauss as a student in Berlin, and expressed admiration for Strauss throughout his life.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Gadamer stated that he 'largely agreed' with Strauss's interpretations.

[ 61 ] The Straussian school [ edit ] Straussianism is the name given "to denote the research methods, common concepts, theoretical presuppositions, central questions, and pedagogic style (teaching style [ 62 ] ) characteristic of the large number of conservatives who have been influenced by the thought and teaching of Leo Strauss".

[ 63 ] While it "is particularly influential among university professors of historical political theory ... it also sometimes serves as a common intellectual framework more generally among conservative activists, think tank professionals, and public intellectuals".

[ 63 ] Harvey C. Mansfield , Steven B. Smith and Steven Berg, though never students of Strauss, are "Straussians" (as some followers of Strauss identify themselves). Mansfield has argued that there is no such thing as "Straussianism" yet there are Straussians and a school of Straussians. Mansfield describes the school as "open to the whole of philosophy" and without any definite doctrines that one has to believe in order to belong to it.

[ 64 ] Within the discipline of political theory, the method calls for its practitioners to use "a 'close reading' of the 'Great Books' of political thought; they strive to understand a thinker 'as he understood himself'; they are unconcerned with questions about the historical context of, or historical influences on, a given author" [ 63 ] and strive to be open to the idea that they may find something timelessly true in a great book . The approach "resembles in important ways the old New Criticism in literary studies." [ 63 ] There is some controversy in the approach over what distinguishes a great book from lesser works. Great books are held to be written by authors/philosophers "of such sovereign critical self-knowledge and intellectual power that they can in no way be reduced to the general thought of their time and place," [ 63 ] with other works "understood as epiphenomenal to the original insights of a thinker of the first rank." [ 63 ] This approach is seen as a counter "to the historicist presuppositions of the mid-twentieth century, which read the history of political thought in a progressivist way, with past philosophies forever cut off from us in a superseded past." [ 63 ] Straussianism puts forward the possibility that past thinkers may have "hold of the truth —and that more recent thinkers are therefore wrong." [ 63 ] The Chinese Straussians [ edit ] Almost the entirety of Strauss's writings has been translated into Chinese. There even is a school of Straussians in China, the most prominent being Liu Xiaofeng (Renmin University) and Gan Yang . "Chinese Straussians" (who often are also fascinated by Carl Schmitt) represent an example of the hybridization of Western political theory in a non-Western context. As the editors of a recent volume write, "the reception of Schmitt and Strauss in the Chinese-speaking world (and especially in the People's Republic of China) not only says much about how Schmitt and Strauss can be read today, but also provides important clues about the deeper contradictions of Western modernity and the dilemmas of non-liberal societies in our increasingly contentious world." [ 65 ] Criticism [ edit ] Conservatism [ edit ] Some critics of Strauss have accused him of being elitist , illiberal and anti-democratic. Journalists such as Seymour Hersh have opined that Strauss endorsed noble lies , "myths used by political leaders seeking to maintain a cohesive society".

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In The City and Man , Strauss discusses the myths outlined in Plato's Republic that are required for all governments. These include a belief that the state's land belongs to it even though it may have been acquired illegitimately and that citizenship is rooted in something more than accidents of birth.

[ 68 ] Shadia Drury , in Leo Strauss and the American Right (1999), claimed that Strauss inculcated an elitist strain in American political leaders linked to imperialist militarism , neoconservatism and Christian fundamentalism . Drury argues that Strauss teaches that " perpetual deception of the citizens by those in power is critical because they need to be led , and they need strong rulers to tell them what's good for them". Nicholas Xenos similarly argues that Strauss was "an anti-democrat in a fundamental sense, a true reactionary ". Xenos says: "Strauss was somebody who wanted to go back to a previous, pre-liberal, pre- bourgeois era of blood and guts, of imperial domination, of authoritarian rule, of pure fascism ." [ 69 ] Anti-historicism [ edit ] Strauss has also been criticized by some conservatives . According to Claes G. Ryn , Strauss's anti-historicist thinking creates an artificial contrast between moral universality and "the conventional", "the ancestral", and "the historical". Strauss, Ryn argues, wrongly and reductively assumes that respect for tradition must undermine reason and universality. Contrary to Strauss's criticism of Edmund Burke, the historical sense may be indispensable to an adequate apprehension of universality. Strauss's abstract, ahistorical conception of natural right distorts genuine universality, Ryn contends. Strauss does not consider the possibility that real universality becomes known to human beings in a concretized, particular form. Strauss and the Straussians have paradoxically taught philosophically unsuspecting American conservatives, not least Catholic intellectuals, to reject tradition in favor of ahistorical theorizing, a bias that flies in the face of the central Christian notion of the Incarnation, which represents a synthesis of the universal and the historical. According to Ryn, the propagation of a purely abstract idea of universality has contributed to the neoconservative advocacy of allegedly universal American principles, which neoconservatives see as justification for American intervention around the world—bringing the blessings of the "West" to the benighted "rest". Strauss's anti-historical thinking connects him and his followers with the French Jacobins , who also regarded tradition as incompatible with virtue and rationality.

[ 70 ] What Ryn calls the "new Jacobinism" of the "neoconservative" philosophy is, writes Paul Gottfried , also the rhetoric of Saint-Just and Leon Trotsky , which the philosophically impoverished American Right has taken over with mindless alacrity; Republican operators and think tanks apparently believe they can carry the electorate by appealing to yesterday's leftist clichés.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Response to criticism [ edit ] In his 2009 book Straussophobia , Peter Minowitz provides a detailed critique of Drury, Xenos, and other critics of Strauss whom he accuses of "bigotry and buffoonery".

[ 73 ] In Reading Leo Strauss , Steven B. Smith rejects the link between Strauss and neoconservative thought, arguing that Strauss was never personally active in politics, never endorsed imperialism, and questioned the utility of political philosophy for the practice of politics. In particular, Strauss argued that Plato's myth of the philosopher king should be read as a reductio ad absurdum , and that philosophers should understand politics not in order to influence policy but to ensure philosophy's autonomy from politics.

[ 74 ] In his review of Reading Leo Strauss , Robert Alter writes that Smith "persuasively sets the record straight on Strauss's political views and on what his writing is really about".

[ 75 ] Strauss's daughter, Jenny Strauss Clay , defended Strauss against the charge that he was the "mastermind behind the neoconservative ideologues who control United States foreign policy." "He was a conservative", she says, "insofar as he did not think change is necessarily change for the better." Since contemporary academia "leaned to the left", with its "unquestioned faith in progress and science combined with a queasiness regarding any kind of moral judgment", Strauss stood outside of the academic consensus. Had academia leaned to the right, he would have questioned it, too—and on certain occasions did question the tenets of the right.

[ 76 ] Mark Lilla has argued that the attribution to Strauss of neoconservative views contradicts a careful reading of Strauss' actual texts, in particular On Tyranny . Lilla summarizes Strauss as follows: Philosophy must always be aware of the dangers of tyranny, as a threat to both political decency and the philosophical life. It must understand enough about politics to defend its own autonomy, without falling into the error of thinking that philosophy can shape the political world according to its own lights.

[ 77 ] Responding to charges that Strauss's teachings fostered the neoconservative foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration, such as "unrealistic hopes for the spread of liberal democracy through military conquest", Nathan Tarcov, director of the Leo Strauss Center at the University of Chicago, asserts that Strauss as a political philosopher was essentially non-political. After an exegesis of the very limited practical political views to be gleaned from Strauss's writings, Tarcov concludes that "Strauss can remind us of the permanent problems, but we have only ourselves to blame for our faulty solutions to the problems of today." [ 78 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Books and articles Gesammelte Schriften . Ed.

Heinrich Meier . Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1996. Four vols. published to date: Vol. 1, Die Religionskritik Spinozas und zugehörige Schriften (rev. ed. 2001); vol. 2, Philosophie und Gesetz, Frühe Schriften (1997); Vol. 3, Hobbes' politische Wissenschaft und zugehörige Schrifte – Briefe (2001); Vol. 4, Politische Philosophie. Studien zum theologisch-politischen Problem (2010). The full series will also include Vol. 5, Über Tyrannis (2013) and Vol. 6, Gedanken über Machiavelli. Deutsche Erstübersetzung (2014).

Leo Strauss: The Early Writings (1921–1932) . (Trans. from parts of Gesammelte Schriften ). Trans. Michael Zank. Albany: SUNY Press, 2002.

Die Religionskritik Spinozas als Grundlage seiner Bibelwissenschaft: Untersuchungen zu Spinozas Theologisch-politischem Traktat . Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1930.

Spinoza's Critique of Religion . (English trans. by Elsa M. Sinclair of Die Religionskritik Spinozas , 1930.) With a new English preface and a trans. of Strauss's 1932 German essay on Carl Schmitt. New York: Schocken, 1965. Reissued without that essay, Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1997.

"Anmerkungen zu Carl Schmitt, Der Begriff des Politischen ".

Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik 67, no. 6 (August–September 1932): 732–49.

"Comments on Carl Schmitt's Begriff des Politischen ". (English trans. by Elsa M. Sinclair of "Anmerkungen zu Carl Schmitt", 1932.) 331–51 in Spinoza's Critique of Religion , 1965. Reprinted in Carl Schmitt, The Concept of the Political , ed. and trans. George Schwab. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers U Press, 1976.

"Notes on Carl Schmitt, The Concept of the Political ". (English trans. by J. Harvey Lomax of "Anmerkungen zu Carl Schmitt", 1932.) In Heinrich Meier, Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: The Hidden Dialogue , trans. J. Harvey Lomax. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995. Reprinted in Carl Schmitt, The Concept of the Political , ed. and trans. George Schwab. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1996, 2007.

Philosophie und Gesetz: Beiträge zum Verständnis Maimunis und seiner Vorläufer . Berlin: Schocken, 1935.

Philosophy and Law: Essays Toward the Understanding of Maimonides and His Predecessors . (English trans. by Fred Baumann of Philosophie und Gesetz , 1935.) Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1987.

Philosophy and Law: Contributions to the Understanding of Maimonides and His Predecessors . (English trans. with introd. by Eve Adler of Philosophie und Gesetz , 1935.) Albany: SUNY Press, 1995.

The Political Philosophy of Hobbes: Its Basis and Its Genesis . (English trans. by Elsa M. Sinclair from German manuscript.) Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1936. Reissued with new preface, Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1952.

Hobbes' politische Wissenschaft in ihrer Genesis . (1935 German original of The Political Philosophy of Hobbes , 1936.) Neuwied am Rhein: Hermann Luchterhand , 1965.

" The Spirit of Sparta or the Taste of Xenophon".

Social Research 6, no. 4 (Winter 1939): 502–36.

" On German Nihilism" (1999, originally a 1941 lecture), Interpretation 26, no. 3 edited by David Janssens and Daniel Tanguay.

" Farabi's Plato" American Academy for Jewish Research , Louis Ginzberg Jubilee Volume, 1945. 45 pp.

"On a New Interpretation of Plato's Political Philosophy".

Social Research 13, no. 3 (Fall 1946): 326–67.

" On the Intention of Rousseau" .

Social Research 14, no. 4 (Winter 1947): 455–87.

On Tyranny: An Interpretation of Xenophon's Hiero . Foreword by Alvin Johnson. New York: Political Science Classics, 1948. Reissued Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 1950.

De la tyrannie . (French trans. of On Tyranny , 1948, with "Restatement on Xenophon's Hiero " and Alexandre Kojève's "Tyranny and Wisdom".) Paris: Librairie Gallimard, 1954.

On Tyranny . (English edition of De la tyrannie , 1954.) Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1963.

On Tyranny . (Revised and expanded edition of On Tyranny , 1963.) Includes Strauss–Kojève correspondence. Ed. Victor Gourevitch and Michael S. Roth. New York: The Free Press, 1991.

" On Collingwood’s Philosophy of History ".

Review of Metaphysics 5, no. 4 (June 1952): 559–86.

Persecution and the Art of Writing . Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 1952.

Reissued Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1988 .

Natural Right and History . (Based on the 1949 Walgreen lectures.) Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1953. Reprinted with new preface, 1971.

ISBN 978-0-226-77694-1 .

" Existentialism " (1956), a public lecture on Martin Heidegger's thought, published in Interpretation , Spring 1995, Vol.22 No. 3: 303–18.

Seminar on Plato's Republic , ( 1957 Lecture ), ( 1961 Lecture ). University of Chicago.

Thoughts on Machiavelli . Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 1958 . Reissued Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1978.

What Is Political Philosophy? and Other Studies . Glencoe, Ill.: The Free Press, 1959. Reissued Chicago: U of Chicago Press, 1988.

On Plato's Symposium [1959]. Ed. Seth Benardete. (Edited transcript of 1959 lectures.) Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2001.

" 'Relativism'" . 135–57 in Helmut Schoeck and James W. Wiggins, eds., Relativism and the Study of Man . Princeton: D. Van Nostrand, 1961. Partial reprint, 13–26 in The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism , 1989.

History of Political Philosophy . Co-editor with Joseph Cropsey . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1963 (1st ed.) , 1972 (2nd ed.), 1987 (3rd ed.).

" The Crisis of Our Time" , 41–54, and " The Crisis of Political Philosophy ", 91–103, in Howard Spaeth, ed., The Predicament of Modern Politics . Detroit: U of Detroit P, 1964.

"Political Philosophy and the Crisis of Our Time". (Adaptation of the two essays in Howard Spaeth, ed., The Predicament of Modern Politics , 1964.) 217–42 in George J. Graham, Jr., and George W. Carey, eds., The Post-Behavioral Era: Perspectives on Political Science . New York: David McKay, 1972.

The City and Man . (Based on the 1962 Page-Barbour lectures.) Chicago: Rand McNally, 1964.

Socrates and Aristophanes . New York: Basic Books, 1966. Reissued Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1980.

Liberalism Ancient and Modern . New York: Basic Books, 1968. Reissued with foreword by Allan Bloom, 1989. Reissued Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995.

Xenophon's Socratic Discourse: An Interpretation of the Oeconomicus . Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1970.

Note on the Plan of Nietzsche's "Beyond Good & Evil" .  St. John's College, 1971.

Xenophon's Socrates . Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1972.

The Argument and the Action of Plato's Laws . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1975.

Political Philosophy: Six Essays by Leo Strauss . Ed. Hilail Gilden. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1975.

An Introduction to Political Philosophy: Ten Essays by Leo Strauss.

(Expanded version of Political Philosophy: Six Essays by Leo Strauss , 1975.) Ed. Hilail Gilden. Detroit: Wayne State UP, 1989.

Studies in Platonic Political Philosophy . Introd. by Thomas L. Pangle. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1983.

The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism: An Introduction to the Thought of Leo Strauss – Essays and Lectures by Leo Strauss . Ed. Thomas L. Pangle. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1989.

Faith and Political Philosophy: the Correspondence Between Leo Strauss and Eric Voegelin, 1934–1964 . Ed. Peter Emberley and Barry Cooper. Introd. by Thomas L. Pangle. University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State UP, 1993.

Hobbes's Critique of Religion and Related Writings . Ed. and trans. Gabriel Bartlett and Svetozar Minkov. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2011. (Trans. of materials first published in the Gesammelte Schriften , Vol. 3, including an unfinished manuscript by Leo Strauss of a book on Hobbes, written in 1933–1934, and some shorter related writings.) Leo Strauss on Moses Mendelssohn . Edited and translated by Martin D. Yaffe. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012. (Annotated translation of ten introductions written by Strauss to a multi-volume critical edition of Mendelssohn's work.) " Exoteric Teaching " (Critical Edition by Hannes Kerber). In Reorientation: Leo Strauss in the 1930s . Edited by Martin D. Yaffe and Richard S. Ruderman. New York: Palgrave, 2014, pp. 275–86.

"Lecture Notes for 'Persecution and the Art of Writing'" (Critical Edition by Hannes Kerber). In Reorientation: Leo Strauss in the 1930s . Edited by Martin D. Yaffe and Richard S. Ruderman. New York: Palgrave, 2014, pp. 293–304.

Leo Strauss on Nietzsche’s “Thus Spoke Zarathustra” . Edited by Richard L. Velkley. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017.

Leo Strauss on Political Philosophy: Responding to the Challenge of Positivism and Historicism . Edited by Catherine H. Zuckert. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018.

Leo Strauss on Hegel . Edited by Paul Franco. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019.

Writings about Maimonides and Jewish philosophy Spinoza's Critique of Religion (see above, 1930).

Philosophy and Law (see above, 1935).

"Quelques remarques sur la science politique de Maïmonide et de Farabi".

Revue des études juives 100 (1936): 1–37.

"Der Ort der Vorsehungslehre nach der Ansicht Maimunis".

Monatschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums 81 (1936): 448–56.

"The Literary Character of The Guide for the Perplexed" [1941]. 38–94 in Persecution and the Art of Writing . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1952.

[1944] "How to Study Medieval Philosophy" [.

Interpretation 23, no. 3 (Spring 1996): 319–338. Previously published, less annotations and fifth paragraph, as "How to Begin to Study Medieval Philosophy" in Pangle (ed.), The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism , 1989 (see above).

[1952].

Modern Judaism 1, no. 1 (May 1981): 17–45. Reprinted Chap. 1 (I–II) in Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity , 1997 (see below).

[1952].

Independent Journal of Philosophy 3 (1979), 111–18. Reprinted Chap. 1 (III) in Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity , 1997 (see below).

"Maimonides' Statement on Political Science".

Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Research 22 (1953): 115–30.

[1957].

L'Homme 21, n° 1 (janvier–mars 1981): 5–20. Reprinted Chap. 8 in Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity , 1997 (see below).

"How to Begin to Study The Guide of the Perplexed". In The Guide of the Perplexed, Volume One . Trans. Shlomo Pines. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1963.

[1965] "On the Plan of the Guide of the Perplexed" .

Harry Austryn Wolfson Jubilee . Volume (Jerusalem: American Academy for Jewish Research), pp. 775–91.

"Notes on Maimonides' Book of Knowledge". 269–83 in Studies in Mysticism and Religion Presented to G. G. Scholem . Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1967.

Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity: Essays and Lectures in Modern Jewish Thought . Ed. Kenneth Hart Green. Albany: SUNY P, 1997.

Leo Strauss on Maimonides: The Complete Writings . Edited by Kenneth Hart Green. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Neoconservatism , often referred to as inspired by the work of Strauss Lev Shestov Allan Bloom Seth Benardete Jacob Klein Notes [ edit ] ^ / s t r aʊ s / STROWSS ; German: [ˈleːoː ˈʃtʁaʊs] References [ edit ] ^ Kenneth L. Deutsch, John Albert Murley (eds.), Leo Strauss, the Straussians, and the American Regime , Rowman & Littlefield, 1999, p. 134.

^ Joachim Lüders and Ariane Wehner, Mittelhessen – eine Heimat für Juden? Das Schicksal der Familie Strauss aus Kirchhain (Central Hesse – a Homeland for Jews? The Fate of the Strauss Family from Kirchhain) 1989.

^ In "A Giving of Accounts", published in The College 22 (1) and later reprinted in Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity .

^ a b Jewish philosophy and the crisis of modernity (SUNY 1997), Leo Strauss as a Modern Jewish thinker , Kenneth Hart Green, Leo Strauss, page 55 ^ a b Scholem, Gershom. 1981. Walter Benjamin: The Story of a Friendship. Trans. Harry Zohn, p. 201 ^ a b The Correspondence of Walter Benjamin and Gershom Scholem, 1932–40 , New York 1989, pp. 155–58 ^ Leo Strauss And the Politics of Exile: The Making of a Political Philosopher p. 87 ^ Eugene Sheppard (2014).

Leo Strauss and the Politics of Exile: The Making of a Political Philosopher . Brandeis UP. pp.

102– 03.

ISBN 9781611687699 .

^ Leo Strauss, Natural Right and History . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965 [1953], p. 42.

^ Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity: Essays and Lectures in Modernity preface p. 6.

^ "Leo Strauss" .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-17 . Retrieved 2020-12-02 .

^ a b c Leora Batnitzky , Leo Strauss [ permanent dead link ] , the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 9 April 2021.

^ a b c Shadia Drury (1998).

Strauss, Leo (1899–1973) . In The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Taylor and Francis. Retrieved 30 Dec. 2023. doi:10.4324/9780415249126-S092-1 ^ Laurence Lampert, The Enduring Importance of Leo Strauss , University of Chicago Press, 2013, p. 126.

^ "From these things it is evident, that the city belongs among the things that exist by nature, and that man is by nature a political animal" (Aristotle, The Politics , 1253a1–3).

^ Steven B. Smith, Reading Leo Strauss: Politics, Philosophy, Judaism , University of Chicago Press, 2007, p. 13.

^ Pangle, Thomas L.

, Leo Strauss: An Introduction to His Thought and Intellectual Legacy . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2006, p. 51: "Classical political philosophy is not concerned to rule, but it is concerned to understand, political society—and to share its understanding, in a constructive fashion, with the various political societies and their citizens and rulers."

Cf. also his "Fundamental Tension" (ibid., p.54f) ^ Leo Strauss, "An Introduction to Heideggerian Existentialism," 27–46 in The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism, ed. Thomas L. Pangle (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1989) 29–30.

^ Velkley, Richard L. (2015).

Heidegger, Strauss, and the premises of philosophy : on original forgetting (Paperback 2015 ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 9780226214948 .

^ Leo Strauss, "Relativism", 13–26 in The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism , ed. Thomas L. Pangle (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 25.

^ Drury, S. B. (1987).

"Leo Strauss's Classic Natural Right Teaching" .

Political Theory .

15 (3): 299– 315.

doi : 10.1177/0090591787015003001 .

JSTOR 191204 .

S2CID 143546488 .

^ "Exoteric Teaching" (Critical Edition by Hannes Kerber). In Reorientation: Leo Strauss in the 1930s . Edited by Martin D. Yaffe and Richard S. Ruderman. New York: Palgrave, 2014, p. 275.

^ Smith, Steven (2007).

Reading Leo Strauss . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226763897 .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-09 . Retrieved 2006-09-20 .

excerpt entitled "Why Strauss, Why Now?" ^ Mansfield, Harvey (1975). "Strauss's Machiavelli".

Political Theory .

JSTOR 190834 .

... a book containing much that is appreciably esoteric to any reader stated in a manner either so elusive or so challenging as to cause him to give up trying to understand it.

^ Damon Linker (October 31, 2014).

"What if Leo Strauss was Right?" .

The Week .

Archived from the original on 2014-11-03 . Retrieved 2014-11-04 .

^ Michael Paley and Jacob J. Staub in Jewish Philosophy: Medieval and Modern , printed in The Schocken Guide to Jewish Books (1992) p. 215.

^ Winfried Schröder (ed.), Reading between the lines – Leo Strauss and the history of early modern philosophy , Walter de Gruyter, 2015, p. 39, "According to Robert Hunt, '[t]he Straussian hermeneutic ... sees the course of intellectual history as an ongoing conversation about important philosophical questions'." ^ Jew and Philosopher: The Return to Maimonides in the Jewish Thought of Leo Strauss p. 25 ^ Allan Bloom , "Leo Strauss", 235–55 in Giants and Dwarfs: Essays 1960–1990 (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1990) 238–39.

^ Faith and Political Philosophy: The Correspondence Between Leo Strauss and Eric Voegelin, 1934–1964 , p. 193 ^ Political Philosopher and Jewish Thinker , p. 3 ^ Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: the hidden dialogue , Heinrich Meier , University of Chicago Press 1995, 123 ^ Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: the hidden dialogue , Heinrich Meier, University of Chicago Press 1995, 125 ^ Howse, Robert. (2003). "The use and abuse of Leo Strauss in the Schmitt revival on the German right—The case of Heinrich Meier". University of Michigan Law School.

^ Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: the hidden dialogue , Heinrich Meier, University of Chicago Press 1995 ^ Lilla, Mark (2001), "Alexandre Kojève", The Reckless Mind. Intellectuals in Politics , New York: New York Review Books, p.

131 , ISBN 978-0-940322-76-9 .

^ Strauss, Leo, Gourevitch, Victor; Roth, Michael S. (eds.), On Tyranny ^ Thomas L. Pangle, "Epilogue", 907–38 in History of Political Philosophy , ed. Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987) 907–8.

^ Leo Strauss, On Tyranny (New York: Free Press, 1991) 22–23, 178.

^ Leo Strauss, "The Crisis of Our Time", 41–54 in Howard Spaeth, ed., The Predicament of Modern Politics (Detroit: University of Detroit Press, 1964) 47–48.

^ Leo Strauss, "What Is Political Philosophy?" 9–55 in Leo Strauss, What Is Political Philosophy? and Other Studies (Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1959) 18–19.

^ Leo Strauss, The City and Man (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1964) 10–11.

^ Leo Strauss, "Plato", 33–89 in History of Political Philosophy , ed. Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987) 68.

^ Leo Strauss, "Plato", 33–89 in History of Political Philosophy , ed. Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987) 60.

^ On Tyranny , p. 143 ^ Voegelin, Eric; Strauss, Leo (20 August 2004). "Letter 30: April 18, 1950". In Emberley, Peter; Cooper, Barry (eds.).

Faith and Political Philosophy: The Correspondence between Leo Strauss and Eric Voegelin, 1934-1964 . University of Missouri. p. 68.

ISBN 978-0826215512 .

^ Anonymous (2011-07-15).

"Strauss and Voegelin on Popper" .

Philosophy of Science . Archived from the original on 2013-07-28 . Retrieved 4 February 2019 .

^ Leo Strauss, the Straussians, and the American Regime by Kenneth Deutch (1999), p. 104 ^ Strauss, Leo, Natural Right and History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953) p. 164 ^ Adam Smith in His Time and Ours: Designing the Decent Society By Jerry Z. Müller ^ a b Jewish philosophy and the crisis of modernity (SUNY 1997), Leo Strauss as a Modern Jewish thinker , Kenneth Hart Green, Leo Strauss, p. 55 ^ Green, K. H. (editor), Strauss, Leo, Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity : Essays and Lectures in Modern Jewish Thought , 1997, State University of New York Press, p. 3 ^ Green, K. H. (editor), Strauss, L., Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity : Essays and Lectures in Modern Jewish Thought , 1997, State University of New York Press, pp. 413–14 ^ see his writings on Max Weber ^ Strauss felt that one should either be "the philosopher open to the challenge of theology or the theologian open to the challenge of philosophy." see Deutsch, Kenneth L. and Walter Nicgorski Leo Strauss: Political Philosopher and Jewish Thinker pp. 11–12, 1994 Rowman & Littlefield ^ but where Aquinas saw an amicable interplay between reason and revelation, Strauss saw two impregnable fortresses. per Schall S.J., James V.

A Latitude for Statesmanship: Strauss on St. Thomas in Leo Strauss: Political Philosopher and Jewish Thinker , ed. Kenneth L. Deutsch and Walter Nicgorski, pp. 212–15, 1994 Rowman & Littlefield. For an early treatment of Aquinas' understanding of the relation between philosophy and sacred, revealed law, see Strauss's early Philosophy and Law ( Philosophie und Gesetz ), where Christian medieval theology testifies to a less than amicable opposition between pagan (though not necessarily Platonic or political) philosophy and Biblical morality.

^ Feser, Edward, "Leo Strauss 101" (a review of Steven B. Smith's Reading Leo Strauss: Politics, Philosophy, Judaism ), National Review Online, May 22, 2006.

Archived November 15, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ See Natural Right and History , especially p. 119A and Chapter III: "The Origin of the Idea of Natural Right" ^ Shadia B. Drury, Leo Strauss and the American Right (Palgrave Macmillan; 1999) ^ Peter Minowitz, Straussophobia: Defending Leo Strauss and Straussians against Shadia Drury and Other Accusers (Lexington Books; 2009) ^ a b c d Approaches to Political Thought , edited by William L. Richter, (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 16 Mar 2009), p. 56 ^ "Definition of PEDAGOGIC" .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-22 . Retrieved 2020-12-26 .

^ a b c d e f g h Mark C. Henrie (May 5, 2011).

"Straussianism" . First Principles – ISI Web Journal. Archived from the original on December 21, 2018 . Retrieved November 24, 2014 .

^ "Transcript of Harvey Mansfield (IV)" .

conversationswithbillkristol.org .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 14 March 2018 .

^ Marchal, Kai (2017).

Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss in the Chinese-speaking World: Reorienting the Political . Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. p. 7.

ISBN 978-1498536264 .

.

^ Seymour M. Hersh , "Selective Intelligence" Archived 2014-07-17 at the Wayback Machine , The New Yorker , May 12, 2003. Retrieved June 1, 2007.

^ Brian Doherty, "Origin of the Specious: Why Do Neoconservatives Doubt Darwin?" Archived 2016-07-31 at the Wayback Machine , Reason Online , July 1997. Retrieved February 16, 2007.

^ The City and Man , p. 104 ^ Nicholas Xenos, "Leo Strauss and the Rhetoric of the War on Terror," Archived 2021-01-26 at the Wayback Machine Logosjournal.com ^ Claes G. Ryn, "Leo Strauss and History: The Philosopher as Conspirator", Humanitas , Vol. XVIII, Nos. 1 & 2 (2005).

^ Paul Gottfried, "Strauss and the Straussians" Archived 2015-06-18 at the Wayback Machine , LewRockwell.com , April 17, 2006. Retrieved February 16, 2007.

^ Cf. Paul Gottfried, "Paul Gottfried: Archives" Archived 2015-06-18 at the Wayback Machine , Lewrockwell.com . Retrieved February 16, 2007.

^ Peter Minowitz, Straussophobia: Defending Leo Strauss and Straussians against Shadia Drury and Other Accusers (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2009). Also see " Straussophobia: Six Questions for Peter Minowitz ," Harper's Magazine , 9/29/09 [1] Archived 2012-10-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ Steven B. Smith , excerpt from "Why Strauss, Why Now?" Archived 2020-11-09 at the Wayback Machine , 1–15 in Reading Leo Strauss: Politics, Philosophy, Judaism (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2006), online posting, press.uchicago.edu . Retrieved June 1, 2007.

^ Robert Alter , "Neocon or Not?" Archived 2017-08-26 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times Book Review , June 25, 2006, accessed February 16, 2007, citing Yale scholar Steven B. Smith , Reading Leo Strauss: Politics, Philosophy, Judaism (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2006).

^ Jenny Strauss Clay (June 7, 2003).

"The Real Leo Strauss" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 30, 2015 .

^ Mark Lilla, The Reckless Mind (New York: NY Review of Books, 2001) 133.

^ Nathan Tarcov, "Will the Real Leo Strauss Please Stand Up" in The American Interest September–October 1986, at "Will the Real Leo Strauss Please Stand Up? - Nathan Tarcov - the American Interest Magazine" . Archived from the original on 2010-11-30 . Retrieved 2009-06-28 .

Further reading [ edit ] Altman, William H. F., The German Stranger: Leo Strauss and National Socialism . Lexington Books, 2011 Andreacchio, Marco. " Philosophy and Religion in Leo Strauss : Critical Review of Menon's Interpretation ".

Interpretation: A Journal of Political Philosophy 46, no. 2 (Spring 2020): 383–98.

Behnegar, Nasser , Leo Strauss, Max Weber, And The Scientific Study Of Politics . University of Chicago Press, 2005.

Benardete, Seth.

Encounters and Reflections: Conversations with Seth Benardete . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2002.

Bloom, Allan. "Leo Strauss". 235–55 in Giants and Dwarfs: Essays 1960–1990 . New York: Simon and Schuster, 1990.

Bluhm, Harald.

Die Ordnung der Ordnung : das politische Philosophieren von Leo Strauss . Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 2002.

Brague, Rémi. "Leo Strauss and Maimonides". 93–114 in Leo Strauss's Thought . Ed. Alan Udoff. Boulder: Lynne Reiner, 1991.

Brittain, Christopher Craig. "Leo Strauss and Resourceful Odysseus: Rhetorical Violence and the Holy Middle".

Canadian Review of American Studies 38, no. 1 (2008): 147–63.

Bruell, Christopher. "A Return to Classical Political Philosophy and the Understanding of the American Founding".

Review of Politics 53, no. 1 (Winter 1991): 173–86.

Chivilò, Giampiero and Menon, Marco (eds). Tirannide e filosofia: Con un saggio di Leo Strauss ed un inedito di Gaston Fessard sj. Venezia: Edizioni Ca' Foscari, 2015.

ISBN 978-88-6969-032-7 .

Colen, Jose. Facts and values. London: Plusprint, 2012.

Deutsch, Kenneth L. and John A. Murley, eds.

Leo Strauss, the Straussians, and the American Regime . New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999.

ISBN 978-0-8476-8692-6 .

Drury, Shadia B.

Leo Strauss and the American Right.

London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999.

Drury, Shadia B.

The Political Ideas of Leo Strauss . New York: St. Martin's Press, 1988.

Gottfried, Paul.

Leo Strauss and the Conservative Movement in America: A Critical Appraisal (Cambridge University Press; 2011) Gourevitch, Victor. "Philosophy and Politics I–II".

Review of Metaphysics 22, nos. 1–2 (September–December 1968): 58–84, 281–328.

Green, Kenneth.

Jew and Philosopher: The Return to Maimonides in the Jewish Thought of Leo Strauss . Albany: SUNY Press, 1993.

"A Giving of Accounts: Jacob Kelin and Leo Strauss". In Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity: Essays and Lectures in Modern Jewish Thought . Ed. Kenneth H. Green. Albany: SUNY Press, 1997.

Havers, Grant N.

Leo Strauss and Anglo-American Democracy: A Conservative Critique . DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press, 2013.

Holmes, Stephen.

The Anatomy of Antiliberalism . Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1996.

ISBN 978-0-674-03185-2 .

Howse, Robert.

Leo Strauss, Man of Peace , Cambridge University Press, 2014] Ivry, Alfred L. "Leo Strauss on Maimonides". 75–91 in Leo Strauss's Thought . Ed. Alan Udoff. Boulder: Lynne Reiner, 1991.

Janssens, David.

Between Athens and Jerusalem. Philosophy, Prophecy, and Politics in Leo Strauss's Early Thought . Albany: SUNY Press, 2008.

Kartheininger, Markus. "Heterogenität. Politische Philosophie im Frühwerk von Leo Strauss". München: Fink, 2006.

ISBN 978-3-7705-4378-6 .

Kartheininger, Markus. "Aristokratisierung des Geistes". In: Kartheininger, Markus/ Hutter, Axel (ed.). "Bildung als Mittel und Selbstzweck". Freiburg: Alber, 2009, pp. 157–208.

ISBN 978-3-495-48393-0 .

Kerber, Hannes. "Strauss and Schleiermacher. An Introduction to 'Exoteric Teaching". In Reorientation: Leo Strauss in the 1930s . Ed. Yaffe/Ruderman. New York: Palgrave, 2014, pp. 203–14.

Kerber, Hannes.

"Leo Strauss on Exoteric Writing" .

Interpretation . 46, no. 1 (2019): 3–25.

Kinzel, Till.

Platonische Kulturkritik in Amerika. Studien zu Allan Blooms The Closing of the American Mind . Berlin: Duncker und Humblot, 2002.

Kochin, Michael S. "Morality, Nature, and Esotericism in Leo Strauss's Persecution and the Art of Writing ".

Review of Politics 64, no. 2 (Spring 2002): 261–83.

Lampert, Laurence.

Leo Strauss and Nietzsche . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1996.

Lutz, Mark J. “Living the Theologico-Political Problem: Leo Strauss on the Common Ground of Philosophy and Theology.” The European Legacy.

2018. Vol. 23. No. 8. pp. 1–25.

Macpherson, C. B. "Hobbes's Bourgeois Man". In Democratic Theory: Essays in Retrieval . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1972.

Major, Rafael (ed.).

Leo Strauss's Defense of the Philosophic Life: Reading "What is Political Philosophy?" . University of Chicago Press, 2013.

ISBN 978-0-226-92420-5 (cloth) Marchal, Kai, Shaw, Carl K.Y.

Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss in the Chinese-speaking World: Reorienting the Political . Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, 2017.

McAllister, Ted V.

Revolt Against Modernity: Leo Strauss, Eric Voegelin & the Search for Postliberal Order . Lawrence, KS: UP of Kansas. 1996.

McWilliams, Wilson Carey. "Leo Strauss and the Dignity of American Political Thought".

Review of Politics 60, no. 2 (Spring 1998): 231–46.

Meier, Heinrich.

Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: The Hidden Dialogue , Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995.

Meier, Heinrich. "Editor's Introduction[s]".

Gesammelte Schriften . Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1996. 3 vols.

Meier, Heinrich.

Leo Strauss and the Theologico-Political Problem . Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2006.

Meier, Heinrich. How Strauss Became Strauss". 363–82 in Enlightening Revolutions: Essays in Honor of Ralph Lerner . Ed. Svetozar Minkov. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2006.

Melzer, Arthur. "Esotericism and the Critique of Historicism".

American Political Science Review 100 (2006): 279–95.

Minowitz, Peter. "Machiavellianism Come of Age? Leo Strauss on Modernity and Economics".

The Political Science Reviewer 22 (1993): 157–97.

Minowitz, Peter.

Straussophobia: Defending Leo Strauss and Straussians against Shadia Drury and Other Accusers . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2009.

Momigliano, Arnaldo. "Hermeneutics and Classical Political Thought in Leo Strauss", 178–89 in Essays on Ancient and Modern Judaism . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1994.

Moyn, Samuel. "From experience to law: Leo Strauss and the Weimar crisis of the philosophy of religion." History of European Ideas 33, (2007): 174–94.

Neumann, Harry.

Liberalism . Durham, NC: Carolina Academic P, 1991.

Norton, Anne .

Leo Strauss and the Politics of American Empire . New Haven & London: Yale UP, 2004.

Pangle, Thomas L. "The Epistolary Dialogue Between Leo Strauss and Eric Voegelin".

Review of Politics 53, no. 1 (Winter 1991): 100–25.

Minowitz, Peter. "Leo Strauss's Perspective on Modern Politics".

Perspectives on Political Science 33, no. 4 (Fall 2004): 197–203.

Minowitz, Peter.

Leo Strauss: An Introduction to His Thought and Intellectual Legacy . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2006.

Pelluchon, Corine . Leo Strauss and the Crisis of Rationalism: Another Reason, Another Enlightenment, Robert Howse (tr.), SUNY Press, 2014.

Piccinini, Irene Abigail.

Una guida fedele. L'influenza di Hermann Cohen sul pensiero di Leo Strauss . Torino: Trauben, 2007.

ISBN 978-88-89909-31-7 .

Rosen, Stanley. "Hermeneutics as Politics". 87–140 in Hermeneutics as Politics, New York: Oxford UP, 1987.

Sheppard, Eugene R.

Leo Strauss and the Politics of Exile: The Making of a Political Philosopher . Waltham, MA: Brandeis UP, 2006.

ISBN 978-1-58465-600-5 .

Shorris, Earl. "Ignoble Liars: Leo Strauss, George Bush, and the Philosophy of Mass Deception".

Harper's Magazine 308, issue 1849 (June 2004): 65–71.

Smith, Steven B.

Reading Leo Strauss: Politics, Philosophy, Judaism . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2006.

ISBN 978-0-226-76402-3 . (Introd: "Why Strauss, Why Now?" , online posting, press.uchicago.edu .) Smith, Steven B. (editor).

The Cambridge Companion to Leo Strauss . Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-521-70399-4 .

Steiner, Stephan: Weimar in Amerika. Leo Strauss' Politische Philosophie, Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck 2013.

Strong, Tracy B. "Leo Strauss and the Demos," The European Legacy (October, 2012) Tanguay, Daniel.

Leo Strauss: une biographie intellectuelle . Paris, 2005.

ISBN 978-2-253-13067-3 .

Tarcov, Nathan. "On a Certain Critique of 'Straussianism' ".

Review of Politics 53, no. 1 (Winter 1991): 3–18.

Tarcov, Nathan. "Philosophy and History: Tradition and Interpretation in the Work of Leo Strauss".

Polity 16, no. 1 (Autumn 1983): 5–29.

Tarcov, Nathan and Thomas L. Pangle, "Epilogue: Leo Strauss and the History of Political Philosophy". 907–38 in History of Political Philosophy . Ed. Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey. 3rd ed. 1963; Chicago and London, U of Chicago P, 1987.

Tepper, Aryeh. "Progressive Minds, Conservative Politics: Leo Strauss' Later Writings on Maimonides." SUNY: 2013.

Thompson, Bradley C. (with Yaron Brook).

Neoconservatism. An Obituary for an Idea . Boulder/London: Paradigm Publishers, 2010. pp. 55–131.

ISBN 978-1-59451-831-7 .

Velkley, Richard.

Heidegger, Strauss, and the Premises of Philosophy: On Original Forgetting . University of Chicago Press, 2011.

West, Thomas G. "Jaffa Versus Mansfield: Does America Have a Constitutional or a "Declaration of Independence" Soul?" Perspectives on Political Science 31, no. 4 (Fall 2002): 35–46.

Xenos, Nicholas.

Cloaked in virtue: Unveiling Leo Strauss and the Rhetoric of American Foreign Policy . New York, Routledge Press, 2008.

Zuckert, Catherine H.

Postmodern Platos . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1996.

Zuckert, Catherine H., and Michael Zuckert.

The Truth about Leo Strauss . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2006.

Robertson, Neil G. (June 2021).

Leo Strauss: An Introduction . Key Contemporary Thinkers. Cambridge: Polity Press.

ISBN 9781509516315 .

Strauss family [ edit ] Lüders, Joachim and Ariane Wehner.

Mittelhessen – eine Heimat für Juden? Das Schicksal der Familie Strauss aus Kirchhain . Marburg: Gymnasium Philippinum, 1989. (In German; English translation: Central Hesse – a Homeland for Jews? The Fate of the Strauss Family from Kirchhain .) External links [ edit ] Leo Strauss at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Library resources about Leo Strauss Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Leo Strauss Resources in your library Resources in other libraries The Leo Strauss Center The Leo Strauss Foundation Guide to the Leo Strauss Papers circa 1930–1997 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center Works by or about Leo Strauss at the Internet Archive Leora Batnitzky.

"Leo Strauss" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Leo Strauss Books Persecution and the Art of Writing (1952) Thoughts on Machiavelli (1958) History of Political Philosophy (1963) Miscellaneous Heidegger, Strauss, and the Premises of Philosophy Reductio ad Hitlerum Links to related articles v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ghlgg
Cached time: 20250818054106
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.250 seconds
Real time usage: 1.533 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8286/1000000
Revision size: 88789/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 360692/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 85056/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 199574/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.696/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23917854/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1131.104      1 -total
 17.71%  200.372      1 Template:Infobox_academic
 17.63%  199.429      2 Template:Reflist
 13.48%  152.529      1 Template:Efn
 11.12%  125.754      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 10.10%  114.246      1 Template:IPA
  7.93%   89.671     13 Template:ISBN
  6.64%   75.158      1 Template:Short_description
  5.77%   65.234      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.42%   61.335     11 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:210244:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818054106 and revision id 1306522568. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leo_Strauss&oldid=1306522568#On_politics " Categories : Leo Strauss 1899 births 1973 deaths 20th-century American historians 20th-century American Jews 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American poets 20th-century German philosophers 20th-century German writers 20th-century American political scientists Academics of the University of Cambridge American anti-communists American critics of atheism American historians of philosophy American male non-fiction writers American male poets American people of German-Jewish descent American political philosophers Carl Schmitt scholars Columbia Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni Columbia University faculty Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Commentators on Plato Continental philosophers Epistemologists German Army personnel of World War I German emigrants to the United States German male non-fiction writers German male poets German scholars of ancient Greek philosophy Hamilton College (New York) faculty Historians from Illinois Historians from New York (state) Historians of political thought Hobbes scholars Jewish American historians Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish American poets Jewish American social scientists Jewish philosophers Metaphysicians Natural law ethicists The New School faculty Philosophers from Chicago People from Hesse-Nassau People from Kirchhain Philosophers of nihilism American philosophers of religion Platonists Scholars of medieval Islamic philosophy Spinoza scholars St. John's College (Annapolis/Santa Fe) faculty University of Chicago faculty University of Freiburg alumni University of Hamburg alumni University of Marburg alumni World historians Writers from Chicago American classical scholars Max Weber scholars Hidden categories: Pages with German IPA All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox academic with unknown parameters Articles with hCards All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2021 Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 05:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leo Strauss 37 languages Add topic

