Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses 2 Engineering 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Datum reference 6 languages Euskara فارسی Қазақша Norsk bokmål Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A point of reference against which some others are calculated This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Datum reference" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Technical drawing with references and geometric specifications A datum reference or just datum (plural: datums [ Note 1 ] ) is some geometrically important part of an object—such as a point , line , plane , hole, set of holes, or pair of surfaces —that serves as a reference in defining the geometry of the object and (often) in measuring aspects of the actual geometry to assess how closely they match with the nominal value, which may be an ideal, standard, average, or desired value.

For example, on a car's wheel, the lug nut holes define a bolt circle that is a datum from which the location of the rim can be defined and measured. This matters because the hub and rim need to be concentric to within close limits (or else the wheel will not roll smoothly).

The concept of datums is used in many fields, including carpentry , metalworking , needlework , geometric dimensioning and tolerancing (GD&T), aviation , surveying , geodesy ( geodetic datums ), and others.

Uses [ edit ] In carpentry, an alternative, more common name is "face side" and "face edge". The artisan nominates two straight edges on a workpiece as the "datum edges", and they are marked accordingly. One convention is to mark the first datum edge with a single slanted line (/) and the second with double lines (//). For most work, the datum references of the workpiece need to be square . If necessary they may be cut, planed or filed to make them so. In subsequent marking out, all measurements are then taken from either of the two datum references.

In aviation, an aircraft is designed to operate within a specified range of mass and (chiefly longitudinal) balance ; an airman is responsible for determining these factors for each flight under their command. This requires the calculation of moment for each variable mass in the aircraft (fuel, passengers, cargo, etc.), by multiplying its weight by its distance from a datum reference. The datum for light airplanes is usually the engine firewall or the tip of the spinner, but in all cases it is a fixed plane perpendicular to the aircraft's longitudinal axis , and specified in its operating handbook.

Engineering [ edit ] Screenshot from AutoCAD with various geometric dimensioning and tolerancing datum reference symbols ( total indicator reading , perpendicularity , and parallelism An engineering datum used in geometric dimensioning and tolerancing is a feature on an object used to create a reference system for measurement .

[ 1 ] In engineering and drafting , a datum is a reference point, surface, or axis on an object against which measurements are made.

These are then referred to by one or more 'datum references' which indicate measurements that should be made with respect to the corresponding datum feature .

In geometric dimensioning and tolerancing , datum reference frames are typically 3D . Datum reference frames are used as part of the feature control frame to show where the measurement is taken from. A typical datum reference frame is made up of three planes. For example, the three planes could be one "face side" and two "datum edges". These three planes are marked A, B and C, where A is the face side, B is the first datum edge, and C is the second datum edge. In this case, the datum reference frame is A/B/C. A/B/C is shown at the end of feature control frame to show from where the measurement is taken. (See the ASME standard Y14.5M-2009 for more examples and material modifiers.) The engineer selects A/B/C based on the dimensional function of the part. The datums should be functional per the ASME standard. Typically, a part is required to fit with other parts. So, the functional datums are chosen based on how the part attaches. However, typically, the functional datums are not used to manufacture the part. The manufacturing datums are typically different from the functional datums to save cost, improve process speed, and repeatability. A tolerance analysis may be needed in many cases to convert between the functional datums and the manufacturing datums. Computer software can be purchased for dimensional analysis .

There are typically 6 degrees of freedom that need to be considered before choosing which feature is A, B, or C. For this example, A is the primary datum, B is the secondary, and C is the tertiary datum. The primary datum controls the most degrees of freedom. The tertiary datum controls the least degrees of freedom. For this example, of a block of wood, datum A (the face) controls 3 degrees of freedom, B (first edge) controls 2 degrees of freedom, and C (second edge) controls 1 degree of freedom. 3+2+1 = 6, all 6 degrees of freedom are considered.

The 6 degrees of freedom in this example are 3 translation and 3 rotation about the 3D coordinate system . The face datum A controls 3: translation along the z-axis, rotation about the x-axis, and rotation about the y-axis. The edge datum B controls 2: translation along the y-axis and rotation about the z-axis. Finally, The edge datum C controls 1 degree of freedom, namely the translation along the x-axis.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Datum (geodesy) Exact constraint Reference frame Surface plate Spatial reference system Notes [ edit ] ^ The plural of this sense of the word datum is datums by convention, in contrast with the other senses of the word in which data usually serves as both the plural form and the mass noun counterpart.) References [ edit ] ^ ANSI Y14.5M ( ISBN 0-7918-2223-0 ) for engineering datums.

^ Dimensioning and tolerancing : engineering drawings and related documentation practices : an international standard . New York, NY: American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 2009.

ISBN 978-0791831922 .

v t e Woodworking Overviews History Glossary Wood ( lumber ) Occupations Boat building Bow and arrow Bush carpentry Cabinetry Caning Carpentry Certosina Chainsaw carving Chip carving Ébéniste Fretwork Intarsia Japanese carpentry Khatam Kohlrosing Log building Luthier Marquetry Millwork Pallet crafting Parquetry Pyrography Relief carving Root carving Segmented turning Shingle weaving Shipbuilding Spindle turning Timber framing Treen Whittling Wood carving Woodturning Woods Soft Cedar ( Calocedrus , Cedrus ) Cypress Douglas fir Fir Juniper Larch Kauri Pine Rimu Spruce Yew Hard Afromosia Alder Andiroba Anigre Ash Apple Aspen Avodire Balsa Beech Bilinga Birch African Blackwood Australian Blackwood Boxwood Bubinga Camphor Cedrela Cherry Chestnut Cocobolo Cumaru Ebony Elm Eucalyptus Hazel Hickory Hornbeam Idigbo Imbuia Ipê Iroko Jarrah Jelutong Lignum vitae Linden (lime, basswood) Lovoa Merbau Mahogany ( American , African ) Maple Meranti Oak Padauk Pear Plum Poplar Purpleheart Ovankol Ramin Red Quebracho Rosewood Rubberwood Sapele Teak Totara Utile Walnut Wenge Willow Zebrano Engineered Cross-laminated Glue laminated Hardboard MDF OSB Particle board Plywood Wood-plastic composite Tools Abrasives Axe Adze Burnisher Chisel Drawknife Drill Fence Float Gimlet Gauge Impact driver Janka hardness test Jointer Mallet Milling machine Mitre box Rasp Router Shaper Sandpaper Square ( Carpenters , Combination , Miter , Speed , Try ) Thickness planer Timber-framing Veneer hammer Vise Warrington hammer Winding sticks Wood scribe Workbench Clamps Band clamp C-clamp F-clamp Flooring clamp Gripe Holdfast Mitre clamp Pipe clamp Sawbuck Saws Backsaw Bandsaw Bow Bucksaw Chainsaw Circular Compass Coping Crosscut Frame Fretsaw Hand saw Jigsaw Keyhole Miter Ripsaw Scroll Table Veneer Whipsaw Planes Bedrock plane Block plane Chamfer plane Compass plane Finger plane Fore plane Grooving plane Jack plane Japanese plane Jointer plane Moulding plane Razee plane Rebate plane Router plane Scrub plane Shoulder plane Smoothing plane Spokeshave Surform Geometry Joints Birdsmouth Biscuit Box Bridle Butt Butterfly Coping Crown of thorns Dado Dovetail Finger Groove Halved Hammer-headed tenon Knee Lap Mason's mitre Miter Mortise and tenon Rabbet/Rebate Scarf Splice Tongue and groove Profiles Bead Bevel Chamfer Ogee Ogive Ovolo Surface piecing Binding Edge banding Intarsia Marquetry Oystering Parquetry Purfling Treatments Adhesive French polish Heat bending Lacquer Oil Paint Paint stripper Steam bending Thermal Varnish Wax Wood drying Wood preservation Wood stain Wood finishing Organizations American Association of Woodturners Architectural Woodwork Institute British Woodworking Federation Building and Wood Workers' International Caricature Carvers of America International Federation of Building and Wood Workers National Wood Carvers Association Society of Wood Engravers Timber Framers Guild Conversion Chainsaw mill Hewing Sawmill Whipsaw Wood splitting Flat sawing Quarter sawing Rift sawing Techniques Frame and panel Frameless construction Green woodworking Category WikiProject Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐tksrx
Cached time: 20250812020550
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.255 seconds
Real time usage: 0.328 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 675/1000000
Revision size: 6667/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 36940/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 814/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 18593/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.157/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5087548/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  247.295      1 -total
 31.55%   78.029      2 Template:Reflist
 30.26%   74.842      1 Template:Woodworking
 20.02%   49.499      1 Template:Short_description
 19.39%   47.952      1 Template:ISBN
 17.25%   42.646      1 Template:Refimprove
 15.83%   39.152      1 Template:Ambox
 11.80%   29.191      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.81%   19.318      1 Template:Cite_book
  5.09%   12.595      4 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1013923:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020550 and revision id 1275867474. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Datum_reference&oldid=1275867474 " Categories : Geometry Coordinate systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 15:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Datum reference 6 languages Add topic

