Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography and major works 2 Books 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Max Gluckman 16 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano עברית Jawa Lietuvių مصرى Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Тоҷикӣ 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia South African anthropologist (1911–1975) Max Gluckman Herman Max Gluckman Born ( 1911-01-26 ) 26 January 1911 Johannesburg Died 13 April 1975 (1975-04-13) (aged 64) Alma mater University of the Witwatersrand University of Oxford Known for Conflict theories Spouse Mary Gluckman Scientific career Fields Social anthropologist Institutions Manchester school Part of a series on Anthropology Outline History Types Archaeological Biological Cultural Linguistic Social Archaeological Aerial Aviation Battlefield Biblical Bioarchaeological Environmental Ethnoarchaeological Experimental Feminist Forensic Maritime Paleoethnobotanical Zooarchaeological Biological Anthrozoological Biocultural Evolutionary Forensic Molecular Neurological Nutritional Paleoanthropological Primatological Social Cultural Applied Art Cognitive Cyborg Development Digital Ecological Environmental Economic Political economy Feminist Food Historical Institutional Kinship Legal Media Medical Museums Musical Political Psychological Public Religion Symbolic Transpersonal Urban Visual Linguistic Anthropological Descriptive Ethnological Ethnopoetical Historical Ideology Semiotic Sociological Research framework Anthropometry Ethnography cyber Ethnology Cross-cultural comparison Participant observation Holism Reflexivity Thick description Cultural relativism Ethnocentrism Emic and etic Key concepts Culture Development Ethnicity Evolution sociocultural Gender Kinship and descent Meme Prehistory Race Society Value Colonialism / Postcolonialism Key theories Actor–network theory Alliance theory Boasian anthropology Cross-cultural studies Cultural materialism Culture theory Diffusionism Feminism Functionalism Historical particularism Interpretive Performance studies Political economy Practice theory Structuralism Post-structuralism Systems theory Lists Anthropologists by nationality Anthropology by year Bibliography Journals List of indigenous peoples Organizations v t e Herman Max Gluckman ( / ˈ ɡ l ʌ k m ə n / ; 26 January 1911 – 13 April 1975) was a South African and British social anthropologist . He is best known as the founder of the Manchester School of anthropology.

Biography and major works [ edit ] Gluckman was born in Johannesburg in 1911.

[ 1 ] Like many of the other anthropologists he later worked with, he was Jewish .

[ 2 ] He was educated at the University of the Witwatersrand , [ 3 ] where he obtained a BA in 1930.

[ 1 ] Although he intended to study law, he became interested in anthropology and studied under Winifred Hoernle . He earned the equivalent of an MA at Witwatersrand in 1934 and then received a Rhodes Scholarship to attend Exeter College, Oxford .

[ 4 ] At Oxford, Gluckman's work was supervised by R.R. Marett , but his biggest influences were Radcliffe-Brown and Edward Evan Evans-Pritchard , who were proponents of structural functionalism . Gluckman conducted his Ph.D. research in Barotseland with the Lozi . In 1939 he joined the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute and in 1941 became its director. He developed the institute into a major center for anthropological research, and continued to maintain close connections there after he moved to England in 1947 to take up a lectureship at Oxford. In 1949, Gluckman became professor of anthropology at the University of Manchester , founding the department there.

Later, he worked under the British Administration in Northern Rhodesia (esp. on the Barotse law, in what is now the Western Province, Zambia ). He directed the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute (1941–1947), before becoming the first professor of social anthropology at the University of Manchester (1949), [ 5 ] where he founded what became known, including many of his Rhodes-Livingstone Institute colleagues along with his students, as the Manchester school of anthropology. One feature of the Manchester School that derives from Gluckman's early training in law was the emphasis on "case studies" involving analysis of instances of social interaction to infer rules and assumptions. He was widely known for his radio lectures on Custom and Conflict in Africa (later published in many editions at Oxford University Press), being  a remarkable contribution to conflict theory .

Gluckman was a political activist, openly and forcefully anti-colonial. He engaged directly with social conflicts and cultural contradictions of colonialism, with racism, urbanisation and labour migration. Gluckman combined the British school of structural-functionalism with a Marxist focus on inequality and oppression, creating a critique of colonialism from within structuralism. In his research on Zululand in South Africa, he argued that the African and European communities formed a single social system, one whose schism into two racial groups formed the basis of its structural unity.

Bruce Kapferer described Gluckman as " perhaps the anthropologist par excellence whose own personal life, history and consciousness not only embodied some of the critical crises of the modern world but also demanded that the anthropology he imagined should confront and examine them " (in " The Crisis in Anthropology " on the occasion of the first Max Gluckman Memorial lecture.) Gluckman was of considerable influence on several anthropologists and sociologists Lars Clausen , Ronald Frankenberg , Bruce Kapferer , J. Clyde Mitchell , Victor Turner , Johan Frederik Holleman , and other students and interlocutors. Most of them came to be known as the " Manchester School ".

Richard Werbner , along with his wife Pnina (Gluckman's niece), assumed the role of continuing Gluckman's legacy at the Manchester school after his 1975 death.

[ 6 ] Books [ edit ] Rituals of Rebellion in South-East Africa (1954) Order and Rebellion in Tribal Africa (London: Cohen and West; 1963) Politics, Law and Ritual in Tribal Society (1965) The Allocation of Responsibility (1972) References [ edit ] ^ a b Anonymous (June 1975). "Obituary of Max Gluckman".

Anthropology Newsletter .

16 (6): 3.

^ Goldberg, Harvey E. (Autumn 1995). "The Voice of Jacob: Jewish Perspectives on Anthropology and the Study of the Bible".

Jewish Social Studies .

2 (1): 37.

JSTOR 4467460 .

^ Obituary . Accessed: 06-06-2011 ^ Colson, Elizabeth (July–August 1975). "Obituary of Max Gluckman".

Royal Anthropological Institute Newsletter (9): 8– 9.

^ Barth, Fredrik. 2005. " The Golden Age, 1945-1970.

" Pp. 32-43 in: One Discipline, Four Ways: British, German, French, and American anthropology , edited by F. Barth, A. Gingrich, R. Parkin, and S. Silverman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ van Binsbergen, Wim (2006).

"Photographic essay: Manchester School and background" . Archived from the original on 6 February 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Max Gluckman and The Manchester School Max Gluckman Papers at the University of Manchester Library Works by or about Max Gluckman at the Internet Archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Max_Gluckman&oldid=1278877824 " Categories : Social anthropologists 1911 births 1975 deaths Fellows of the British Academy South African Jews British Jews Jewish scientists Jewish socialists South African Rhodes Scholars Alumni of Exeter College, Oxford Academics of the Victoria University of Manchester People associated with the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute Jewish anthropologists 20th-century South African anthropologists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 5 March 2025, at 03:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Max Gluckman 16 languages Add topic

