Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content 2 Influences 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Manifesto Antropófago 5 languages Eesti Français Italiano Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Manifesto by Oswald de Andrade This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Manifesto Antropófago" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Manifesto Antropófago Author Oswald de Andrade Language Portuguese Publication date 1928 Publication place Brazil The Anthropophagic Manifesto ( Portuguese : Manifesto Antropófago ), also variously translated as the Cannibal Manifesto or the Cannibalist Manifesto ,  is an essay published in 1928 by the Brazilian poet and polemicist Oswald de Andrade , a key figure in the cultural movement of Brazilian Modernism and contributor to the publication Revista de Antropofagia . It was inspired by " Abaporu ," a painting by Tarsila do Amaral , modernist artist and wife of Oswald de Andrade.

[ 1 ] The essay was translated to English in 1991 by Leslie Bary.

[ 2 ] Content [ edit ] The Grupo dos Cinco , a modernist art collective that upheld the principles of the Modern Art Week of 1922.

[ 3 ] "A Tapuya woman with human body parts" by Albert Eckhout .

[ 4 ] Written in poetic prose in the modernist style of Une Saison en Enfer by Rimbaud , the Manifesto Antropófago is more directly political than Oswald's previous manifesto, Manifesto Pau-Brasil , which was created in the interest of propagating a Brazilian poetry for export. The "Manifesto" has often been interpreted as an essay in which the main argument proposes that Brazil's history of "cannibalizing" other cultures is its greatest strength, while playing on the modernists ' primitivist interest in cannibalism as an alleged tribal rite. Cannibalism becomes a way for Brazil to assert itself against European post-colonial cultural domination.

[ 5 ] One of the Manifesto's iconic lines, written in English in the original, is " Tupi or not Tupi, that is the question ." The line is simultaneously a celebration of the Tupi , who practiced certain forms of ritual cannibalism (as detailed in the 16th century writings of André Thévet , Hans Staden , and Jean de Léry ), and a metaphorical instance of cannibalism: it eats Shakespeare . On the other hand, some critics argue that Antropofagia as a movement was too heterogeneous for overarching arguments to be extracted from it, and that often it had little to do with a post-colonial cultural politics.

[ 6 ] Influences [ edit ] In the 1960s, introduced to the work of Oswald de Andrade by concrete poet Augusto de Campos , both visual artist Hélio Oiticica and musician Caetano Veloso saw the Manifesto as a major artistic influence on the Tropicália movement. Veloso has stated, "the idea of cultural cannibalism fit us, the tropicalists, like a glove. We were ‘eating’ the Beatles and Jimi Hendrix ." [ 7 ] On the 1968 album Tropicalia: ou Panis et Circensis , Gilberto Gil and Torquato Neto explicitly refer to the Manifesto in the song "Geléia geral" in the lyric "a alegria é a prova dos nove" (happiness is the proof of nines), which they follow with "e a tristeza é teu porto seguro" (and sadness is your safe harbor).

In 1990, Brazilian visual artist Antonio Peticov created a mural in honour of what would have been Andrade's 100th birthday.

Momento Antropofágico com Oswald de Andrade was installed in the São Paulo Metro 's Republica station . It was inspired by three of Andrade's works: O Perfeito Cozinheiro das Almas deste Mundo , Manifesto Antropofágico , and O Homem do Povo .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Literature of Brazil Tropicália References [ edit ] ^ "Tarsila do Amaral: Inventing Modern Art in Brazil | MoMA" .

The Museum of Modern Art . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ Andrade, Oswald de (1991).

"Cannibalist Manifesto" .

Latin American Literary Review .

19 (38). Translated by Leslie Bary. Pittsburgh: Dept. of Modern Languages, Carnegie-Mellon University: 38– 47.

JSTOR 20119601 . Retrieved 22 July 2015 .

^ Gearini, Victória (26 February 2020).

"Aventuras na História · Grupo dos Cinco: os precursores do Modernismo no Brasil" .

Aventuras na História (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ "Albert Eckhout, Series of eight figures (article)" .

Khan Academy . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ Garcia, Luis Fellipe (2020).

"Oswald de Andrade / Anthropophagy" .

ODIP: The Online Dictionary of Intercultural Philosophy . Thorsten Botz-Bornstein (ed.) . Retrieved 13 June 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jauregui, Carlos, A. (2012). McKee Irwin & Szurmuk, Robert & Mónica (ed.).

Dictionary of Latin American Cultural Studies . Gainesville: University Press of Florida. pp.

22– 28.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Dunn, Christopher.

Brutality garden : Tropicália and the emergence of a Brazilian counterculture . Chapel Hill, NC.

ISBN 978-1-4696-1571-4 .

OCLC 862077082 .

^ "Editorial - Underground collection: works of art in São Paulo subway" .

SP-Arte (in Brazilian Portuguese). 24 January 2020 . Retrieved 18 August 2021 .

^ "Livro Digital" (PDF) .

Arte no Metrô (in Brazilian Portuguese). p. 31. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2019.

External links [ edit ] Text in English, translation by Leslie Bary Article in English about Antropofagia by Carlos Jauregui v t e Works by Oswald de Andrade Alma (1922) Manifesto Pau-Brasil (1924) Pau-brasil (poems, 1925) Estrela de absinto (1927) Manifesto Antropófago (1928) Serafim Ponte Grande (1933) Meu Testamento (1944) A Arcádia e a Inconfidência (1945) A Crise da Filosofia Messiânica , (1950) Um Aspecto Antropofágico da Cultura Brasileira: O Homem Cordial (1950) A Marcha das Utopias (1953) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manifesto_Antropófago&oldid=1301122937 " Categories : 1928 essays Brazilian literature Cannibalism in South America Tropicália Brazilian art Satirical essays 20th-century Brazilian literature Public domain books Hidden categories: CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Use British English from January 2025 Articles needing additional references from June 2016 All articles needing additional references Books with missing cover No local image but image on Wikidata Articles containing Portuguese-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 06:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manifesto Antropófago 5 languages Add topic

