Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Facilities and logistics 2 Notable restoration accomplishments 3 List of major donors 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hamilton Kerr Institute Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conservation branch of the Fitzwilliam Museum in England The Thornham Parva Retable The Hamilton Kerr Institute is a branch of the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridgeshire , England, dedicated to the study and conservation of easel paintings. It is also part of the University of Cambridge .

Facilities and logistics [ edit ] The institute was founded in 1976 through grants from the Baring Foundation , the Esmée Fairbairn Trust , the Gulbenkian Foundation , the Isaac Wolfson Foundation , the Monument Trust , and the Pilgrim Trust , and continues to finance itself through income from its work and its endowment fund. It is housed in a riverside property, donated by Hamilton Kerr , seven miles south of Cambridge in the village of Whittlesford . The premises consist of a mid-eighteenth century house and converted mill buildings, containing offices and a scientific laboratory, restoration studios, studios for panel treatment and the relining of canvases, and studios for photography. In 1980, the institute opened a studio in London.

[ 1 ] Notable restoration accomplishments [ edit ] The Westminster Retable : 1998–2004. The Westminster Retable of ca. 1270 was the main altarpiece for Westminster Abbey during pre-Reformation England. When it was rediscovered in the 18th century, several poorly executed restoration attempts damaged the retable. In 1998, the institute acquired this work, and began work on repairing and restoring it.

[ 2 ] The Thornham Parva Retable . This 15-ft long medieval altarpiece was restored after an eight-year plan. Estimated to be worth millions, the altarpiece is thought to have been created in the 1330s for a Dominican Priory in Norfolk . It now stands in a protective glass case in St Mary's Church , Thornham Parva in Suffolk .

[ 3 ] List of major donors [ edit ] The following have made donations: [ 1 ] Council for the Care of Churches J. Paul Getty Trust Idlewild Trust Samuel H. Kress Foundation Paul Mellon Centre Queen Elizabeth Scholarship Trust Rayne Foundation Woodmansterne Publications Ltd Worshipful Company of Painter-Stainers National Association of Decorative and Fine Arts Societies References [ edit ] ^ a b Hamilton Kerr Institute History Page Archived 2 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 24 December 2008.

^ Bunny Smedley (27 May 2005).

"The Westminster Retable at the National Gallery" . Archived from the original on 20 November 2008 . Retrieved 24 December 2008 .

^ The Hamilton Kerr Institute in Cambridge has restored a 15-ft long medieval altarpiece , History Today , 2003.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases Artists RKD Artists People Trove Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hamilton_Kerr_Institute&oldid=1296295118 " Categories : Research institutes established in 1976 Fitzwilliam Museum Organisations based in Cambridgeshire Conservation and restoration companies 1976 in art 1976 establishments in England Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 Use British English from August 2015 This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 03:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hamilton Kerr Institute Add languages Add topic

