Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Porphyry 2 Amelius 3 Castricius Firmus 4 Eustochius of Alexandria 5 Marcellus Orontius and Sabinillus 6 Paulinus 7 Rogatianus 8 Serapion 9 Zethos 10 Zoticus 11 Notes 12 References Toggle the table of contents List of students of Plotinus 5 languages العربية پښتو Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Students of 3rd century Neoplatonist Plotinus This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "List of students of Plotinus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e The following is a list of students of Plotinus . The philosopher Plotinus was the founder of a tradition later known as Neoplatonism .

Porphyry [ edit ] Main article: Porphyry (philosopher) Porphyry , the most important of Plotinus 's pupils, was born in Tyre c. 233. He was taught first by Cassius Longinus in Athens , before travelling to Rome in 262 where he studied under Plotinus for six years. After the death of Plotinus, he edited and published the Enneads , which had been compiled by his teacher. He also wrote a biography of his teacher, and many commentaries and philosophical works, some of which survive and is famous for his attacks on Christianity compiled in his Adversus Christianos , of which only fragments preserved by his Christian opponents remain.

Amelius [ edit ] Main article: Amelius Amelius was originally a student of the works of Numenius of Apamea , before attending the lectures of Plotinus in the third year after Plotinus came to Rome , and never left him until the end of his life. Amelius read and wrote voraciously, writing over 100 volumes of sayings and commentaries, none of which survive. His most important convert to Neoplatonism was Porphyry.

[ 1 ] Castricius Firmus [ edit ] Castricius Firmus was a 3rd-century neoplatonist and disciple of Plotinus .

[ 2 ] Plotinus was on the most familiar terms with him ( Zethos ), and used to stay with him at his country place, six miles from Minturnae, a property which had formerly belonged to Castricius Firmus.

Porphyry stated of Castricius Firmus in the Life of Plotinus , "Castricius was excelled by none of the group in appreciation of the finer side of life: he venerated Plotinus; he devoted himself in the most faithful comradeship to Amelius in every need, and was in all matters as loyal to myself as though I were his own brother." Eustochius of Alexandria [ edit ] Eustochius of Alexandria was a 3rd-century neoplatonic philosopher and student of Plotinus .

[ 2 ] Porphyry stated in the Life of Plotinus , "Among closer personal friends was Eustochius of Alexandria, also a doctor, who came to know Plotinus towards the end of his life, and attended him until his death: Eutochius consecrated himself exclusively to Plotinus' system and became a veritable philosopher." Marcellus Orontius and Sabinillus [ edit ] Senators Marcellus Orontius and Sabinillus were 3rd century neoplatonists and disciples of Plotinus .

[ 3 ] Porphyry stated of them in the Life of Plotinus , "There were also among Plotinus' hearers not a few members of the Senate, amongst whom Marcellus Orontius and Sabinillus showed the greatest assiduity in philosophical studies." Paulinus [ edit ] Paulinus was a 3rd-century neoplatonist and disciple of Plotinus .

[ 3 ] Porphyry stated of Paulinus  in the Life of Plotinus , "The group included also one Paulinus, a doctor of Scythopolis, whom Amelius used to call Mikkalos in allusion to his blundering habit of mind." Rogatianus [ edit ] Rogatianus was a 3rd-century neoplatonist and disciple of Plotinus .

[ 3 ] Porphyry stated of Rogatianus in the Life of Plotinus . "Another Senator, Rogatianus, advanced to such detachment from political ambitions that he gave up all his property, dismissed all his slaves, renounced every dignity, and, on the point of taking up his praetorship, the lictors already at the door, refused to come out or to have anything to do with the office. He even abandoned his own house, spending his time here and there at this friends' and acquaintances', sleeping and eating with them and taking, at that, only one meal every other day. He had been a victim of gout, carried in a chair, but this new regime of abstinence and abnegation restored his health: he had been unable to stretch out his hands; he came to use them as freely as men living by manual labour. Plotinus took a great liking to Rogatianus and frequently praised him very highly, holding him up as a model to those aiming at the philosophical life." Serapion [ edit ] Serapion was a 3rd-century neoplatonic philosopher and student of Plotinus .

[ 3 ] Porphyry wrote of Serapion in the Life of Plotinus that "Then there was Serapion, an Alexandrian , who began life as a professional orator and later took to the study of philosophy, but was never able to conquer the vices of avarice and usury ." Zethos [ edit ] Zethos was a 3rd-century neoplatonist and disciple of Plotinus .

[ 2 ] Porphyry stated of Zethos in the Life of Plotinus , "Another friend was Zethos, an Arabian by descent, who married a daughter of Ammonius ' friend Theodosius. Zethos, too, was a doctor. Plotinus was deeply attached to him and was always trying to divert him from the political career in which he stood high. Plotinus was on the most familiar terms with him, and used to stay with him at his country place, six miles from Minturnae, a property which had formerly belonged to Castricius Firmus." Zoticus [ edit ] Zoticus was a 3rd-century neoplatonic philosopher and student of Plotinus .

[ 3 ] Porphyry stated in the Life of Plotinus , Zoticus was a critic and poet, who also amended the text of Antimachus . Zoticus also authored a poem upon the Atlantis story. His sight failed, and he died a little before Plotinus, as also did Paulinus.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Porphyry, Vita Plotini , 1–5, 7, 10, 16–22 ^ a b c Porphyry, Vita Plotini , 2, 7 ^ a b c d e Porphyry, Vita Plotini , 7 References [ edit ] Porphyry, Life of Plotinus translated by Stephen MacKenna . London: Medici Society, 1917–1930.

v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐srlhx
Cached time: 20250812040409
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.296 seconds
Real time usage: 0.387 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 851/1000000
Revision size: 6351/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 75967/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1235/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23971/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.187/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3208326/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  310.455      1 -total
 33.10%  102.766      1 Template:Neoplatonism
 32.52%  100.953      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 21.07%   65.398      1 Template:Short_description
 20.23%   62.809      1 Template:Primary_sources
 19.58%   60.783      8 Template:Navbox
 18.58%   57.683      1 Template:Ambox
 14.75%   45.782      1 Template:Platonists
 10.91%   33.863      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.63%   20.575      3 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10380076:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812040409 and revision id 1291032573. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_students_of_Plotinus&oldid=1291032573 " Categories : Ancient Greek philosophy-related lists Plotinus Lists of philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2022 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 17:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of students of Plotinus 5 languages Add topic

