Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical and geographical distribution 2 Description Toggle Description subsection 2.1 The seigneur 2.2 The land lordship 3 Common features Toggle Common features subsection 3.1 Residents of a manor 3.2 Tenants 4 Variation among manors 5 Abolition 6 See also Toggle See also subsection 6.1 General 6.2 Similar land tenure systems in other parts of the world 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Manorialism 39 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lingua Franca Nova Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic, political, and judicial institution during the Middle Ages in Europe This article is about the medieval system. For the 17th-century system in Canada, see Seigneurial system of New France .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Manorialism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) English feudalism Harold Sacramentum Fecit Willelmo Duci ( Bayeux Tapestry ) Fief Ecclesiastical fief Crown land Allodial title Appanage Vassal Feoffment Seignory Subinfeudation Feoffee Fealty Homage Affinity Feudal maintenance Feudal fragmentation Bastard feudalism Livery Manorialism Lord of the manor Manorial court Manor house ( List ) Demesne Glebe Overlord Lord Peasant Serfdom Free tenant Feudal land tenure in England Land tenure English feudal barony Feudal baron Knight's fee Knight-service Baronage Peerage Serjeanty Copyhold Freehold Gavelkind Customary freehold Landed gentry Peerages in the United Kingdom Feudal duties Avera and inward Socage Scutage Feudal aid Scot and lot Tallage Feudalism v t e Manorialism , also known as seigneurialism , the manor system or manorial system , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was the method of land ownership (or " tenure ") in parts of Europe, notably France and later England, during the Middle Ages .

[ 3 ] Its defining features included a large, sometimes fortified manor house in which the lord of the manor and his dependants lived and administered a rural estate, and a population of labourers or serfs who worked the surrounding land to support themselves and the lord.

[ 4 ] These labourers fulfilled their obligations with labour time or in-kind produce at first, and later by cash payment as commercial activity increased. Manorialism was part of the feudal system .

[ 5 ] Manorialism originated in the Roman villa system of the Late Roman Empire , [ 6 ] and was widely practised in medieval western Europe and parts of central Europe. An essential element of feudal society, [ 7 ] [ 5 ] manorialism was slowly replaced by the advent of a money-based market economy and new forms of agrarian contract.

Manorialism faded away slowly and piecemeal, along with its most vivid feature in the landscape, the open field system . It outlasted serfdom in the sense that it continued with freehold labourers. As an economic system, it outlasted feudalism, according to Andrew Jones, because "it could maintain a warrior, but it could equally well maintain a capitalist landlord. It could be self-sufficient, yield produce for the market, or it could yield a money rent." [ 8 ] The last feudal dues in France were abolished at the French Revolution . In parts of eastern Germany, the Rittergut manors of Junkers remained until World War II .

[ 9 ] Historical and geographical distribution [ edit ] Ploughing on a French ducal manor in March from the manuscript, Les Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry , c.

1410 The term is most often used with reference to medieval Western Europe. Antecedents of the system can be traced to the rural economy of the later Roman Empire ( Dominate ). Labour was the key factor of production .

[ 10 ] Successive administrations tried to stabilise the imperial economy by freezing the social structure into place: sons were to succeed their fathers in their trade, councillors were forbidden to resign, and coloni , the cultivators of land, were not to move from the land they were attached to. The workers of the land were on their way to becoming serfs.

[ 11 ] Several factors conspired to merge the status of former slaves and former free farmers into a dependent class of such coloni : it was possible to be described as servus et colonus , "both slave and colonus ".

[ 12 ] The Laws of Constantine I around 325 both reinforced the semi-servile status of the coloni and limited their rights to sue in the courts; the Codex Theodosianus promulgated under Theodosius II extended these restrictions. The legal status of adscripti , "bound to the soil", [ 13 ] contrasted with barbarian foederati , who were permitted to settle within the imperial boundaries, remaining subject to their own traditional law.

As the Germanic kingdoms succeeded Roman authority in the west in the fifth century, Roman landlords were often simply replaced by Germanic ones, with little change to the underlying situation or displacement of populations.

The process of rural self-sufficiency was given an abrupt boost in the eighth century, when normal trade in the Mediterranean Sea was disrupted.

Description [ edit ] The great hall at Penshurst Place , Kent , built in the mid 14th century. A manor house hall was where the lord and his family ate, received guests, and conferred with dependents.

The word derives from traditional inherited divisions of the countryside, reassigned as local jurisdictions known as manors or seigneuries ; each manor being subject to a lord (French seigneur ), usually holding his position in return for undertakings offered to a higher lord (see Feudalism ). The lord held a manorial court , governed by public law and local custom. Not all territorial seigneurs were secular; bishops and abbots also held lands that entailed similar obligations.

By extension, the word manor is sometimes used in England as a slang term for any home area or territory in which authority is held, often in a police or criminal context.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In the generic plan of a medieval manor [ 16 ] from Shepherd's Historical Atlas , [ 17 ] the strips of individually worked land in the open field system are immediately apparent. In this plan, the manor house is set slightly apart from the village, but equally often the village grew up around the forecourt of the manor, formerly walled, while the manor lands stretched away outside, as still may be seen at Petworth House . As concerns for privacy [ dubious – discuss ] increased in the 18th century, [ citation needed ] manor houses were often located a farther distance from the village. For example, when a grand new house was required by the new owner of Harlaxton Manor , Lincolnshire, in the 1830s, the site of the existing manor house at the edge of its village was abandoned for a new one, isolated in its park, with the village out of view.

[ citation needed ] In an agrarian society, the conditions of land tenure underlie all social or economic factors. There were two legal systems of pre-manorial landholding. One, the most common, was the system of holding land " allodially " in full outright ownership. The other was a use of precaria or benefices , in which land was held conditionally (the root of the English word "precarious").

To these two systems, the Carolingian monarchs added a third, the aprisio , which linked manorialism with feudalism . The aprisio made its first appearance in Charlemagne 's province of Septimania in the south of France , when Charlemagne had to settle the Visigothic refugees who had fled with his retreating forces after the failure of his Zaragoza expedition of 778. He solved this problem by allotting "desert" tracts of uncultivated land belonging to the royal fisc under direct control of the emperor. These holdings aprisio entailed specific conditions. The earliest specific aprisio grant that has been identified was at Fontjoncouse , near Narbonne (see Lewis, links). In former Roman settlements, a system of villas , dating from Late Antiquity, was inherited by the medieval world.

The seigneur [ edit ] Reconstruction of a medieval castle, Bachritterburg, Baden-Württemberg The possessor of a seigneurie bears the title of " Lord ". He can be an individual, in the vast majority of cases a national of the nobility or of the Bourgeoisie , but also a judicial person most often an ecclesiastical institution such as an abbey , a cathedral or canonical chapter or a military order. The power of the lord was exercised through various intermediaries, the most important of which was the bailiff . The sovereign can also be a lord; the seigneuries he owns form the royal domain.

The title of lord is also granted, especially in modern times, to individuals holding noble fiefdoms which are not for all that seigneuries. These "lords" are sometimes called sieurs, equivalent terms in medieval times.

The land lordship [ edit ] The lord is the direct or prominent owner of the land assets of his lordship. The notion of absolute ownership over a common good cannot be applied, because there are also others than the main user who have rights over these goods. We [ who?

] distinguish in the land lordship two sets the reserves which is the set of goods of which the lord reserves the direct exploitation and tenant-in-chief , property whose exploitation is entrusted to a tenant against payment of a royalty, most often called cens and services such as Corvée . The distribution between reserve and tenure varies depending on the period and region.

[ 18 ] Common features [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Generic map of a medieval manor.

The mustard-coloured areas are part of the demesne , the hatched areas part of the glebe . William R. Shepherd, Historical Atlas , 1923.

Manors each consisted of up to three classes of land: Demesne , the part directly controlled by the lord and used for the benefit of his household and dependents; Dependent ( serf or villein ) holdings carrying the obligation that the peasant household supply the lord with specified labour services or a part of its output (or cash in lieu thereof), subject to the custom attached to the holding; and Free peasant land , without such obligation but otherwise subject to manorial jurisdiction and custom, and owing money rent fixed at the time of the lease.

Additional sources of income for the lord included charges for use of his mill, bakery or wine-press, or for the right to hunt or to let pigs feed in his woodland, as well as court revenues and single payments on each change of tenant. On the other side of the account, manorial administration involved significant expenses, perhaps a reason why smaller manors tended to rely less on villein tenure .

[ original research?

] Dependent holdings were held nominally by arrangement of lord and tenant, but tenure became in practice almost universally hereditary, with a payment made to the lord on each succession of another member of the family. Villein land could not be abandoned, at least until demographic and economic circumstances made flight a viable proposition; nor could they be passed to a third party without the lord's permission, and the customary payment.

Although not free, villeins were by no means in the same position as slaves: they enjoyed legal rights, subject to local custom, and had recourse to the law subject to court charges, which were an additional source of manorial income. Sub-letting of villein holdings was common, and labour on the demesne might be commuted into an additional money payment, as happened increasingly from the 13th century.

Land which was neither let to tenants nor formed part of demesne lands was known as "manorial waste"; typically, this included hedges , verges , etc.

[ 19 ] Common land where all members of the community had right of passage was known as "lord's waste". Part of the demesne land of the manor which being uncultivated was termed the Lord's Waste and served for public roads and for common pasture to the lord and his tenants.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In many settlements during the early modern period, illegal building was carried out on lord's waste land by squatters who would then plead their case to remain with local support. An example of a lord's waste settlement, where the main centres grew up in this way, is the village of Bredfield in Suffolk .

[ 22 ] Lord's waste continues to be a source of rights and responsibilities issues in places such as Henley-in-Arden , Warwickshire .

[ 23 ] In examining the origins of the monastic cloister , Walter Horn found that "as a manorial entity the Carolingian monastery ... differed little from the fabric of a feudal estate, save that the corporate community of men for whose sustenance this organisation was maintained consisted of monks who served God in chant and spent much of their time in reading and writing." [ 24 ] Residents of a manor [ edit ] Lord of the manor (who could be an absentee ) Serfs Villeins Cottars Bordars Freeholders Copyholders Tenants [ edit ] Tenants owned land on the manor under one of several legal agreements: freehold , copyhold , customary freehold and leasehold .

[ 25 ] Variation among manors [ edit ] Like feudalism which, together with manorialism, formed the legal and organisational framework of feudal society, manorial structures were not uniform or coordinated. In the later Middle Ages, areas of incomplete or non-existent manorialisation persisted while the manorial economy underwent substantial development with changing economic conditions.

Not all manors contained all three classes of land.  Typically, demesne accounted for roughly a third of the arable area, and villein holdings rather more; but some manors consisted solely of demesne, others solely of peasant holdings. The proportion of unfree and free tenures could likewise vary greatly, with more or less reliance on wage labour for agricultural work on the demesne.

The proportion of the cultivated area in demesne tended to be greater in smaller manors, while the share of villein land was greater in large manors, providing the lord of the latter with a larger supply of obligatory labour for demesne work. The proportion of free tenements was generally less variable, but tended to be somewhat greater on the smaller manors.

Manors varied similarly in their geographical arrangement: most did not coincide with a single village, but rather consisted of parts of two or more villages, most of the latter containing also parts of at least one other manor. This situation sometimes led to replacement by cash payments or their equivalents in kind of the demesne labour obligations of those peasants living furthest from the lord's estate.

As with peasant plots, the demesne was not a single territorial unit, but consisted rather of a central house with neighbouring land and estate buildings, plus strips dispersed through the manor alongside free and villein ones: in addition, the lord might lease free tenements belonging to neighbouring manors, as well as holding other manors some distance away to provide a greater range of produce.

Nor were manors held necessarily by lay lords rendering military service (or again, cash in lieu) to their superior: a substantial share (estimated by value at 17% in England in 1086 ) belonged directly to the king, and a greater proportion (rather more than a quarter) were held by bishoprics and monasteries .

Ecclesiastical manors tended to be larger, with a significantly greater villein area than neighbouring lay manors.

[ citation needed ] The effect of circumstances on manorial economy is complex and at times contradictory: upland conditions tended to preserve peasant freedoms (livestock husbandry in particular being less labour-intensive and therefore less demanding of villein services); on the other hand, some upland areas of Europe showed some of the most oppressive manorial conditions, while lowland eastern England is credited with an exceptionally large free peasantry, in part a legacy of Scandinavian settlement.

Similarly, the spread of money economy stimulated the replacement of labour services by money payments, but the growth of the money supply and resulting inflation after 1170 initially led nobles to take back leased estates and to re-impose labour dues as the value of fixed cash payments declined in real terms.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Abolition [ edit ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e The last feudal dues in France were abolished at the French Revolution . The last patroonship was abolished in New York in the 1840s as a result of the Anti-Rent War . In parts of eastern Germany, the Rittergut manors of Junkers remained until World War II .

[ 9 ] In Quebec, the last feudal rents were paid in 1970 under the modified provisions of the Seigniorial Dues Abolition Act of 1935.

See also [ edit ] Middle Ages portal France portal United Kingdom portal General [ edit ] Allodial title Domesday Book Glebe Banal rights Gentry Similar land tenure systems in other parts of the world [ edit ] Maenor , the Welsh system Heerlijkheid , Dutch manorialism Junker , Prussian manorialism Folwark , system in Poland/Lithuania Baltic nobility , system in Estonia/Latvia Latifundium , Ancient Rome Patroon , 17th century New Netherland Property Law in Colonial New York , 17th–18th century New York Seigneurial system of New France , 17th century Canada Hacienda , the Spanish system Fazenda , the Brazilian system Mouza , manor equivalent in the Indian Subcontinent Indian feudalism , Indian feudalism Fengjian , Chinese feudalism Shōen the Japanese system Particuliere landerij , 17th-century Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) References [ edit ] ^ Students of History (2023).

"The Manor System" . Retrieved 3 October 2023 .

^ Cartwright, Mark (29 November 2018).

"Manorialism Definition" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 3 October 2023 .

^ Ian John Ernest Keil (11 May 2018).

"Manorial System" .

Encyclopedia .

Oxford University Press . Retrieved 3 October 2023 .

^ North, Douglass C.; Thomas, Robert Paul (1971).

"The Rise and Fall of the Manorial System: A Theoretical Model" .

The Journal of Economic History .

31 (4): 777– 803.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050700074623 .

ISSN 0022-0507 .

JSTOR 2117209 .

^ a b Sait, E. M. (1908).

"The Manorial System and the French Revolution" .

Political Science Quarterly .

23 (4): 690– 711.

doi : 10.2307/2140868 .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

JSTOR 2140868 .

^ Peter Sarris (April 2004).

"The Origins of the Manorial Economy: New Insights from Late Antiquity" .

The English Historical Review .

119 (119): 279– 311.

doi : 10.1093/ehr/119.481.279 .

JSTOR 3490231 .

^ "Feudal Society", in its modern sense was coined in Marc Bloch 's 1939–40 books of the same name. Bloch ( Feudal Society tr. L.A. Masnyon, 1965, vol. II p. 442) emphasised the distinction between economic manorialism which preceded feudalism and survived it, and political and social feudalism, or seigneurialism .

^ Andrew Jones, "The Rise and Fall of the Manorial System: A Critical Comment" The Journal of Economic History 32 .4 (December 1972:938–944) p. 938; a comment on D. North and R. Thomas, "The rise and fall of the manorial system: a theoretical model", The Journal of Economic History 31 (December 1971:777–803).

^ a b Hartwin Spenkuch, "Herrenhaus und Rittergut: Die Erste Kammer des Landtags und der preußische Adel von 1854 bis 1918 aus sozialgeschichtlicher Sicht" Geschichte und Gesellschaft , 25 .3 (July – September 1999):375–403).

^ Donald J. Herreld, (2016) An Economic History of the World Since 1400. The Great Courses. P. 20.

^ C.R. Whittaker, "Circe's pigs: from slavery to serfdom in the later Roman world", Slavery and Abolition 8 (1987) 87–122.

^ Averil Cameron, The Mediterranean World in Late Antiquity AD 395–600 , 1993:86.

^ Cameron 1993:86 instances Codex Justinianus XI. 48.21.1; 50,2.3; 52.1.1.

^ Stewart Payne (2007-08-03).

"Terror raids on homes of uranium ex-employee" .

The Daily Telegraph . London . Retrieved 2010-05-12 .

^ "London Slang - M" . Archived from the original on 2009-02-08 . Retrieved 2009-04-29 .

^ "Plan of Medieval Manor by William R. Shepherd" .

University of Texas Libraries . Retrieved 3 October 2023 .

^ William R. Shepherd.

"Historical Atlas" . Perry–Castañeda Map Collection – UT Library Online.

^ corvée noun ^ John Cordle (12 July 1966).

"Manorial Wastes" .

House of Lords Official Record .

Hansard .

^ Black’s Law Dictionary , 6th ed., 1990, quoted at http://www.henleynews.co.uk/history/LordsWaste.pdf Archived 2021-09-26 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Jeffrey Lehman; Shirelle Phelps (2005).

West's Encyclopedia of American Law, Vol. 6 (2 ed.). Detroit: Thomson/Gale. p. 420.

ISBN 9780787663742 .

^ See Bredfield Parish Plan 2006, p.9: "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-12-09 . Retrieved 2009-06-27 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Jonathan Dovey.

"Lord's Waste" (PDF) .

Henley News . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2021 . Retrieved 12 March 2022 .

^ Horn, "On the Origins of the Medieval Cloister" Gesta 12 .1/2 (1973:13–52), quote p. 41.

^ Angus Winchester; Eleanor Straughton.

"What is a Manor?" .

Lancaster University . Retrieved 12 March 2022 .

^ "Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia. "manorialism". Encyclopedia Britannica, 3 Oct. 2022" . Retrieved 28 January 2024 .

^ Reed, Clyde G; Anderson, Terry L (1973).

"An Economic Explanation of English Agricultural Organization in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries" .

The Economic History Review .

26 (1): 134–137 (4 pages).

doi : 10.2307/2594763 .

JSTOR 2594763 . Retrieved 28 January 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bloch, Marc (1989-11-16).

Feudal Society: Vol 1: The Growth and Ties of Dependence (2 ed.). Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-03916-9 .

Bloch, Marc (1989-11-16).

Feudal Society: Vol 2: Social Classes and Political Organisation (2 ed.). Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-03918-5 .

Boissonnade, Prosper; Eileen Power; Lynn White (1964).

Life and work in medieval Europe : the evolution of medieval economy from the fifth to the fifteenth century . Harper torchbook, 1141. New York, NY: Harper & Row.

Pirenne, Henri (1937).

Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe .

Harcourt Brace & Company .

ISBN 0-15-627533-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) External links [ edit ] World History Encyclopedia – Manorialism Archibald R. Lewis, The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society, 718–1050 Estonian Manors Portal – the English version gives the overview of 438 best preserved historical manors in Estonia Medieval manors and their records Specific to the British Isles.

v t e European Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Decline of the Western Roman Empire Barbarian kingdoms Late antiquity Decline of Hellenistic religion Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Rise of Islam Papal States First Bulgarian Empire Frankish Empire Principality of Serbia Duchy of Croatia Kingdom of Croatia Anglo-Saxon England Viking Age Carolingian Empire Old Church Slavonic Rise of the Venetian Republic Civitas Schinesghe Kievan Rus' Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire Reconquista High Middle Ages Norman Conquest Holy Roman Empire Second Bulgarian Empire Georgian Empire Kingdom of Poland Croatia in personal union with Hungary Kingdom of Serbia Feudalism Rise of the Republic of Genoa Great Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Republic of Florence Scholasticism Capet–Plantagenet feud Monasticism Communalism Manorialism Medieval Warm Period Mongol invasion of Europe Kingdom of Portugal Late Middle Ages Hundred Years' War Wars of the Roses Hussite Wars Burgundy Milan France England Serbian Empire Castile Western Schism Fall of Constantinople Rise of the Ottoman Empire Swiss mercenaries Chivalry Renaissance Humanism Universities Crisis of the late Middle Ages Great Famine Little Ice Age Culture Agriculture Architecture Art Church and State Cuisine Crusading movement Dance Demography Domes Hastilude Household Hunting In popular culture Itinerant court Literature Medicine Minstrel Music Instruments Philosophy Poetry Science Slavery Technology Theatre Warfare Women Related Medieval anthropology Dark Ages Disability in the Middle Ages Basic topics list Land terms Medievalism Medieval reenactment Medieval studies Misconceptions Neo-medievalism Peasant Wars Post-classical history Timeline Historiography in the Middle Ages Medieval archaeology Portal Category WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany Japan Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐6k2gv
Cached time: 20250814215131
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.736 seconds
Real time usage: 0.875 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3316/1000000
Revision size: 25782/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 135962/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5380/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 121554/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.484/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23886428/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  732.429      1 -total
 26.20%  191.903      1 Template:Reflist
 15.75%  115.353     10 Template:Cite_web
 15.73%  115.215      1 Template:English_Feudalism
 15.35%  112.408      1 Template:Sidebar
 11.93%   87.371      1 Template:Lang
  7.94%   58.164      1 Template:Short_description
  7.26%   53.146      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.16%   52.416      2 Template:Ambox
  7.03%   51.505      4 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20862:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215131 and revision id 1300374001. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manorialism&oldid=1300374001 " Categories : Feudalism Economic systems Social classes Land tenure Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Use British English from March 2021 Articles containing French-language text All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from March 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2021 Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from June 2016 CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 23:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manorialism 39 languages Add topic

