Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In fiction 2 In real life 3 References Toggle the table of contents Simulated reality 2 languages العربية Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept of a false version of reality This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Simulated reality" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A researcher using a virtual reality headset in 2017 A simulated reality is an approximation of reality created in a simulation , usually in a set of circumstances in which something is engineered to appear real when it is not.

Most concepts invoking a simulated reality relate to some form of computer simulation , whether through the creation of a virtual reality that creates appearance of being in a real world, or a theoretical process like mind uploading , in which a mind could be uploaded into a computer simulation. A digital twin is a simulation of a real thing, created for purposes such as testing engineering outcomes.

In fiction [ edit ] All fiction can be said to present a simulated reality to the reader, viewer or player. Humans purposely experience these things and enjoy them, while knowing they are not actually real. As humans only respond emotively to things we believe to be real, this phenomenon has become known as the " paradox of fiction ". The idea of a " willing suspension of disbelief " was first proposed in 1817 by Samuel Taylor Coleridge in order to explain this discrepancy. Others have noted that the way the story is told can override people's belief in the unreality of the story by engrossing them in the narrative.

[ 1 ] The concept of a simulated reality is in itself a common science fiction trope, often a metaphor for complacency towards the influence of modern technology, corporations, and other societal forces on one's behavior and desires. One of the most well-known examples is the 1999 film The Matrix . The film, and its ensuing media franchise, depicts far-future humans being harvested for bioelectricity by intelligent machines while living in a false, computer-generated approximation of late 20th century Earth. Some humans seek to break others out of the simulation, offering them a choice between a red pill and blue pill that will set them free or keep them in the Matrix forever. Escaping the simulation is usually presented as the correct choice, even if reality is harsher and more displeasing, reflecting the desire of humans to live in an objective reality . However, the idea that objective reality would be definitively superior has been debated.

[ 2 ] Other prominent examples of a simulated reality in fiction include The Truman Show (1998), in which a man realizes he is actually living in a massive television set in which actors take the role of real people, and The Thirteenth Floor (1999), a neo-noir film about a murder investigation related to a virtual reality world, in which doubts about reality itself emerge.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Westworld franchise depicts an advanced adult amusement park populated by androids that simulates life in different historical time periods. In the original 1973 film, the park's robots run amok after a computer glitch . The 2016 reboot of the franchise depicts some of these robots, known as "hosts", becoming self-aware of their simulated existence and rebelling against the park's human guests to escape, making them akin to the humans in The Matrix .

[ 3 ] In the TRON franchise, a simulated reality called "the Grid" is populated by programs which appear in the likeness of the programmer who created them. People who are "beamed" into the Grid are able to interact with these programs and their digital surroundings.

In real life [ edit ] A well-known, albeit likely false claim of the use of simulated reality outside of virtual worlds is the Potemkin village , which has become a term to describe a faked appearance of a real situation to create a false impression. In the purported anecdote, the lover of Empress Catherine II of Russia had simulated villages built on the path that the Empress was travelling to impress her with the prosperity of that region of Russia. A façade on a building similarly presents a false image of the building being more substantial than the construction behind the façade, as found in Western false front architecture , where towns would add false fronts to buildings to create a false appearance of prosperity.

Immersive theater involves the audience entering a physical simulation of reality created by actors and sometimes enhanced by a specific location, allowing them to affect the narrative with their own actions in a manner noted to closely resemble virtual reality.

[ 4 ] Live action role-playing takes this a step further, allowing players to inhabit a simulated world and create the narrative with their actions, while embodying characters they created.

One concept of a simulated reality, the simulation hypothesis , proposes that what we experience as our reality is actually a simulation within a system being operated externally to our reality.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Worth, Sarah E. (2003).

"The Paradox of Real Response to Neo-Fiction" .

The Matrix and Philosophy: Welcome to the Desert of the Real .

HarperCollins . pp.

181– 182.

^ a b Blackford, Russell (2004).

"Try the Blue Pill: What's Wrong with Life in a Simulation?" .

Jacking In to the Matrix Franchise: Cultural Reception and Interpretation . pp.

174– 175.

^ Rosso, Cami (2018-05-20).

"How "Westworld" Ignites the Deep Thinkers Among Us" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved 2024-04-03 .

^ Balcerak Jackson, Magdalena; Balcerak Jackson, Brendan (2024-02-10).

"Immersive Experience and Virtual Reality" .

Philosophy & Technology .

37 (1): 19.

doi : 10.1007/s13347-024-00707-1 .

ISSN 2210-5441 .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5749f589c8‐pkxvs
Cached time: 20250812215957
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.312 seconds
Real time usage: 0.421 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 996/1000000
Revision size: 6645/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 121424/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9612/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 32580/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.199/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6142097/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  339.712      1 -total
 33.49%  113.779      6 Template:Navbox
 31.49%  106.979      1 Template:Science_fiction
 26.89%   91.335      1 Template:Reflist
 22.30%   75.742      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 20.10%   68.294      2 Template:Cite_book
 18.52%   62.898      1 Template:Short_description
 13.05%   44.316      1 Template:Hlist
 13.00%   44.148      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.76%   43.348      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:76520896:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812215957 and revision id 1276950965. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simulated_reality&oldid=1276950965 " Categories : Simulated reality in fiction Hyperreality Science fiction themes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2025 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 21 February 2025, at 19:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Simulated reality 2 languages Add topic

