Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Chronological selection of science fiction plays 3 Research 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources Toggle the table of contents Science fiction theatre 2 languages Español Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of drama For the science fiction anthology TV series, see Science Fiction Theatre .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Science fiction theatre" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Scene from a production of Rosumovi Univerzální Roboti ( Rossum's Universal Robots ) by Karel Čapek . The play introduced the term " robot " to the world Science fiction theatre includes live dramatic works, but generally not cinema or television programmes. It has long been overshadowed by its literary and broadcast counterparts, but has an extensive history, and via the play R.U.R.

introduced the word robot into global usage.

Background [ edit ] Ralph Willingham in his 1993 study Science Fiction and the Theatre [ 1 ] catalogued 328 plays with sf elements, several of which were adaptations. Christos Callow Jr created the Internet Science Fiction Theatre Database [ 2 ] in 2018 including mainly 21st century plays that feature elements of science fiction, fantasy and horror. In addition to productions of individual plays, the science fiction theatre festival Sci-Fest LA was launched in Los Angeles in 2014, and the festivals of Otherworld and Talos: Science Fiction Theatre Festival of London [ 3 ] were both launched in 2015 in Chicago and in London, UK respectively.

Posle milijon godina (After Million of Years), written by Dragutin Ilić in 1889, is considered the first science fiction theatrical play in the history of the world literature .

[ 4 ] Chronological selection of science fiction plays [ edit ] Presumption; or, the Fate of Frankenstein adapted from Mary Shelley 's novel of the same name by Richard Brinsley Peake, 1823 Journey Through the Impossible by Jules Verne and Adolphe d'Ennery , 1882 Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde adapted from Robert Louis Stevenson 's novella The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by Thomas Russell Sullivan , 1887 Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde an unauthorised adaptation of Robert Louis Stevenson's novella The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by John McKinney, 1888 Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, Or a Mis-Spent Life adapted from Robert Louis Stevenson's novella The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by Luella Forepaugh and George F. Fish, 1897 R.U.R.

by Karel Čapek , 1920 The Blue Flame by George V. Hobart and John Willard , 1920 Back to Methuselah by George Bernard Shaw , 1922 The Makropulos Affair by Karel Čapek , 1922 The Bedbug by Vladimir Mayakovsky , 1929 The Bathhouse by Vladimir Mayakovsky, 1930 Night of the Auk by Arch Oboler, 1956 Rhinoceros by Eugène Ionesco , 1959 The Bedsitting Room by Spike Milligan and John Antrobus , 1962 The Curse of the Daleks by David Whitaker and Terry Nation , 1965 Doctor Who and the Daleks in the Seven Keys to Doomsday by Terrence Dicks , 1974 Starstruck by Elaine Lee , 1980 Henceforward...

by Alan Ayckbourn , 1987 A Clockwork Orange: A Play with Music by Anthony Burgess adapted from his novel of the same name , 1987 Greenland by Howard Brenton , 1988 Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure by Terrence Dicks, 1989 They're Made Out of Meat by Terry Bisson , 1991 short story later adapted by author as a play Communicating Doors by Alan Ayckbourn, 1994 Comic Potential by Alan Ayckbourn, 1998 Whenever by Alan Ayckbourn, 2000 Far Away by Caryl Churchill, 2000 A Number by Caryl Churchill , 2004 My Sister Sadie by Alan Ayckbourn, 2003 The Cut by Mark Ravenhill , 2004 Mercury Fur by Philip Ridley , 2005 Klingon Christmas Carol by Christopher Kidder-Mostrom and Sasha Warren, 2007 Really Old, Like Forty Five by Tamsin Oglesby , 2010 A Thousand Stars Explode in the Sky by David Eldridge , Robert Holman and Simon Stephens , 2010 Earthquakes in London by Mike Bartlett , 2010 Doctor Who Live by Will Brenton and Gareth Roberts , 2010 Frankenstein adapted from Mary Shelley's novel of the same name by Nick Dear , 2011 Future Shock by Richard Stockwell , 2011 The Nether by Jennifer Haley , 2011 The Crash of the Elysium by Tom MacRae, 2011 Constellations by Nick Payne , 2012 Mr. Burns, a Post-Electric Play by Anne Washburn , 2012 Jerome Bixby's The Man From Earth adapted by Richard Schenkman from Jerome Bixby 's film of the same name 1984 adapted from George Orwell's novel of the same name by Robert Icke and Duncan MacMillan , 2013 King Charles III by Mike Bartlett, 2014 Marjorie Prime by Jordan Harrison , 2014 The Future Boys Trilogy by Stephen Jordan , 2012–2015 Game by Mike Bartlett, 2015 Elegy by Nick Payne, 2016 Solaris adapted from Stanisław Lem 's novel of the same name by David Greig , 2019 Research [ edit ] There is generally little research on science fiction theatre, but a notable exception is "Science Fiction and the Theatre" by Ralph Willingham and the international conference series on science fiction theatre, "Stage the Future." [ 5 ] Contemporary dramatic science fiction scholar Dr. Ian Farnell, examines how science fiction narratives, themes and images have emerged as an evolving dramatic strategy for engaging twenty-first century critical discourse.

[ 6 ] His work discussing portrayals of A.I. and robotics in caregiving and medical settings, highlights the importance of continued inquiry into the challenges presented by science fiction works, and the unique possibilities for staging and intervening upon these issues through the medium of theatre.

[ 7 ] Other research projects include the Robot Theatre project by Louise LePage.

See also [ edit ] Science fiction opera References [ edit ] ^ Willingham, Ralph. 1993. Science Fiction and the Theatre. London: Greenwood Press ^ "The Internet Science Fiction Theatre Database" .

www.cyborphic.com . Retrieved 6 September 2019 .

^ "Review: Talos II, the Bread & Roses Theatre" .

www.ayoungertheatre.com . 28 March 2018 . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ English translation of Dragutin Ilić's sci-fi drama "After a Million Years" ^ http://sfra.org/resources/sfra-review/309.pdf Retrieved 31 August  2019, p.8 ^ "Dr Ian Farnell" .

warwick.ac.uk . Retrieved 2022-11-07 .

^ Farnell, Ian (2021).

"Theatre, Science Fiction, and Care Robots: Embodying Contemporary Experiences of Care" .

Theatre Journal .

73 (3): 373– 389.

doi : 10.1353/tj.2021.0073 .

S2CID 242207920 .

ProQuest 2590215714 .

Sources [ edit ] Willingham, Ralph.

Science Fiction and the Theatre . London: Greenwood Press, 1993 v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Authority control databases International FAST 2 National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_fiction_theatre&oldid=1296087979 " Category : Science fiction theatre Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 18:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science fiction theatre 2 languages Add topic

