Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 From the Enlightenment to the Industrial Revolution 1.2 Contemporary political conception of the philosophy 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Cultural progressivism 2.2 Economic progressivism 2.3 Techno progressivism 3 Progressive parties or parties with progressive factions Toggle Progressive parties or parties with progressive factions subsection 3.1 Current parties 3.2 Former parties 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Progressivism 57 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latviešu Magyar Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political philosophy in support of social progress and reform For other uses, see Progressivism (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Progressivism Movements 50501 movement BLM Conservation movement ECG Ethical movement Environmental movement Indivisible movement Labour LGBTQ movements #MeToo Occupy Wall Street Reform Social hygiene " The Resistance " Taiwan independence YIMBY Ideas Direct democracy Economic development Environmentalism Broad measures of economic progress Gender equality Green politics Human enhancement Indigenous rights Intersectionality Liberation theology Metaphysics Minority rights LGBTQ rights Multiculturalism Modernism Post Moral universalism Progress Philosophy of progress Progressive education In Latin America Progressive stack Progressive nationalism Progressive taxation Religious liberalism Reparations for slavery In the US Scientific management Scientific progress Social change Social constructivism Social justice Social justice warrior Social organization Social progress List of countries Solidarity unionism Strategic essentialism Sustainable design Ecological engineering Sustainable development Techno-progressivism Welfare state Women's suffrage Workplace democracy Youth rights Variants Christian Confucian Conservative Economic Islamic Neoliberal Techno Ideologies Ecevitism Kirchnerism Lulism Roosevelt Republican Activists Abbott (Edith) Abbott (Grace) Addams Armstrong Ahmed Ajamu X Alexander Alinsky Archer Belmont Bond Brandeis Breckinridge Cambell Cloward Dees Gilman Hammer Hanna Hassan Heumann Huang Jackson (Esther) Jackson (George) Jackson (Jesse) Kahane King (Shaun) King (Jr.) Lennon Ludmer Markey McIlrath Mckesson Page Pearson Roosevelt (Eleanor) Rothblatt Seligmann Smeeth Soros (Alexander) Soros (George) Su Walia Windsor Wong (Alice) Wong (Joshua) Woodhull Commentators Bedborough Brewis Cohen Conover Criado Perez Danskin Duberman Ellis Faust Favreau Fiorentini Glaude Goldberg Hartmann Hasan Jennings Klippenstein Kochinski Krugman Kulinski Levy Lovett Marshall McKay Miller (Stephanie) Moore Morgan Nagle Oliver Pakman Pfeiffer Piker Rather Reich (Robert) Reid Seder Sharpton Smith Stewart Thorn Vietor Withers Wise Wynn Welles Zuckerberg Intellectuals Addams Allen Anderson Benedict Benjamin Ben-Moshe Beveridge Black Blackwell Bornstein Brand Brandeis Butler Carpenter de Condorcet Cornell Davis (Mike) Dewey DiAngelo Douglas (Kelly) Douglas (William) Du Bois Dyson Ellis Fredrickson Friedan Gilmore Hammonds Helms Hirschfeld hooks Jeffries Karenga Keller Kendi McIntosh Merriam Meyers Mills Money Moore Oastler Ostrowski Painter Patterson Peled-Elhanan Rawls Reich (Wilhelm) Roberts Rothstein Saini Sanger Seuss Shaw Stanley Stein TallBear Wachowskis (Lana/Lilly) Wells Welsing West Whedon Wilderson III Zuboff Politicians Albanese Ardern Attlee Boric Brandt Bryan Casar Crockett da Silva Debs Drees Frost Gorbachev Harris Hawkins Hessel Hunter Jackson Jayapal Johnson Kennedy (John F.) Kennedy (Ted) Khanna La Follette La Guardia Lai Layton Lee (Barbara) Lee (Summer) Lewis Lyuh Mamdani Manley Markey McGovern Merkley Mottley Murayama Murphy (Emily) Murphy (Chris) Nader Nehru Norris Norton Obrador Ocasio-Cortez Omar Petro Pocan Pressley Raskin Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sánchez Sanders Tlaib Trudeau Tsai Turner Wallace Walz Warren Weaver Wilson (Harold) Yamamoto Yavlinsky Zapatero Literature Looking Backward (1888) Equality (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) Man and Superman (1903) The Universal Kinship (1906) The Open Conspiracy (1928) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) Sexuality in the Cultural Struggle (1936) Beveridge Report (1942) Rules for Radicals (1971) Humanist Manifesto II (1973) Woman Hating (1974) The Handmaid's Tale (1985) Black Athena (1987–2006) The Racial Contract (1997) War Against the Weak (2003) The Audacity of Hope (2006) The Invention of the Jewish People (2008) The New Jim Crow (2010) The Speech (2011) Our Revolution (2016) White Rage (2016) The Color of Law (2017) Inferior (2017) Not All Dead White Men (2018) White Fragility (2018) Invisible Women (2019) How to Be an Antiracist (2019) Race After Technology (2019) Superior (2019) Nice Racism (2021) Organizations Amadeu Antonio Foundation ACLU ASHA BLMGNF CGS Brennan Center for Justice Color of Change Democracy Alliance Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Equality and Human Rights Commission ENAR Fabian Society " Coefficients " FIRM Ford Foundation ILGA InCAR IPPA MacArthur Foundation Movement for Black Lives No one is illegal NWRO New SDS OSF Our Revolution PFAW Progressive Alliance Progressive International Progressive League Progressive Majority ProgressNow Red Flare RWJF SftP Tides Foundation Media CTXT HuffPost Jacobin Jezebel Lucifer Mother Jones MSNBC The Nation New Statesman The Progressive Salon Searchlight The Young Turks Rational Wiki By region Japan South Korea Taiwan United States Related Accelerationism Communitarianism Counterculture of the 1960s Critical theory Democratic capitalism Democratic socialism Red–green alliance Social democracy Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Left-wing populism Liberalism Classical radicalism Social liberalism In United States New Left Pink tide Progress Studies Progressive Era Technocracy Unitarian Universalism Woke Politics portal v t e Progressivism is a left-leaning political philosophy and reform movement that seeks to advance the human condition through social reform .

[ 1 ] Adherents hold that progressivism has universal application and endeavor to spread this idea to human societies everywhere. Progressivism arose during the Age of Enlightenment out of the belief that civility in Europe was improving due to the application of new empirical knowledge .

[ 2 ] In modern political discourse, progressivism is often associated with social liberalism , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] a left-leaning type of liberalism, and social democracy .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Within economic progressivism , there is some ideological variety on the social liberal to social democrat continuum, as well as occasionally some variance on cultural issues; examples of this include some Christian democrat and conservative-leaning communitarian movements.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] While many ideologies can fall under the banner of progressivism, both the current and historical movement are characterized by a critique of unregulated capitalism, desiring a more active democratic government to take a role in safeguarding human rights , bringing about cultural development , and being a check-and-balance on corporate monopolies .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] History [ edit ] From the Enlightenment to the Industrial Revolution [ edit ] Immanuel Kant , German philosopher John Stuart Mill , English philosopher Immanuel Kant identified progress as being a movement away from barbarism toward civilization .

[ 10 ] 18th-century philosopher and political scientist Marquis de Condorcet predicted that political progress would involve the disappearance of slavery , the rise of literacy , the lessening of sex inequality , reform of prisons , which at the time were harsh, and the decline of poverty.

[ 11 ] Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Modernity or modernisation was a key form of the idea of progress as promoted by classical liberals in the 19th and 20th centuries, who called for the rapid modernisation of the economy and society to remove the traditional hindrances to free markets and the free movements of people.

[ 12 ] In the late 19th century, a political view rose in popularity in the Western world that progress was being stifled by vast economic inequality between the rich and the poor, minimally regulated laissez-faire capitalism with out-of-control monopolistic corporations , intense and often violent conflict between capitalists and workers, with a need for measures to address these problems.

[ 13 ] Progressivism has influenced various political movements.

Social liberalism was influenced by British liberal philosopher John Stuart Mill 's conception of people being "progressive beings." [ 14 ] British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli developed progressive conservatism under one-nation Toryism .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In France, the space between social revolution and the socially conservative laissez-faire centre-right was filled with the emergence of radicalism which thought that social progress required anti-clericalism , humanism , and republicanism . Especially anti-clericalism was the dominant influence on the centre-left in many French- and Romance-speaking countries until the mid-20th century. In Imperial Germany , Chancellor Otto von Bismarck enacted various progressive social welfare measures out of paternalistic conservative motivations to distance workers from the socialist movement of the time and as humane ways to assist in maintaining the Industrial Revolution .

[ 17 ] In 1891, the Roman Catholic Church encyclical Rerum novarum issued by Pope Leo XIII condemned the exploitation of labor and urged support for labor unions and government regulation of businesses in the interests of social justice while upholding the property right and criticising socialism.

[ 18 ] A  progressive Protestant outlook called the Social Gospel emerged in North America that focused on challenging economic exploitation and poverty and, by the mid-1890s, was common in many Protestant theological seminaries in the United States.

[ 19 ] Early 20th-century progressivism included support for American engagement in World War I and the creation of and participation in the League of Nations , [ 20 ] [ 21 ] compulsory sterilisation in Scandinavia, [ 22 ] and eugenics in Great Britain, [ 23 ] and the temperance movement .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Progressives believed that progress was stifled by economic inequality , inadequately regulated monopolistic corporations, and conflict between workers and elites, arguing that corrective measures were needed.

[ 26 ] Contemporary political conception of the philosophy [ edit ] Theodore Roosevelt , 26th U.S. President Woodrow Wilson , 28th U.S. President In the United States, progressivism began as an intellectual rebellion against the political philosophy of Constitutionalism [ 27 ] as expressed by John Locke and the Founding Fathers of the American Republic , whereby the authority of government depends on observing limitations on its just powers.

[ 28 ] What began as a social movement in the 1890s grew into a popular political movement referred to as the Progressive Era ; in the 1912 United States presidential election , all three U.S. presidential candidates claimed to be progressives. While the term progressivism represents a range of diverse political pressure groups , not always united, progressives rejected social Darwinism , believing that the problems society faced, such as class warfare , greed , poverty , racism and violence , could best be addressed by providing good education, a safe environment, and an efficient workplace. Progressives lived mainly in the cities, were college educated, and believed in a strong central government.

[ 29 ] President Theodore Roosevelt of the Republican Party and later the Progressive Party declared that he "always believed that wise progressivism and wise conservatism go hand in hand." [ 30 ] President Woodrow Wilson was also a member of the American progressive movement within the Democratic Party . Progressive stances have evolved.

Imperialism was a controversial issue within progressivism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, particularly in the United States, where some progressives supported American imperialism while others opposed it.

[ 31 ] In response to World War I , President Woodrow Wilson 's Fourteen Points established the concept of national self-determination and criticised imperialist competition and colonial injustices.

Anti-imperialists supported these views in areas resisting imperial rule.

[ 32 ] During the period of acceptance of economic Keynesianism (the 1930s–1970s), there was widespread acceptance in many nations of a large role for state intervention in the economy. With the rise of neoliberalism and challenges to state interventionist policies in the 1970s and 1980s, centre-left progressive movements responded by adopting the Third Way , which emphasised a major role for the market economy .

[ 33 ] Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e There have been social democrats who have called for the social-democratic movement to move past Third Way.

[ 34 ] Prominent progressive conservative elements in the British Conservative Party have criticised neoliberalism.

[ 35 ] In the 21st century, progressives continue to favour public policy that they theorise will reduce or lessen the harmful effects of economic inequality as well as systemic discrimination such as institutional racism ; to advocate for social safety nets and workers' rights ; and to oppose corporate influence on the democratic process. The unifying theme is to call attention to the negative impacts of current institutions or ways of doing things and to advocate for social progress , i.e., for positive change as defined by any of several standards such as the expansion of democracy , increased egalitarianism in the form of economic and social equality as well as improved well-being of a population. Proponents of social democracy have identified themselves as promoting the progressive cause.

[ 36 ] Types [ edit ] Cultural progressivism [ edit ] Progressivism, in the general sense, mainly means social and cultural progressivism. The term cultural liberalism is used in a substantially similar context and can be said to be a synonym for cultural progressivism.

[ 37 ] Unlike progressives in a broader sense, some cultural progressives may be economically centrist , conservative , or politically libertarian . The Czech Pirate Party is classified as a (cultural or social) progressive party, [ 38 ] and it calls itself "economically centrist and socially liberal".

[ 39 ] Economic progressivism [ edit ] Main article: Economic progressivism Economic progressivism —also New Progressive Economics [ 40 ] —is a term used to distinguish it from progressivism in cultural fields. Economic progressives may draw from a variety of economic traditions, including democratic capitalism , democratic socialism , social democracy , and social liberalism . Overall, economic progressives' views are rooted in the concept of social justice and the common good , and aim to improve the human condition through government regulation , social protections and the maintenance of public goods .

[ 41 ] Some economic progressives may show centre-right views on cultural issues. These movements are related to communitarian conservative movements such as Christian democracy and one-nation conservatism .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Techno progressivism [ edit ] Main article: Techno-progressivism An early mention of techno-progressivism appeared in 1999 as the removal of "all political, cultural, biological, and psychological limits to self-actualization and self-realization".

[ 42 ] According to techno-progressivism, scientific and technical aspects of progress are linked to ethical and social developments in society. Therefore, according to the majority of techno-progressive viewpoints, advancements in science and technology will not be considered proper progress until and unless they are accompanied by a fair distribution of the costs, risks, and rewards of these new capabilities. Many techno-progressive critics and supporters believe that while improved democracy, increased justice, decreased violence, and a broader culture of rights are all desirable, they are insufficient on their own to address the problems of modern technological societies unless and until they are accompanied by scientific and technological advancements that uphold and apply these ideals.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ self-published source?

] Progressive parties or parties with progressive factions [ edit ] Part of the Politics Series Party politics Political spectrum Left-wing Far-left Centre-left Centre Centre-left Radical centre Centre-right Right-wing Centre-right Far-right Syncretism Major ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Christian democracy Communism Conservatism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Green politics Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Monarchism Nationalism Populism Progressivism Classical radicalism Republicanism Social democracy Socialism Syncretism Third Way Types Bloc party Elite party Cartel party Competitive Catch-all party Entrepreneurial party Ethnic party Fraternal party Major party / Minor party Mass party Ruling party / Opposition party Rump party Parliamentary opposition Party of power Official party status Single-issue party Transnational / International Leaders and organization Backbencher Caucus Caucus chair Frontbencher Lead candidate Leader of the Opposition Majority leader Minority leader Political faction Parliamentary leader Party chair Party leader Party spokesperson Party secretary Shadow cabinet Whip Internal elections Primary election Leadership election Open list Party convention/conference Leadership convention Party discipline Conscience vote Crossing the floor Party discipline Party line Party-line vote Party switching Whip Party systems One-party Dominant-party Two-party Multi-party Non-partisan Coalitions between parties Parliamentary group Divided government Coalition government Confidence and supply Consensus government Cordon sanitaire Grand coalition Hung parliament Majority government Minority government National unity government Rotation government Tech-Trad Alliance Lists of political parties Ruling parties by country Political parties by region Banned political parties Politics portal v t e Current parties [ edit ] Afghanistan : Solidarity Party of Afghanistan Argentina : Union for the Homeland (factions) [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Australia : Australian Greens , [ 48 ] Fusion Party , Australian Labor Party (factions) Brazil : Workers' Party , [ 49 ] Brazilian Socialist Party (factions), [ 50 ] Democratic Labour Party , [ 51 ] Socialism and Liberty Party [ 52 ] Canada : Liberal Party of Canada , [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] New Democratic Party , Canadian Future Party Chile : Broad Front , Liberal Party of Chile Colombia : Humane Colombia Croatia : Social Democratic Party [ 57 ] Czech Republic : Czech Pirate Party [ 38 ] [ 58 ] France : Radical Party of the Left , New Deal [ 59 ] Germany : Volt Germany , [ 60 ] Alliance 90/The Greens , Party of Humanists Greece : Syriza , [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Course of Freedom Hungary : Democratic Coalition Italy : Possible , Green Europe Indonesia : Green Party of Indonesia [ 65 ] Japan : Social Democratic Party , Japanese Communist Party , [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Reiwa Shinsengumi [ 69 ] Kosovo : Vetëvendosje Kuwait : Kuwaiti Progressive Movement Mexico : Morena , Party of the Democratic Revolution , Citizens' Movement Netherlands : Democrats 66 , GroenLinks , [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] PvdA [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Pakistan : Pakistan Peoples Party Peru : New Peru for Good Living Philippines : Akbayan [ 76 ] Poland : Polish Initiative , New Left , Left Together , Polish Socialist Party , The Greens , Civic Platform (faction) Portugal : Socialist Party , Left Bloc , People Animals Nature , [ 77 ] LIVRE , Volt Portugal Romania : Save Romania Union , Democracy and Solidarity Party , Volt Romania , Health Education Nature Sustainability Party Russia : Yabloko [ 78 ] Serbia : Party of the Radical Left Singapore : Progress Singapore Party [ 79 ] Slovakia : Progressive Slovakia South Korea : Justice Party , Progressive Party , [ 80 ] [ 81 ] Mirae Party Spain : Spanish Socialist Worker's Party , [ 61 ] [ 82 ] Más Madrid , [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Sumar , Republican Left of Catalonia Taiwan : Democratic Progressive Party , [ 85 ] [ 86 ] New Power Party , Taiwan People's Party (factions) Thailand : Thai Liberal Party , [ 87 ] People's Party Turkey : Republican People's Party United Kingdom : Green Party of England and Wales , [ 88 ] Labour Party (factions), Liberal Democrats (factions), Scottish National Party , Plaid Cymru , Social Democratic and Labour Party , Transform United States : Democratic Party (factions), [ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Working Families Party , [ 92 ] Green Party of the United States [ 93 ] Venezuela : Popular Will Former parties [ edit ] Argentina : Front for Victory [ 94 ] Australia : Reason Party Canada : Progressive Party of Canada Chile : Social Convergence [ 95 ] France : Movement Party , [ 96 ] Opportunist Republicans Hong Kong : Demosisto Iran : Society for the Progress of Iran Israel : Meretz Japan : Japan Socialist Party Netherlands : Free-thinking Democratic League [ 97 ] New Zealand : Jim Anderton's Progressive Party Pakistan : Sindh National Front Poland : Spring , Your Movement Romania : Romanian Social Party , National Union for the Progress of Romania South Korea : Progressive Party (1956) , Democratic Labor Party , [ 98 ] [ 99 ] New Progressive Party , Unified Progressive Party Spain : Unidas Podemos Thailand : Move Forward Party United States : Progressive Party (1912) , Progressive Party (1924) , Progressive Party (1948) See also [ edit ] Affirmative action Democracy Democratic socialism Economic progressivism Egalitarianism Left-wing politics Green politics Left-libertarianism Left-wing nationalism Left-wing populism Liberal socialism Liberalism Modern liberalism in the United States Managerial state Progressive Era Progressive conservatism Progressive Party Progressive tax Radicalism (historical) Reformist party (Japan) Revisionism (Marxism) Secularism Secular liberalism Transhumanism New eugenics ( Not the precursor ) Techno-progressivism Transhumanist politics References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Progressivism in English" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Archived from the original on 21 March 2019 . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ Harold Mah.

Enlightenment Phantasies: Cultural Identity in France and Germany, 1750–1914 . Cornell University. (2003). p. 157.

^ Klaus P. Fischer, ed. (2007).

America in White, Black, and Gray: A History of the Stormy 1960s . Bloomsbury Publishing USA. p. 39.

^ Great Courses, ed. (2014).

The Modern Political Tradition: Episode 17: Progressivism and New Liberalism . Great Courses.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Helen Hardacre; Timothy S. George; Keigo Komamura; Franziska Seraphim, eds. (2021).

Japanese Constitutional Revisionism and Civic Activism . Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 136, 162.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Gerstle, Gary (2022).

The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0197519646 .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 August 2024 .

The most sweeping account of how neoliberalism came to dominate American politics for nearly a half century before crashing against the forces of Trumpism on the right and a new progressivism on the left.

^ a b "America Is Becoming a Social Democracy" .

Foreign Policy . 7 May 2021 . Retrieved 24 October 2024 .

^ a b "Did you know there's a third party based on Catholic teaching?" .

Catholic News Agency . 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 24 December 2021 .

Politically, we would be considered center-right on social issues ^ a b "New political party says its roots are in Catholic Social Teaching" . 26 November 2018 . Retrieved 17 November 2021 .

I was working on my doctoral dissertation largely concerning difficulties and opportunities for socially conservative, economically progressive movements, and desired to get involved in such movements ... and was glad to see that ASP was interested in applying such ways of thinking to contemporary issues.

^ Kant, Immanuel; Reiss, Hans Siegbert (1991).

"Kant: political writings" . Cambridge [England]; New York: Cambridge University Press.

^ Nisbet, Robert (1980).

History of the Idea of Progress . New York: Basic Books. ch 5 ^ Joyce Appleby; Lynn Hunt & Margaret Jacob (1995).

Telling the Truth about History . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 78.

ISBN 9780393078916 .

^ Nugent, Walter (2010).

Progressivism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780195311068 .

^ Alan Ryan.

The Making of Modern Liberalism . p. 25.

^ Patrick Dunleavy, Paul Joseph Kelly, Michael Moran.

British Political Science: Fifty Years of Political Studies . Oxford, England; Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell, 2000. pp. 107–108.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Robert Blake.

Disraeli . Second Edition. London: Eyre & Spottiswoode (Publishers) Ltd, 1967. p. 524.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Union Contributions to Labor Welfare Policy and Practice: Past, Present, and Future . Routledge, 16, 2013. p. 172.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Faith Jaycox.

The Progressive Era . New York: Infobase Publishing, 2005. p. 85.

^ Charles Howard Hopkins, The Rise of the Social Gospel in American Protestantism, 1865–1915 (1940).

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ Freeden, Michael (2005).

Liberal Languages: Ideological Imaginations and Twentieth-Century Progressive Thought .

Princeton : Princeton University Press . pp.

144– 165.

ISBN 9780691116778 .

^ Ambrosius, Lloyd E. (April 2006). "Woodrow Wilson, Alliances, and the League of Nations".

The Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era .

5 (2): 139– 165.

doi : 10.1017/S153778140000298X .

S2CID 162853992 .

^ Roll-Hansen, Nils (1989). "Geneticists and the Eugenics Movement in Scandinavia".

The British Journal for the History of Science .

22 (3): 335– 346.

doi : 10.1017/S0007087400026194 .

JSTOR 4026900 .

PMID 11621984 .

S2CID 44566095 .

^ Leonard, Thomas (2005).

"Retrospectives: Eugenics and Economics in the Progressive Era" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

19 (4): 207– 224.

doi : 10.1257/089533005775196642 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 August 2017 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ James H. Timberlake, Prohibition and the Progressive Movement, 1900–1920 (1970) [ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ "Prohibition: A Case Study of Progressive Reform" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved 4 October 2017 .

^ Nugent, Walter (2010).

Progressivism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780195311068 .

^ Waluchow, Wil (17 August 2018). "Constitutionalism". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Watson, Bradley (2020).

Progressivism : the strange history of a radical idea . Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press. p. 11.

ISBN 9780268106973 .

^ "The Progressive Era (1890–1920)" . The Eleanor Roosevelt Papers Project.

Archived 20 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 31 September 2014.

^ Lurie, Jonathan (2012).

William Howard Taft: The Travails of a Progressive Conservative . New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 196.

^ Nugent, Walter (2010).

Progressivism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 33.

ISBN 9780195311068 .

^ Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace . p. 309.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Jane Lewis, Rebecca Surender.

Welfare State Change: Towards a Third Way?

.

Oxford University Press , 2004. pp. 3–4, 16.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ After the Third Way: The Future of Social Democracy in Europe . I.B. Taurus, 2012. p. 47.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Hugh Bochel.

The Conservative Party and Social Policy . The Policy Press, 2011. p. 108.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Henning Meyer, Jonathan Rutherford.

The Future of European Social Democracy: Building the Good Society . Palgrave Macmillan, 2012. p. 108.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Nancy L. Cohen, ed. (2012).

Delirium: The Politics of Sex in America . Catapult.

ISBN 9781619020962 .

When the going got tough, the economic progressives got going back to the Reagan days when the cultural progressives were to blame. Clinton's presidential campaign had "signaled cultural moderation and articulated the pocketbook frustrations of ordinary people," Robert Kuttner, editor of The American Prospect ventured. "But in office, he seemed a cultural liberal who failed to produce on economics." ^ a b Slawek Blitch.

Finally, a healthy dose of anti-establishment . politicalcritique.org. 8 January 2018.

^ "Piráti chtějí vést liberální politický střed a v květnu získat 20 procent, zaznělo na fóru v Táboře" (in Czech).

ČT24 . 19 January 2019.

^ Prokop, Andrew (4 October 2024).

"The rise — and fall? — of the New Progressive Economics" .

Vox .

^ "The Origins and Evolution of Progressive Economics" .

^ Sikora, Tomasz (2003).

The Cultural Dimension of Waste: a Critique of the Ethos of Technology. Economic and Environmental Studies . p. 103–112.

^ Carrico, Dale (2004).

"The Trouble with "Transhumanism": Part Two" . Archived from the original on 8 September 2016 . Retrieved 28 January 2007 .

^ Carrico, Dale (2005).

"Technoprogressivism Beyond Technophilia and Technophobia" . Archived from the original on 8 September 2016 . Retrieved 28 January 2007 .

^ "La llamativa definición política de Alberto Fernández: "Soy de la rama del liberalismo progresista peronista" " .

Clarín . 19 July 2019. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019 . Retrieved 6 November 2019 .

^ "Juan Grabois lanza el Frente Patria Grande que lideraría Cristina Kirchner" .

Perfil (in Spanish). 27 October 2018 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ "Alberto Fernández: "Soy más hijo de la cultura hippie que de las veinte verdades peronistas" " . 12 April 2020.

^ Lopez, Daniel; Bandt, Adam (3 September 2021).

"Australian Greens Are Building a Movement to End Neoliberalism" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 19 October 2021 .

^ Liisa L. North, Timothy D. Clark, ed. (2017).

Dominant Elites in Latin America: From Neo-Liberalism to the 'Pink Tide' .

Springer . p. 212.

ISBN 9783319532554 .

In Brazil, as Simone Bohn makes straightforward (Chap. 3), the progressive Workers' Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores, PT) governments did not threaten the power of the national elite or landlord class; ...

^ "A trajetória do PSB, o Partido que quer lançar Joaquim Barbosa à Presidência" , BBC News Brasil ^ "O Que é ser progressist?" , BBC News Brasil ^ O que pensam os partidos progressistas sobre o "Efeito Lula" , 17 March 2021 ^ Alvin Finkel (2012).

Our Lives: Canada after 1945: Second Edition . James Lorimer & Company. p. 5.

... capitalism and a wise federal bureaucracy presided over by a progressive Liberal party with intelligent leaders.

^ Robert Harris (2018).

Song of a Nation: The Untold Story of Canada's National Anthem . McClelland & Stewart.

^ "Trudeau made pushing his agenda more complicated with a failed bid for majority" .

CBC . 21 September 2021 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ Emmett Macfarlane (2021).

Dilemmas of Free Expression . University of Toronto Press. p. 317.

^ Gladoic, Andrea (14 June 2018).

"Croatia's Largest Political Parties" .

Expat in Croatia . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ Katerina Safarikova.

"Czechs Eye 'Symbolic' Pirate Breakthrough in Europe" . /balkaninsight.com. 21 May 2019.

^ "Notre charte fondatrice" .

nouvelledonne.fr (in French).

^ "Volt Germany" .

voltdeutschland.org (in German).

^ a b Gregor Fitzi; Juergen Mackert; Bryan S. Turner, eds. (2018).

Populism and the Crisis of Democracy: Volume 3: Migration, Gender, and Religion .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781351608916 .

Progressive groups such as Syriza and Podemos6 tend, on the contrary, to show solidarity towards migrants and refugees, as in general being the weakest components of the society. The Five Star Movement that defines itself as neither ...

^ Christopher Chase-Dunn, Paul Almeida, ed. (2020).

Global Struggles and Social Change: From Prehistory to World Revolution in the Twenty-First Century . JHU Press. p. 133.

ISBN 9781421438634 .

The Arab Spring, the Latin American Pink Tide, the Indignados in Spain, the Occupy movement, the rise of progressive social movement– based parties in Spain (Podemos) and in Greece (Syriza), and the spike in mass protests in 2011 and ...

^ Prebble Q. Ramswell, ed. (2017).

Euroscepticism and the Rising Threat from the Left and Right: The Concept of Millennial Fascism . Lexington Books. p. 86.

ISBN 9781498546041 .

SYRIZA massively scooped up the votes of leftist, progressive, socially liberal young people, as well as the trade union voters, not specifically aligned with the Communist Party, to gain 52 seats.

^ Ken McMullen, Martin McQuillan, ed. (2015).

Oxi: An Act of Resistance: The Screenplay and Commentary, Including interviews with Derrida, Cixous, Balibar, and Negri . Lexington Books. p. 12.

ISBN 9781783482702 .

The choice to be made for Syriza is between fidelity to a progressive social agenda and retaining Greece's place within a community of nations tied together by a commitment to a neoliberal global economy. The skill with which they ...

^ "Mengenal Partai Hijau Indonesia: Suarakan Isu Lingkungan, Anti Mengultuskan Pemimpin" .

mojok.co (in Indonesian). 8 February 2023 . Retrieved 24 June 2023 .

^ Matthew Allen, Rumi Sakamoto, ed. (2007).

Popular Culture, Globalization and Japan . Routledge.

... capturing 295 seats in the Diet. Progressive parties like the Japanese Communist Party and Social Democratic Party, ...

^ Willy Jou, Masahisa Endo, ed. (2016).

EGenerational Gap in Japanese Politics: A Longitudinal Study of Political Attitudes and Behaviour .

Springer . p. 29.

ISBN 9781137503428 .

Conventional wisdom, still dominant in media and academic circles, holds that the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and the Japanese Communist Party (JCP) occupy the conservative and progressive ends of the ideological spectrum, ...

^ " "선제공격 능력 갖추자" 日정부 주장에…"시대착오적" 비판" .

Edaily . 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 3 December 2021 .

...

개헌에 반대해 온 진보 성향의 일본공산당은 "적 기지에 대한 공격력을 갖추더라도 상대국의 지하나 이동발사대 등 미사일 위치를 모두 파악하고 파괴하는 것은 불가능하다"며 ...

[... The progressive position Japanese Communist Party, which has opposed the constitutional amendment, said, "Even if it has offensive power against enemy bases, it is impossible to identify and destroy all missile locations such as underground or mobile launchers of the other country" ...] ^ Brasor, Philip (20 July 2019).

"Citizen campaigns seek to increase voter turnout in Upper House election" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved 24 July 2019 .

^ "GroenLinks (GL)" .

www.parlement.com (in Dutch) . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ a b GroenLinks.

"EEN PROGRESSIEF OPPOSITIEAKKOORD" .

^ a b GroenLinks.

"PVDA EN GROENLINKS SLUITEN PROGRESSIEF OPPOSITIEAKKOORD" .

^ a b ProDemos NL.

"Indeling van partijen" .

^ a b "Progressief Oppositieakkoord" .

PvdA (in Dutch) . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ "Partij van de Arbeid (PvdA)" .

www.parlement.com (in Dutch) . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ "About Akbayan – Akbayan Party List" .

akbayan.org.ph . Archived from the original on 27 July 2018 . Retrieved 27 July 2018 .

^ The politics of Portugal – who are the parties?

^ Lewis, Paul G. (2018).

Party Development and Democratic Change in Post-Communist Europe: The First Decade . Taylor & Francis US.

ISBN 9780714681740 – via Google Books.

^ "The Progress Singapore Party Offers A 'Progressive' Vision for Singapore" . 18 June 2020.

^ "Minjung Party press conference" .

Yonhap News Agency . 11 October 2018 . Retrieved 16 June 2020 .

Members of the progressive Minjung Party hold a press conference in front of former President Chun Doo-hwan's home in Seoul on May 18, 2020.

^ "South Korea Backtracks on Easing Sanctions After Trump Comment" .

The New York Times . 11 October 2018.

"The dog barks, but the caravan moves on," Lee Eun-Hae, a spokeswoman at the minor progressive Minjung Party, said in a statement about Mr. Trump and closer relations with North Korea.

^ Sebastián Royo, ed. (2020).

Why Banks Fail: The Political Roots of Banking Crises in Spain . Springer Nature. p. 298.

ISBN 9781137532282 .

As of January 2020 (the time of writing), a new leftist government coalition between the Socialist Party and the leftist populist Unidas Podemos that emerged from the November 2019 election is coming to power with a progressive agenda ...

^ "Errejón pide a Gabilondo centrarse en lo importante, una mayoría progresista" .

La Vanguardia (in Spanish). Madrid. EFE. 24 May 2019 . Retrieved 24 May 2019 .

^ "The Center Cannot Hold in Spain, but Can the Left Take Advantage?" .

thenation.com . The Nation. 3 May 2021.

^ "Democracy prevails in Taiwan" .

Taiwan News . 12 January 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

^ Kuo, Yu-Ying, ed. (2018).

Policy Analysis in Taiwan . Policy Press.

The Democratic Progressive Party, founded in 1986, is a progressive and liberal political party in Taiwan.

^ Nidhi Eoseewong (8 May 2018).

"Nidhi Eoseewong: An open letter to Pheu Thai" .

prachatai .

^ "Green Party of England and Wales elects new leaders" .

europeangreens.edu . European Green Party. Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ Ball, Molly.

"The Battle Within the Democratic Party" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 28 January 2017 .

^ Joseph M. Hoeffel, ed. (2014).

Fighting for the Progressive Center in the Age of Trump . ABC-CLIO.

^ Chotiner, Isaac (2 March 2020).

"How Socialist Is Bernie Sanders?" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 14 February 2021 .

^ "Progressives contemplate post-Cuomo politics" . Spectrum News. 11 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2021 .

^ Denisha Jones, Jesse Hagopian, ed. (2020).

Black Lives Matter at School: An Uprising for Educational Justice .

Haymarket Books .

ISBN 9781642595307 .

She later ran as a New York State lieutenant gubernatorial candidate on a progressive Green Party platform ^ Daniel K. Lewis, ed. (2014).

The History of Argentina, 2nd Edition .

ABC-CLIO . p. 193.

ISBN 9781610698610 .

Progressive decrees, exemplified by the government's legalization of same-sex marriage in July, depicted the FPV as progressive. Behind the scenes, Kirchner promoted 'La Campora," and Peronist youth organization.

^ "El pinochetista Kast y el progresista Boric definirán la presidencia el 19 de diciembre elecciones en Chile" .

^ Rémond, René (1966). University of Pennsylvania Press (ed.).

The Right Wing in France: From 1815 to de Gaulle .

^ David Broughton (1999).

Changing Party Systems in Western Europe . Continuum International Publishing Group. pp. 166–.

ISBN 9781855673281 . Retrieved 20 August 2012 .

^ Kim, Sunhyuk (2007), "Civil society and democratization in Korea" , Korean Society , Taylor & Francis, p. 65, ISBN 9780203966648 ^ Chang, Yun-Shik (2008), "Left and right in South Korean politics" , Korea Confronts Globalization , Taylor & Francis, p. 176, ISBN 9780203931141 Sources [ edit ] Dudley, Larkin Sims. "Enduring narratives from progressivism." International Journal of Organization Theory & Behavior 7.3 (2003): 315–340.

Eisenach, Eldon J., ed.

Social and Political Thought of American Progressivism.

(Hackett Publishing, 2006).

Frohman, Larry. "The Break-Up of the Poor Laws—German Style: Progressivism and the Origins of the Welfare State, 1900–1918." Comparative Studies in Society and History 50.4 (2008): 981–1009.

Jackson, Ben. "Equality and the British Left: A study in progressive political thought, 1900-64." in Equality and the British Left (2013) Kloppenberg, James T.

Uncertain Victory: Social Democracy and Progressivism in European and American Thought, 1870–1920 . Oxford University Press, US, 1988.

ISBN 0195053044 .

Lakoff, George .

Don't Think of an Elephant: Know Your Values and Frame the Debate . Chelsea Green Publishing, 2004.

ISBN 1931498717 .

Link, Arthur S.

and McCormick, Richard L.

Progressivism (American History Series) . Harlan Davidson, 1983.

ISBN 0882958143 .

McGerr, Michael .

A Fierce Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the Progressive Movement in America, 1870–1920 . 2003.

Nugent, Walter.

Progressivism: A very short introduction (Oxford University Press, 2009).

Petrow, Stefan. "Progressivism in Australia: the case of John Daniel Fitzgerald, 1900-1922." Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society 90.1 (2004): 53–74.

Sawyer, Stephen, and William J. Novak. "Emancipation and the creation of modern liberal states in America and France." Journal of the civil war era 3.4 (2013): 467–500.

online [ permanent dead link ] Schutz, Aaron.

Social Class, Social Action, and Education: The Failure of Progressive Democracy . Palgrave, Macmillan, 2010.

ISBN 9780230105911 .

Tröhler, Daniel.

Progressivism . In: Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Education . Oxford University Press, 2017.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Progressivism .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Progressivism .

Progressivism – entry at the Encyclopædia Britannica Government v t e Politics and government Overviews State Nation Empire Central government Unitary state Federal government National unity government Levels: Local government County government Administrative division Municipality Township Systems Lists: Govt systems Countries by system Systems: Anarchy Aristocracy Bureaucracy Capitalism Confederation Colonialism Communism Electocracy Ergatocracy Federalism Feudalism Geniocracy Kleptocracy Meritocracy Military dictatorship Monarchy Oligarchy Plutocracy Republicanism Socialism Statism Technocracy Theocracy Totalitarianism Democracy : Parliamentary system Presidential system Cellular Collaborative Consensus Conservative Cosmopolitan Direct democracy Representative democracy Republic Philosophies Agrarianism Anarchism Authoritarianism Centrism Christian democracy Collectivism Communalism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Egalitarianism Environmentalism Extremism Familialism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Liberalism Progressivism Theoreticians: John Locke Functions Social insurance Law enforcement Unemployment benefits National healthcare Public education Military Espionage Regulation: Environmental regulation Banking regulation Food inspection Municipal: Traffic lights Sanitation Street cleaning Components Documents Constitution Charter Uncodified constitution Roles: Head of state Head of government Monarch President Prime minister Bodies: Cabinet Ministry Judiciary Legislature Legislative bodies Congress Parliament Council Assembly Legislative council Governance processes Process: Hearing Committee Town meeting Outcomes: Legislation Regulation Zoning Law : Precedent Politics Elections : Voting Campaigns Groups: Political parties Advocacy groups Issues: Civil rights Environmentalism Academic Fields of study Political science Urban planning Sociology History Overviews: Political history of the world History of political thought Reforms Suffrage Documents: Magna Carta U.S. Constitution International Diplomacy Embassy Treaty International law World: World government United Nations European Union World Court Related Human history History of philosophy Civilization Templates: {{ Political ideologies }} {{ Political culture }} {{ Political spectrum }} {{ Social and political philosophy }} {{ liberalism }} {{ Conservatism navbox }} {{ aspects of capitalism }} {{ Western culture }} {{ Autonomous types of first-tier administration }} {{ World government }} Categories Forms of government Types of democracy Political parties v t e Common types of government ministers and ministries Leadership President Vice president Prime minister Deputy prime minister First minister Deputy First Minister Premier Office of the president Cabinet department / Office of the prime minister Speaker / President of the assembly Minister Titles Secretary of state Minister of state Deputy minister Undersecretary Assistant minister/Parliamentary secretary Associate Minister Defence / foreign affairs / public safety Ministry of defence Ministry of foreign affairs Immigration minister Interior minister Interior ministry International development minister Europe Economics/ infrastructure Commerce minister Ministry of the economy Ministry of finance Minister of industry Ministry of infrastructure Ministry of trade and industry Ministry of transport Environment / natural resources Energy minister Ministry of energy Environment minister Ministry of electricity Ministry of petroleum Ministry of water resources Social Culture minister Ministry of culture Education minister Ministry of education and culture Health minister Ministry of health Information minister Housing minister Ministry of housing Ministry of justice Minister of labour Ministry of labour Regional minister Ministry of sports Tourism minister Ministry of home affairs Ministry of religious affairs Ministry of science Ministry of social affairs Ministry of social security Minister for Veterans Ministry of women Minister for women Other Minister without portfolio Lists Presidents Vice presidents Prime ministers Deputy prime ministers Presidents of assembly Agriculture ministries Climate change ministers Communications ministries Defence ministers Education ministries Environment ministers Environment ministries Finance ministers Foreign ministers Forest ministries Health ministries ( mental health ) Interior ministers Public works ministries Government ministers by portfolio Ministries by portfolio v t e Public services Municipalization Nationalization Progressive tax Concepts Common good Free-culture movement Free newspaper Product sample Public administration Public bad Public domain Public good (economics) Public health Public interest Public land Public ownership Public policy Public rights Public sphere Public procurement Public trust Public value Universal access to education Universal basic services Basic services Civil service Fire department Housing First Law enforcement Postal service Savings system Public broadcasting Public transport Universal basic services Public utility Electric utility Oil & gas Telecommunication Municipal broadband Public infrastructure Public water system Waste management Public works Drinking fountain Drug checking Free clinic Free education Infrastructure Needle and syringe programmes Public art Public bank Public bookcase Public computer Public hospital Public library Public open space Public school Public space Public toilet Public university Reagent testing Supervised injection site Urban park Social services Publicly funded health care Public housing Job creation Job guarantee Single-payer health care National health insurance Social insurance Social pension Social security Youth services See also Commons Free public transport Government auction Public float Public holiday Public offering Public sector Public security Public use Public viewing area Category Commons v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism Authority control databases National Germany United States 2 Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5cf665967b‐phjwk
Cached time: 20250818153252
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.620 seconds
Real time usage: 1.962 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13643/1000000
Revision size: 50793/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 634547/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 65455/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 496861/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.889/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22198144/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1387.062      1 -total
 42.39%  587.929      1 Template:Reflist
 13.39%  185.734      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.66%  175.648     31 Template:Cite_web
 11.30%  156.788     32 Template:Cite_book
  9.72%  134.776     13 Template:Navbox
  9.61%  133.363      5 Template:Excerpt
  8.30%  115.162      7 Template:Cite_news
  7.53%  104.427      1 Template:Liberalism
  6.52%   90.421      1 Template:Progressivism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26636309:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818153252 and revision id 1304061689. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Progressivism&oldid=1304061689 " Categories : Progressivism Centre-left ideologies Democratic socialism Green politics Justice Left-wing ideologies Liberal socialism Liberalism Political ideologies Political movements Social change Social democracy Social justice Social liberalism Social movements Sociocultural evolution theory Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2022 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) Articles containing Korean-language text CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2016 Use Oxford spelling from April 2016 Articles with excerpts All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from September 2022 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 18:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Progressivism 57 languages Add topic

