Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career and public service 3 Selected bibliography 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cedric Robinson 8 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American professor (1940–2016) For the Morecambe Bay sand pilot, see Cedric Robinson (guide) .

Cedric Robinson Robinson in 2006 Born Cedric James Hill November 5, 1940 Oakland, California , U.S.

Died June 5, 2016 (aged 75) Other names Cedric James Robinson Education University of California, Berkeley San Francisco State University Stanford University Cedric James Robinson (November 5, 1940 – June 5, 2016 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] ) was an American professor in the Department of Black Studies and the Department of Political Science at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). He headed the Department of Black Studies and the Department of Political Science. He served as the director of the Center for Black Studies Research. Robinson's areas of interest included classical and modern political philosophy , radical social theory in the African diaspora , comparative politics , racial capitalism , and the relationships between and among media and politics .

Early life [ edit ] Robinson was given the name Cedric James Hill when he was born on November 5, 1940, in Alameda County, California .

[ 4 ] He grew up in Oakland , California. He attended the University of California, Berkeley , where he earned a B.A.

degree in social anthropology in 1963, and Stanford University , where he received an M.A.

and Ph.D.

in political theory in 1974.

He became a political activist during his student days, when he protested against the university administration and American foreign and domestic policies along with other Black radical students.

[ 5 ] He was part of the Afro-American Association at Berkeley, a student group that discussed Black identity, African decolonization, historical and contemporary racism, and related topics.

[ 5 ] Robinson's grandfather, Winston "Cap" Whiteside, influenced his radical political views. His grandfather had been forced to flee after defending his wife Cecilia, Robinson's future grandmother, from an abusive boss in their hometowns of Mobile, Alabama , and decided to go to California during the Great Migration in the 1920s. Robinson named C. L. R. James and Terence Hopkins as other thinkers who shaped his political outlook.

[ 6 ] Career and public service [ edit ] After leaving Berkeley, Robinson was drafted into the U.S. Army and also worked at the Alameda County Probation Department.

[ 7 ] From 1971 to 1973, he was a lecturer in Political Science and Black Studies at the University of Michigan . In 1973, he accepted his first tenure-track job at Binghamton University –State University of New York. In 1978, Robinson joined the faculty at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and became director of the Center for Black Studies Research.

In 1980, trying to correct what they saw as overall media bias as well as media laziness in accepting what the White House, the US State Department , and The Pentagon said about the Third World and American relations with it, Robinson and UCSB student Corey Dubin started Third World News Review ( TWNR ) on the campus and community radio station, KCSB . Five years later the program became available on public access television . Since 1980, UCSB students from the Third World and other UCSB faculty members have contributed to the program, produced it, or both.

[ 8 ] The author of five books, Robinson also had articles appear in academic journals and anthologies on subjects ranging from political thought in the United States, Africa , and the Caribbean to Western social theory, film, and the press.

Selected bibliography [ edit ] Forgeries of Memory & Meaning: Blacks & the Regimes of Race in American Theater & Film Before World War II . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press , 2007.

An Anthropology of Marxism . 1st ed., London: Ashgate Publishing , 2001. 2nd ed., Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press , 2019.

Black Movements in America . New York: Routledge , 1997.

Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical Tradition . 1st ed., London: Zed Books , 1983. 2nd ed., Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press , 2000. 3rd ed., Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press , 2020.

Terms of Order: Political Science and the Myth of Leadership . 1st ed., Albany, NY: State University of New York Press , 1980. 2nd ed., Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press , 2016.

References [ edit ] ^ "Office of the Chancellor, UC Santa Barbara" ^ "In Memoriam: Cedric Robinson (1940-2016)" Archived 2016-08-20 at the Wayback Machine , University of California Humanities Research Institute, June 7, 2016.

^ "'A Brilliant Political Theorist': David Leonard Reflects On Cedric Robinson" , African American Intellectual History Society (AAIHS), June 8, 2016.

^ "The Birth of Cedric Hill" .

California Birth Index .

^ a b Kelley, Robin (June 2016).

"Cedric J. Robinson: the Making of a Black Radical Intellectual" .

The Frantz Fanon Blog: Reading Frantz Fanon in Grahamstown, South Africa .

^ Kelley, Robin (November 1, 2016).

"Revisiting Black Marxism in the Wake of Black Lives Matter" .

The Frantz Fanon Blog: Reading Frantz Fanon in Grahamstown, South Africa .

^ Kelley, Robin D. G. (Winter 2017).

"What Did Cedric Robinson Mean by Racial Capitalism?" .

Boston Review . No. 1, Race, Capitalism, Justice . Retrieved October 25, 2022 .

^ Robinson, Elizabeth (October 2005). "Twenty-five years of the Third World News Review".

Race & Class .

47 (2, Cedric Robinson and the philosophy of Black resistance ): 78.

doi : 10.1177/0306396805058084 .

External links [ edit ] " Celebrating the Black radical tradition ", Institute of Race Relations , September 28, 2005.

Gregory Meyerson, " Rethinking Black Marxism: Reflections on Cedric Robinson and Others ", Cultural Logic , Vol. 3, No. 2, Spring 2000.

Chuck Morse , " Capitalism, Marxism, and the Black Radical Tradition: An Interview with Cedric Robinson ", Perspectives on Anarchist Theory , Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring 1999.

" Cedric Robinson: Short Biography & Selected Works ", Perspectives on Anarchist Theory , Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring 1999.

Cornel West , " The Making of the Black Radical Tradition ", Monthly Review , Vol. 40, No. 4, September 1988.

Cedric J. Robinson and Elizabeth P. Robinson Collection on Third World News Review , Tamiment Library and Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives at New York University Special Collections Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Belgium Artists FID Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cedric_Robinson&oldid=1304059430 " Categories : 1940 births 2016 deaths 20th-century African-American academics 20th-century American academics 21st-century African-American academics 21st-century American academics Academics from California African-American Marxists American activists American Marxists American non-fiction writers American television personalities Stanford University alumni University of California, Berkeley alumni University of California, Santa Barbara faculty Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 18:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cedric Robinson 8 languages Add topic

