Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 2.1 On Piety 2.2 Letters 3 Notes 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Ancient testimony 4.2 Modern scholarship 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Theano (philosopher) 34 languages Asturianu Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Sicilianu Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 6th-century BC Pythagorean philosopher Theano Θεανώ Born c.

6th century BC Croton or Metapontum Spouse Pythagoras or Brontinus Philosophical work Era Ancient Greek philosophy School Pythagoreanism Theano ( / θ i ˈ æ n oʊ / ; Greek : Θεανώ ) was a 6th-century BC Pythagorean philosopher. She has been called the wife or student of Pythagoras , although others see her as the wife of Brontinus . Her place of birth and the identity of her father is uncertain as well. Many Pythagorean writings were attributed to her in antiquity, including some letters and a few fragments from philosophical treatises, although these are all regarded as spurious by modern scholars.

Life [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Theano, and the few details on her life from ancient testimony are contradictory.

[ 1 ] According to Porphyry , she came from Crete and was the daughter of Pythonax .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In the catalog of Aristoxenus of Tarentum quoted by Iamblichus , she is the wife of Brontinus , and from Metapontum in Magna Graecia , while Diogenes Laertius reports a tradition from Hermesianax where she came from Crotone , was the daughter of Brontinus , married Pythagoras, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 3 ] and while some claim that after Pythagoras' passing, she took over his school, [ 6 ] the evidence is overwhelmingly clear that was not the case.

[ 7 ] Writings [ edit ] Many writings were attributed to Theano in antiquity [ 8 ] - The Suda [ 3 ] attributes to her works with the titles Pythagorean Apophthegms , Advice to Women , On Pythagoras , On Virtue and Philosophical Commentaries , which have not survived. In addition, a short fragment attributed to her from a work titled On Piety is preserved in the Anthologium of Stobaeus, and several epistles have survived through medieval manuscript traditions that are attributed to her.

[ 9 ] These writings are all widely considered by modern scholarship to be pseudepigrapha , [ 1 ] [ 10 ] works that were written long after Theano's death by later Pythagoreans, which attempt to correct doctrinal disputes with later philosophers [ 11 ] or apply Pythagorean philosophy to a woman's life.

[ 1 ] Some sources claim that Theano wrote about either the doctrine of the golden mean in philosophy, or the golden ratio in mathematics, but there is no evidence from the time to justify this claim.

[ 7 ] On Piety [ edit ] The surviving fragment of On Piety preserved in Stobaeus concerns a Pythagorean analogy between numbers and objects; I have learned that many of the Greeks suppose Pythagoras said that everything came to be from number. This statement, however, poses a difficulty—how something that does not even exist is thought to beget things. But he did not say that things came to be from number, but according to number. For in number is the primary ordering, by virtue of whose presence, in the realm of things that can be counted, too, something takes its place as first, something as second, and the rest follow in order.

[ 11 ] Walter Burkert notes that this statement, that "number does not even exist" contradicts the Platonic idealism of the Neopythagoreans and Neoplatonists , and attributes it to the Hellenistic period , before the advent of Neopythagoreanism in the early Roman period.

[ 11 ] Letters [ edit ] The various surviving letters deal with domestic concerns: how a woman should bring up children, how she should treat servants, and how she should behave virtuously towards her husband.

[ 1 ] The preserved letters are as follows: [ 8 ] To Eubule : On caring for infants.

To Euclides : A short letter to a physician who is ill.

To Eurydice : On behavior when a husband is unfaithful.

To Callisto : On etiquette towards maids.

To Nicostrate : On behavior when a husband is unfaithful.

To Rhodope : On a philosopher named Cleon.

To Timonides : Addressed to an unfaithful lover There are also references to a letter addressed To Timareta , which is referenced by Julius Pollux in his Onomasticon for its use of the word οἰκοδεσπότης .

[ 8 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Plant 2004 , p. 69.

^ Porphyry, Life of Pythagoras , 4 ^ a b c Suda, Theano .

^ Suda, Pythagoras .

^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Pythagoreans: Pythagoras" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:8. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

^ "Theano" .

www.brooklynmuseum.org . Retrieved 2024-03-01 .

^ a b Deakin 2013 .

^ a b c Thesleff 1961 , p. 22-23.

^ Hercher 1873 .

^ Voula Lambropoulou, Some Pythagorean female virtues , in Richard Hawley, Barbara Levick, (1995), Women in antiquity: new assessments , page 133. Routledge ^ a b c Burkert 1972 , p. 61.

References [ edit ] Ancient testimony [ edit ] Porphyry.

Life of Pythagoras . Translated by Kenneth Sylvan Guthrie – via Tertullian Project.

Iamblichus .

Life of Pythagoras . Translated by Thomas Taylor . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

"Puthagoras" . Suda On Line . Retrieved 2023-05-04 .

"Theano" . Suda On Line . Retrieved 2023-05-04 .

Modern scholarship [ edit ] Burkert, Walter (1972).

Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-53918-1 . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

Deakin, Michael A.B. (15 April 2013). "Theano: the world's first female mathematician?".

International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology .

44 (3): 350– 364.

doi : 10.1080/0020739X.2012.729614 .

Hercher, Rudolf (1873). "Pythagoreans".

Epistolographoi hellenikoi. Epistolographi graeci, recensuit, recognovit, adnotatione critica et indicibus instruxit Rudolphus Hercher; accedunt Francisci Boissonadii ad Synesium notae ineditae (in Ancient Greek and Latin). Parisiis A.F. Didot. pp.

603– 607 . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

Plant, Ian Michael (2004).

Women writers of ancient Greece and Rome: an anthology . University of Oklahoma Press. p. 68-75.

ISBN 978-0-8061-3621-9 .

Thesleff, Holger (1961).

An Introduction to the Pythagorean Writings of the Hellenistic Period .

Zhmud, Leonid (31 May 2012).

Pythagoras and the Early Pythagoreans . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-928931-8 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Theano (philosopher) .

Dancy, R. M. (1989).

"On A History of Women Philosophers, Vol. I" .

Hypatia .

4 (1): 160– 171.

ISSN 0887-5367 .

Huizenga, Annette (27 March 2013).

Moral Education for Women in the Pastoral and Pythagorean Letters: Philosophers of the Household . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-24518-1 . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Sweden Israel Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theano_(philosopher)&oldid=1290098399 " Categories : 6th-century BC Greek women 6th-century BC Greek philosophers Ancient Greek women philosophers Ancient Crotonians Pythagoreans of Magna Graecia Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 20:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theano (philosopher) 34 languages Add topic

