Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Figures of narration 2 Editions 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents A General Rhetoric 2 languages Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e A General Rhetoric is  a 1970 book by the Belgian semioticians known as Groupe μ . The first part of the book reformulates classical rhetoric within semiotics, [ 1 ] while the second part discusses the new concept of a general rhetoric , which introduces rhetorical figures for storytelling , called figures of narration .

It became a classic of human sciences and has been translated in more than 20 languages.

[ citation needed ] Figures of narration [ edit ] Groupe μ categorized the figures of narration are following Hjelmslev's sign model , and included in the analysis of each group the perspective of two fundamental aspects of Quintilian 's classical rhetoric: the principle of deviation from a norm, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and the four fundamental operations for such of variation.

Hjelmslev distinguished between the expression plane and the content plane, and then further between form and substance.

[ 4 ] Moreover, Hjelmslev's considered the "internal structure of language" to be a system of figurae , which he considered, instead of the sign , to be the ultimate semiotic unity.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] His analysis distinguished between expression-figurae (or figurae of the expression plane ) and content-figurae , [ 4 ] [ 6 ] and then within each between form and content.

[ 7 ] Groupe μ 's essay discusses figures of the substance of expression , figures of the form of expression , and figures of form of content . They avoid discussion the figures of the substance of content , wondering if they are actually conceivable, and leave them to future works building a universal theory of semantics.

[ 7 ] For the figures of the substance of expression they make the examples of diction in speech and the font of a written text. Following a quote from Hjelmslev, they define variations in the substance of expression as variation in the modalities of the physical medium.

[ 8 ] For speech, they make examples of possible different modalities of enunciation of a text, like reading it with monotone diction, with emphatic diction, or singing it, which are all variations from the established "norm" of reading text "normally".

[ 8 ] For written text, whose substance is graphic, the modalities of variation of the  substance of expression include handwriting and fonts. In printing a book, it is possible to choose among several fonts: in the final results, the physical medium and substance will be the same, they will just have different modalities.

[ 8 ] Regarding the definition of form of expression , one of the examples given is syntactic play .

Editions [ edit ] 1970, original French edition published by Larousse 1981, English translation by Paul B. Burrell and Edgar M. Slotkin.  Johns Hopkins University Press 1982, paperback edition, published by Seuil (collection "Points").

References [ edit ] ^ Eco (1976) ^ James J. Murphy  (2000) Grammar and rhetoric in Roman schools , in Sylvain Auroux (editor) History of the language sciences: An International Handbook on the Evolution of the Study of Language from the Beginnings to the Present , part XII, article 70, section 4, p.491 ^ Nöth (1990) pp.341,358 ^ a b c Nöth (1990) ^ Hjelmslev [1943] ^ a b Beaugrande (1991) ^ a b Groupe μ, section II.2.0 ^ a b c Groupe μ, section II.2.1.1 Physical medium and substance Further reading [ edit ] Beaugrande (1991) [Linguistic Theory: The Discourse of  Fundamental Works] , section on Louis Hjelmslev .

Eco (1976) Trattato di semiotica generale , sections 3.8.1 and 3.8.4 Hjelmslev [1943] Prolegomena to a Theory of Language , chapter 13, pp. 47, 65, 67, and cf. 6.26-30 Nöth, Winfried (1990) Handbook of semiotics , pp. 66, 70-1 section 3 Jean-Marie Klinkenberg (1997) Précis de sémiotique générale , Brussels, Duculot (paperback : Paris, Le Seuil, 2000).

Muzzioli, Francesco (2004) Le strategie del testo: introduzione all'analisi retorica della letteratura Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A_General_Rhetoric&oldid=1234468580 " Categories : Rhetoric works Books in semiotics 1970 non-fiction books Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 This page was last edited on 14 July 2024, at 14:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A General Rhetoric 2 languages Add topic

