Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition in film studies 2 Key aspects Toggle Key aspects subsection 2.1 Set design 2.2 Lighting 2.3 Space 2.4 Composition 2.5 Costume 2.6 Makeup and hairstyles 2.7 Acting 2.8 Film 2.9 Actor blocking 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mise-en-scène 31 languages العربية Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Visual and design aspects of a theatre production Mise-en-scène ( French pronunciation: [miz ɑ̃ sɛn] ⓘ ; English: "placing on stage" or "what is put into the scene") is the stage design and arrangement of actors in scenes for a theatre or film production, [ 1 ] both in the visual arts through storyboarding , visual themes, and cinematography and in narrative - storytelling through directions . The term is also commonly used to refer to single scenes that are representative of a film.

Mise-en-scène has been called film criticism 's "grand undefined term ".

[ 2 ] Ed Sikov has attempted to define it as "the totality of expressive content within the image".

[ 3 ] It has been criticized for its focus on the dramatic design aspects rather than the plot itself, as those who utilize mise-en-scène tend to look at what is "put before the camera" rather than the story.

[ 4 ] The use of mise-en-scène is significant as it allows the director to convey messages to the viewer through what is placed in the scene, not just the scripted lines spoken and acted in the scene.

Mise-en-scène allows the director to not only convey their message but also implement their aesthetic; as such, each director has their own unique mise-en-scène .

Mise-en-scène refers to everything in front of the camera, including the set design , lighting, and actors, and the ultimate way that this influences how the scene comes together for the audience.

Definition in film studies [ edit ] The distinctive mise-en-scène of The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (Germany, 1920) features jagged architecture.

When applied to the cinema, mise-en-scène refers to everything that appears before the camera —the sets , props , costumes, actors, and even the lighting.

[ 5 ] These elements help to express a film's vision by generating a sense of time and space, as well as setting a mood.

Mise-en-scène can be used to suggest a character's state of mind, whether that be happy with bright colors, or sad with darker colors.

[ 6 ] Mise-en-scène also includes the composition, which consists of the positioning and movement of actors, as well as objects, in the shot, as overseen by the director and production designer .

[ 6 ] The director (who controls props, costumes, lighting and sound) all have input on the mise-en-scène ; they work together to make sure it fits the film well before production begins.

[ 7 ] The production designer is generally responsible for the look of the movie, and thus leads the various departments in charge of individual sets, locations, props, and costumes, among other things.

[ 6 ] André Bazin , a French film critic and film theorist , describes the mise-en-scène aesthetic as emphasizing choreographed movement within the scene rather than through editing.

[ 7 ] According to Sikov, mise-en-scène includes every detail and treats every detail as "a statement of meaning" regardless of whether the director consciously intended that or not.

[ 8 ] When an actor appears on the screen in a costume on a set with specific props, the director made creative choices to place all those particular things in the shot—because after all, it is their movie—and those choices convey meaningful information to the viewer as to what a film is about.

[ 8 ] Mise-en-scène includes not only what is present but what is absent, such as the director's intentional use of a "big empty wall" where one would expect to see decorations on a wall.

[ 8 ] Mise-en-scène , as a term, is also sometimes used by screenwriters to refer to the descriptive paragraphs between the dialog used in shot blocking .

[ 9 ] Key aspects [ edit ] Set design [ edit ] Mise en scène by Constant Puyo An important element of mise-en-scène is set design —the setting of a scene and the objects (props) visible in a scene.

[ 10 ] Set design can be used to amplify character emotion or to set the mood, which effects the physical, social, psychological, emotional, economic, and cultural significance in the film. Set design often influences many themes or parts of a film.

[ 6 ] Mise-en-scène can also affect the decision whether to shoot on location or set. Shooting on a set is more commonly done than shooting on location for reasons of cost efficiency and simplicity, on a set, you can create the entire background and arrange the props within it. On the other hand, if shooting on location the natural background must be considered—if there is a boulder, barn, or field in the background it must either be worked around or integrated.

[ 6 ] Lighting [ edit ] The intensity, direction, and quality of lighting can influence an audience's understanding of characters, actions, themes, and mood.

[ 11 ] [ 7 ] Light (and shade) can emphasize texture, shape, distance, mood, time of day, season, and glamour; it affects the way colors are rendered, both in terms of hue and depth, and can focus attention on particular elements of the composition. Highlights, for example, call attention to shapes and textures, while shadows often conceal things, creating a sense of mystery or fear.

[ 6 ] For this reason, lighting must be thoroughly planned to ensure its desired effect on an audience.

Cinematographers are a large part of this process, as they coordinate the camera and lighting crews.

[ 6 ] Lighting is the last factor of mise-en-scène that ties together texture, setting, and characters; it directs each scene, directing the viewers' gaze and attention.

[ citation needed ] Space [ edit ] The use of space also affects the mise-en-scène of a film.

[ 12 ] The depth, proximity, size, and proportions of places and objects can be manipulated through lighting, set design, and camera placement and lenses—effectively determining the mood and relationships between elements. Space is the most overlooked component of mise-en-scène , yet the use of space determines whether the screen is too compact or too empty for the themes, characters' emotions, or major events. For example, an empty space may represent peace and an empty mind.

[ citation needed ] Composition [ edit ] Composition is the organization of objects, actors and space within the frame, often by use of balance and symmetry [ 7 ] for the distribution of light, color, objects and figures in a shot. Composition also includes the intentional use of misalignment, often to emphasize certain portions of the screen and distract the viewers from the background. This works because audiences are more inclined to pay attention to something off balance, out of place, or abnormal. Through these mise-en-scène , directors carefully compose the frame to control the narrative and induce viewers to pay attention to certain characters or points of interest in a scene.

[ citation needed ] Costume [ edit ] Costume design refers to all the clothes that characters wear. By using particular colors or designs, narrative cinema uses costumes to make clear distinctions between characters or to signify a particular character.

[ 13 ] While costume design is a subtle component of mise-en-scène , it is an important one, with an Oscar awarded annually for the best costume design. Designers often use specific colors to enhance emotions, whether that be red to draw attention or using light versus dark colors. Often, costume designs are used to attract the attention of the audience, communicate details of a character's personality to the audience, and help actors transform into believable characters.

[ citation needed ] Makeup and hairstyles [ edit ] While makeup and hairstyles can be included in costumes and design, they are often viewed separately as they can take hours to apply daily. Actors may wake up hours before shooting begins to get makeup applied, sometimes including prosthetics or even full-body makeup. Makeup and hairstyles establish periods, reveal character traits, and signal changes within a character.

[ 7 ] Acting [ edit ] There is enormous historical and cultural variation in performance styles in the cinema. In the early years of cinema, stage acting was difficult to differentiate from film acting, as most film actors had previously been stage actors and therefore knew no other method of acting.

[ 7 ] Eventually, the melodramatic styles of 19th-century theatre gave way, in Western cinema, to a relatively naturalistic style. This more naturalistic style of acting is largely influenced by Konstantin Stanislavski 's theory of method acting , which involves the actor fully immersing themselves in their character.

[ 7 ] [ 14 ] The art of acting uses movement, gesture, and intonation to realize a character for the stage, motion picture, or television. The acting, setting, themes, and other factors must align to fit the mise-en-scène .

[ citation needed ] Film [ edit ] The film medium itself affects the mise-en-scène . The film stock may be black-and-white or color, fine-grain or grainy.

[ 15 ] Likewise, different aspect ratios yield different ways of looking at the world and the expressive meaning of the film.

[ 16 ] : 42–44 Actor blocking [ edit ] Main article: Blocking (stage) The terms 'blocking' and 'blocks' were both used as early as 1961. In theatre, blocking is the precise staging of actors to facilitate the performance of a play, ballet , film or opera ; it is a set of instructions incorporated by the director to ensure the appropriate mise-en-scène of the film. In contemporary theatre, the director usually determines blocking during the rehearsal, telling actors where they should stand for the proper dramatic effect, ensure sight lines for the audience and work with the lighting design of the scene.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Choreography Montage Filmmaking technique of Luis Buñuel v t e Theatre History Greek Roman Medieval Commedia dell'arte English Renaissance Spanish Golden Age French Classicism Neoclassical Restoration Augustan Weimar Romanticism Melodrama Naturalism Realism Modernism Postmodern 19th century 20th century timeline Types Drama Play Musical theatre Comedy Tragedy Improvisation Opera Ballet Circus Radio drama Variety show Regions Armenia China India Indonesia Italy Japan Korea Persia Poland Stagecraft and scenography Cue Curtain Call Rehearsal Stage Theater (structure) Theatrical constraints Theatrical superstitions Technical rehearsal Technical week Performance Lighting design Sound design Set construction Theatrical property Costume construction Personnel Management Stage management Technical director Production management Company management Technical Carpenter (theatre) Electrician (theatre) Fly crew Make-up artist Property master Pyrotechnician Running crew Spotlight operator Stagehand Theatrical Technician Technical crew Wardrobe supervisor Design Costume designer Lighting designer Scenic designer Sound designer Sound engineer Video design Running crew Call boy Production manager Stage manager Stagehand Technical director Theatrical technician Carpenter Fly crew Electrician Light board operator Lighting technician Spotlight operator A2 Sound operator Property master Dresser Wardrobe supervisor Musicians Musical ensemble Orchestra Pit orchestra Miscellaneous Glossary Theatrical troupe Category Commons Wiktionary WikiProject Outline of theatre v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude References [ edit ] ^ "mise-en-scène" .

merriam-webster.com . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved April 20, 2020 .

^ Henderson, Brian (1976). "The Long Take". In Nichols, Bill (ed.).

Movies and Methods: An Anthology . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 315.

^ Sikov, Ed (2010).

Film Studies: An Introduction . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 6.

ISBN 9780231142939 . Retrieved June 30, 2025 .

^ Corrigan, Timothy (2015).

A short guide to writing about film (9th ed.). Boston: Pearson Education.

ISBN 9781292078113 .

OCLC 1137242678 .

^ Bordwell, David; Thompson, Kristin (2003).

Film Art: An Introduction, 7th ed . New York: McGraw–Hill.

ISBN 0-07-248455-1 .

^ a b c d e f g Barsam, Richard Meran; Monahan, Dave (28 September 2012).

Looking at movies: an introduction to film (4th ed.). New York: Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-91302-6 .

^ a b c d e f g Pramaggiore, Maria; Wallis, Tom (2005).

Film: A Critical Introduction . London: Laurence King Publishing.

ISBN 0205433480 .

^ a b c Sikov, Ed (2010).

Film Studies: An Introduction . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 9780231142939 . Retrieved June 30, 2025 .

^ Edgar-Hunt, Robert; Marland, John; Richards, James O. (2009).

Basics Film-Making: Screenwriting (1st ed.). Lausanne: AVA Publishing. p. 71.

ISBN 978-2-940373-89-5 .

^ "Set Design and Locations" .

film110 . PBworks. Archived from the original on 2 November 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2012 .

^ "Lighting" .

film101 . PBworks. Archived from the original on 2 November 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2012 .

^ "Part 2: Mise-en-scene" .

Film Studies Program . Yale University. Archived from the original on 2002-12-24 . Retrieved 25 August 2012 .

^ Fourie, Pieter J. (2004).

Media Studies Volume 2: Content, Audiences and Production . Lansdowne, SA: Juta and Company. pp.

462– 463.

ISBN 0-7021-5656-6 .

^ "Acting" .

film101 . PBworks. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2012 .

^ Kawin, Bruce (1992).

How Movies Work . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp.

88 .

ISBN 0-520-07696-6 .

mise en scene blocking.

^ Sikov, Ed (2010).

Film Studies: An Introduction . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-51989-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bordwell, David; Thompson, Kristin (2010). "The Shot: Mise-en-Scène".

Film Art: An Introduction (9th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp.

175– 228.

ISBN 978-0-07-122057-6 .

Martin, Adrian (2014).

Mise en scène and film style: from classical Hollywood to new media art . Palgrave close readings in film and television (1st ed.). Houndmills New York, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-137-26994-2 .

External links [ edit ] Look up mise-en-scène in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Listen to this article ( 5 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 26 July 2019 ( 2019-07-26 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) "Mise-en-scène" .

encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2023-09-27 .

"What do artsy film critics mean by mise-en-scene?" .

The Straight Dope . 22 August 1980.

Michael, Hall (27 August 2016).

"Mise-en-scène Explained" .

"mise-en-scene" .

Yale University Film Analysis Site .

"Mise en Scene" .

Indy Mogul 4 Minute Film School . Archived from the original on 2008-03-25.

"Costume design: designing character" (PDF) .

"What Is Mise En Scène in Film: Definition and Examples" .

StudioBinder . 13 April 2018.

Dang, Tammy (10 June 2020).

"Film Techniques: Lighting" .

Matrix Education .

Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mise-en-scène&oldid=1301197632 " Categories : Lighting Concepts in film theory Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 16:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mise-en-scène 31 languages Add topic

