Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Policies in detail Toggle Policies in detail subsection 2.1 Economy 2.2 Education 2.3 Expansion of presidential powers 2.4 Foreign affairs 2.5 Healthcare and social security 2.6 Immigration reforms 2.7 Infrastructure and urban planning 2.8 Journalism, information, and censorship 2.9 Law enforcement 2.10 National security 2.11 Social issues 2.12 Transgender and LGBT rights 3 Reception 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Agenda 47 8 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Italiano Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Policy platform of the 2024 Donald Trump campaign Not to be confused with Project 2025 .

Logo This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series about Donald Trump Business and personal Age and health Business career The Trump Organization wealth tax returns cryptocurrency Conspiracy theories Endorsements Eponyms Family Foundation grants American football Golf Honors John McCain comments Legal affairs indictments Media career The Apprentice bibliography filmography Nicknames Voters Obama–Trump voters Sanders–Trump voters Public image in popular culture in music SNL parodies baby balloon dance handshakes pseudonyms Racial views antisemitism Religious views Residences Rhetoric Security incidents Sexual misconduct allegations Epstein ties Trump–Musk feud 45th and 47th President of the United States Presidencies first second timeline Transitions first second Inaugurations first second Portraits Presidential library Tenure First 100 days first term second term Executive actions executive orders first term second term proclamations pardons first term second term Trips foreign first term '17 '18 '19 '20–'21 Riyadh summit North Korea summits Singapore Hanoi DMZ Helsinki summit Namaste Trump second term '25 Middle East visit Shutdowns January 2018 2018–2019 Opinion polls first term second term Legal affairs as president first term second term Protests federal law enforcement deployment St. John's Church photo op No Kings Social media Twitter False or misleading statements Trumpism TikTok controversy American Civil War Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election fake electors plot Eastman memos lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Fascism Mar-a-Lago face Policies Domestic first term second term Economy first term tax cuts tariffs USMCA farmer bailouts second term One Big Beautiful Bill Act tariffs China Canada and Mexico Liberation Day TACO Environment Paris Agreement withdrawal America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 Foreign policy first term Syria strikes 2017 2018 Kosovo–Serbia agreements second term Russian invasion of Ukraine Putin call Saudi Arabia summit Zelenskyy Oval Office meeting minerals agreement peace talks Putin summit in Alaska Armenia–Azerbaijan agreement America First Saudi Arabia arms deal Iran first term nuclear deal withdrawal second term Iran negotiations Iran–Israel war June 2025 strikes Iran–Israel war ceasefire Israel Jerusalem recognition Golan Heights recognition Palestine peace plan Abraham Accords Killings al-Baghdadi Soleimani Afghanistan withdrawal Taliban deal American expansionism Proposed Venezuela invasion Immigration first term second term travel ban border wall family separation policy migrant detentions troop deployments national emergency Infrastructure Social issues First Step Act cannabis Space COVID-19 pandemic Taskforce Communication Government response stimulus bills CARES Act Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 Operation Warp Speed Interference with science agencies Targeting of political opponents and civil society AI Appointments ( first second ) Cabinets first second Ambassadors first second Federal judges inferior courts Supreme Court candidates Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Executives first second U.S. Attorneys first second Presidential campaigns 2000 primaries 2016 election primaries endorsements rallies Las Vegas incident convention debates foreign policy Make America Great Again Never Trump movement people Access Hollywood tape wiretapping allegations Spygate 2020 election primaries endorsements political non-political opposition rallies convention debates GOP reactions to election fraud claims Raffensperger phone call 2024 election primaries endorsements opposition eligibility Agenda 47 rallies convention debates assassination attempts PA perpetrator photographs FL suspect Impeachments Efforts to impeach Donald Trump resolutions First impeachment Zelenskyy phone call Ukraine scandal House inquiry Senate trial Second impeachment Capitol attack Senate trial Proposed expungements Legal proceedings 2020 election federal indictment Classified documents federal indictment Special counsel investigation FBI investigation FBI search of Mar-a-Lago Trump v. United States New York felony conviction for falsifying business records Stormy Daniels scandal New York investigations Georgia election indictment Georgia election investigation mug shot v t e Agenda 47 (styled by the Trump campaign as Agenda47 ) is the campaign manifesto of President Donald Trump , which details policies that would be implemented upon his election as the 47th president of the United States .

[ a ] Agenda 47 is a collection of formal policy plans of Donald Trump, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] many of which would rely on executive orders and significantly expand executive power.

[ 3 ] The platform has been criticized for its approach to climate change [ 4 ] and public health; [ 5 ] its legality and feasibility; [ 6 ] [ 7 ] and the risk that it will increase inflation . Some columnists have described it as fascist [ 8 ] [ 9 ] or authoritarian .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In September 2024, Trump's campaign launched a tour called "Team Trump Agenda 47 Policy Tour" to promote Agenda 47.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Overview Agenda 47 is Donald Trump's 2024 presidential campaign formal policy plans.

[ 1 ] According to the Trump campaign, it is "the only official comprehensive and detailed look at what President Trump will do if he returns to the White House ".

[ 14 ] It is presented on the campaign's website in a series of videos with Trump outlining each proposal.

[ 15 ] According to Philip Bump, some Agenda 47 videos appeared scattershot and responsive to current events around early 2023.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The proposals appeared to be aimed towards Republican primary voters and slowed down once his primary lead grew in April 2023, [ 16 ] to the point where Philip Bump wrote in the Washington Post in June 2024 that neither Trump nor his campaign regularly brings up the plan, [ 16 ] although, according to Phil Mattingly from CNN , it is "regularly featured in the scripted portions of his remarks at rallies".

[ 18 ] In 2023, Trump campaign officials acknowledged the Project 2025 aligned well with Agenda 47; [ 19 ] however, Trump repeatedly disclaimed it in 2024.

[ 20 ] As of June 2024, Project 2025 had reportedly caused some annoyance in the Trump campaign which had historically preferred fewer and more vague policy proposals to limit opportunities for criticism and maintain flexibility.

[ 16 ] Some commentators have argued that Project 2025 is the most detailed look at what a Trump administration would look like.

[ 16 ] Agenda 47 and Project 2025 share many themes and policies, including expanding presidential power such as through reissuing Schedule F , [ 21 ] : min.00:14 [ 22 ] cuts to the Department of Education , mass deportations of illegal immigrants, [ 23 ] the death penalty for drug dealers, and using the US National Guard in liberal cities with high crime rates or those that are "disorderly".

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] The plans include constructing " freedom cities " on empty federal land , investing in flying car manufacturing, introducing baby bonuses to encourage a baby boom , implementing protectionist trade policies, and over forty others. Seventeen of the policies that Trump says he will implement if elected would require congressional approval. Some of his plans are legally controversial, such as ending birthright citizenship , and may require amending the U.S. Constitution .

[ 27 ] [ 15 ] [ 28 ] Many of the proposals are contentious. One Agenda 47 proposal would impose the death penalty on drug dealers and human traffickers , as well as placing Mexican cartels on the United States list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations .

[ 26 ] The campaign website's layout has changed.

[ 2 ] As of September 2024, there is a new section called "Platform," where a synthesis of the main policies can be found.

[ 29 ] [ b ] Policies in detail As of September 2024, the policies are detailed in 46 videos, the first one uploaded on December 15, 2022, and the last one on December 22, 2023.

[ 31 ] [ 16 ] [ c ] [ d ] The videos are usually accompanied by a transcription and often by complementary material regarding the policy in question, as exemplified by the proposition Agenda47: Rescuing America's Auto Industry from Joe Biden's Disastrous Job-Killing Policies, [ 34 ] which contains links to reports and articles from entities such as the America First Policy Institute , [ 35 ] The Heritage Foundation , [ 36 ] and The Harris Poll , [ 37 ] news articles from entities like Reuters , [ 38 ] [ 39 ] The American Oil & Gas Reporter , [ 40 ] and Fox Business , [ 41 ] and related propositions in the campaign website.

[ original research?

] Economy Propositions relating to the economy include: Restrictions on Chinese ownership of infrastructure in the United States, including energy, technology, telecommunications, farmland, natural resources, medical supplies, and other strategic national assets, preventing all future Chinese purchases, and forcing the Chinese to sell any current holdings.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Ending "Joe Biden's war on American energy" and deregulating domestic production, getting out of the Paris Agreement , and issuing fast approvals to every oil infrastructure project presented to his administration.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Universal baseline tariffs on most foreign products, which will increase incrementally if other countries manipulate their currency or "otherwise engage in unfair trading practices", and lowering taxes. Revoking China's Most Favored Nation trade status, gradually stopping all Chinese imports of essential goods, stopping American companies from investing in China, and banning federal contracts for any company that outsources to China.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Decreasing trade deficits , especially with China.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Not bailing out failing banks, but "unleash[ing] energy production, slash[ing] regulations", and repealing "Biden's tax hikes", to reduce inflation .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Passing the "Trump Reciprocal Trade Act". If any country applies a certain percent tariff on American-made goods, the same tariff will be applied on theirs; the other countries "will have two choices – they'll get rid of their tariffs on us, or they will pay us hundreds of billions of dollars, and the United States will make an absolute FORTUNE." This is meant to help agricultural states and manufacturers.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] To "save America's auto industry from Joe Biden's radical Green New Deal policies", by terminating all of Biden's policies regarding emission regulations , fossil fuels, and electric vehicles, specifically the "mandates designed to force Americans into expensive electric cars", subsidies for "electric cars for rich people", and " DOUBLED CAFÉ standards". Also, asking Canada and Mexico for full compliance with the terms of USMCA regarding the amount of regional auto parts content in North American cars which reduction benefited China and other countries, ending delays in federal drilling permits and leases, and restoring the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve .

[ 34 ] [ 54 ] He promised "higher wages for auto workers" [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Tariffs were a policy in Trump's first term, centered on China, and later extended to the European Union, Canada, and Mexico.

[ 57 ] They led to retaliatory tariffs imposed by the affected countries, and to a trade war with China , which "raised the price for items such as baseball hats, luggage, bicycles, TVs, sneakers, and a variety of materials used by American manufacturers." They also caused loss of jobs and hurt manufacturers and farmers.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said that "those tariffs on Chinese goods have “imposed more harm on consumers and businesses” than on China." [ 61 ] Trump's new economic proposals drew criticism from 16 Nobel prize-winning economists [ 62 ] [ 63 ] (Trump's campaign and supporters rebuked the laureates' critiques.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] ), Wharton School ( Trump's alma mater ), [ 66 ] [ 67 ] Goldman Sachs , [ 68 ] [ 69 ] and Moody's Analytics , among others.

[ 70 ] After his electoral victory , Trump enacted a series of steep tariffs affecting nearly all goods imported into the United States.

Education Cutting federal funding for any school or program teaching critical race theory or "gender ideology", directing the Departments of Justice and Education to open civil rights investigations into any school district that has engaged in race-based discrimination; also, "remov[ing] the radicals who have infiltrated the federal Department of Education" and "keep[ing] men out of women's sports." Creating a new way to certify teachers based on their patriotism, giving preferential funding and treatment to states and school districts that abolish teacher tenure for grades K through 12 and adopt merit pay, cutting the number of school administrators (specifically the ones in charge of diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)), and adopting direct election of school principals by the parents.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] "Reclaim[ing] our once great educational institutions from the radical Left" by using the college accreditation system ; firing the "radical Left accreditors " and substituting them with new ones "who will impose real standards on colleges". The standards will include "defending the American tradition and Western civilization"; protecting free speech; eliminating "wasteful" administrative positions, specifically all the ones dealing with DEI ; offering accelerated and low-cost degrees; providing job placement and career services; and implementing college entrance and exit exams to prove learning quality. Also, directing the Department of Justice to pursue federal civil rights cases against schools that "engage in racial discrimination"; the ones that persist in "discrimination under the guise of equity" will have their endowment taxed, and through budget reconciliation , "I will advance a measure to have them fined up to the entire amount of their endowment." Part of the seized funds will be used as restitution "for victims of these illegal and unjust policies".

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 73 ] According to The Nation , "Many experts in higher education have begun to sound the alarm that such actions may infringe on academic freedom and institutional autonomy – two cornerstones of American higher education", whereas Trump’s National Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt stated, "By increasing access to school choice, empowering parents to have a voice in their child's education, and supporting good teachers, President Trump will improve academic excellence for all students." [ 74 ] "Ten principles for achieving great schools that lead to great jobs", by ensuring that instead of "indoctrinating young people with inappropriate racial, sexual, and political material", schools must refocus on preparing "children to succeed in the world of work". The principles are: "Restoring Parental Rights", specifically to control the education of their children. This includes being made aware of academic standards, updating on acts of violence, inspecting "professional development materials", being notified about guest speakers, reviewing the school's budget, knowing about bullying, health and mental health concerns, "to have the right to opt out of school healthcare services", and be immediately notified if any school employee "has worked to change their children’s name, pronouns, or understanding of his or her gender".

"Great Principals and Great Teachers", i.e. empowering parents and local school boards to hire and fire principals and teachers.

"Knowledge and Skills, Not CRT and Gender Indoctrination", i.e. teaching "reading, writing, math, science, arithmetic, and other truly useful subjects". This includes getting "the left's 'equity' agenda out of our classrooms." "Love of Country". This includes reinstating the 1776 Commission .

"Freedom to Pray", i.e. "we will support bringing back prayer to our schools".

"Safe, Secure, and Drug-Free", by "immediate expulsion for any student who harms a teacher or another student". This includes sending the "out-of-control troublemakers OUT of the classroom and INTO reform schools and corrections facilities", supporting "school districts that allow highly trained teachers to carry concealed weapons at school", and supporting federal funding to hire trained gun-owners as armed guards. Also, directing the "U.S.

Food and Drug Administration to convene an independent outside panel to investigate whether transgender hormone treatments and ideology increase the risk of extreme depression, aggression, and violence. He will also look at whether common psychiatric drugs, as well as genetically engineered cannabis and other narcotics, are causing psychotic breaks". Additionally, immediate suspension or expulsion for illegal drug use or possession in school.

"Universal School Choice". This includes "that parents can send their children to the public, private, or religious school that best suits" them.

"Project-Based Learning", "to help train [the students] for meaningful work outside the classroom".

"Internships and Work Experiences" for all students. This includes implementing "funding preferences for schools that actively work to help students secure internships, part-time work, and summer jobs".

"Jobs and Career Counseling", provided by all schools. Also, closing the Department of Education , and sending all education matters back to the states.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Supporting homeschooling , by allowing homeschool parents to use 529 education savings accounts to spend up to $10,000 a year per child, tax-free. Also, ensuring that every homeschooling family is "entitled to full access to the benefits available to non-homeschooled students – including participating in athletic programs, clubs, after school activities, educational trips, and more".

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Endowing the American Academy with funds collected by "taxing the large endowments of private universities plagued by antisemitism" (implicitly referring to the 2024 pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses ). The American Academy's mission will be to make "a truly world-class education available to every American, free of charge, and do it without adding a single dime to the federal debt", covering all subjects and trades, online, for free, also "using study groups, mentors, industry partnerships, and the latest breakthrough in computing". According to the Trump campaign, the Academy will be strictly apolitical, it will compete directly with the university system by granting degree credentials recognized by the government and federal contractors, it will award the equivalent of a bachelor's degree , and it will allow people to complete an unfinished college education.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] According to Politico , "[u]sing the federal government to create an entirely new educational institution aimed at competing with the thousands of existing schools would drastically reshape American higher education", adding that this policy would likely need U.S. Congress approval, and that it targets the over "40 million Americans who have some college but never completed their degree", similarly to some of the student debt relief efforts by the Biden administration , but differing in the source for its financing.

[ 81 ] Expansion of presidential powers Trump's plan to expand presidential powers is based largely on a controversial and not widely held interpretation of the constitution known as the unitary executive theory .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] The plan includes: "Dismantl[ing] the deep state and reclaim[ing] our democracy from Washington corruption", by firing government employees, reissuing Executive Order 13957 ( Schedule F ), "restoring the president's authority to fire rogue bureaucrats". Also, reforming FISA courts , declassifying and publishing "all documents on Deep State spying, censorship, and corruption", taking action against "government leakers", making every Inspector General's office independent and separated from the departments they oversee, establishing an independent auditing system to monitor the intelligence agencies, moving government positions out of Washington, banning federal employees from taking jobs at the companies they regulate, and "push" a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on members of Congress.

[ 21 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] According to the Associated Press , the proposal of moving some 10,000 federal employees from Virginia, Maryland, and the District of Columbia: "it’s causing a lot of anxiety, a lot of discomfort within the workforce, as you are faced with these strong, negative, anti-federal worker stances and this uncertainty of what might happen to your job, your home and your livelihood." Larry Hogan , former Governor of Maryland, stated that the relocations, "would be devastating to the region, the state of Maryland and bad for the federal government." The measure is seen [ by whom?

] as retaliatory and damaging to the states' economy. Filipe Campante, a Bloomberg Distinguished professor at Johns Hopkins University , stated: "I think it is a positive factor for accountability that you have civil servants also operating as a check on political appointees, and this would be weakened by moving these people away from where the center of the government is, so I think from that perspective it would reduce accountability. Obviously, then, it depends on whether you think this accountability is good or not." [ 88 ] Cutting federal regulations by restoring Executive Order 13771 and asking Congress to make it permanent. Implementing a regulatory budget, aiming at reducing the federal government every year. Requiring all government regulations to be posted publicly in a central database , failing which they will be made null and void. Signing a law to "ban bureaucrats from taking any enforcement action based on informal guidance alone". Bringing the independent regulatory agencies , such as the FCC and the FTC , "back under Presidential authority". Creating "an ultra-streamlined federal regulatory framework specifically for Freedom Cities". Requiring federal employees to pass a new Civil Service test about "Constitutional limited government", including command of due process rights, equal protection , free speech , religious liberty , federalism , the Fourth Amendment , and other constitutional limits on federal power.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Stopping unnecessary government expenditure by restoring impoundment , challenging the Impoundment Control Act of 1974 in court, or getting Congress to overturn it. The consequent savings will be in the form of tax reductions, and this will stop inflation and reduce the deficit. Every federal agency will be ordered to identify the parts of their budgets that "can be saved through efficiencies and waste reduction using Impoundment". This will not include defense, Medicare, or Social Security; they will be strengthened with some of those funds.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] The Washington Post has said that this policy "could upend the balance of power between the three branches of the federal government", "could provoke a dramatic constitutional showdown, with vast consequences for how the government operates", and that "legal scholars" say it "could violate the Constitution and usurp congressional authority by consolidating more power in the executive branch".

[ 93 ] It also stated that "unilaterally zero[ing] out any program he doesn't like, or whose recipient has angered him, regardless of Congress's instructions" would be illegal, even if Trump gets the Impoundment Control Act repealed.

[ 94 ] The New Republic called it a "fascist plan".

[ 95 ] On its part, The Hill stated that, on the contrary, impounding is "common sense", and "a key tool for the president to pursue U.S. foreign policy and protect national security".

[ 96 ] Foreign affairs Negotiating an end to the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 24 hours.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ e ] Reshuffling government employees in charge of foreign policy, namely "clean[ing] house of all of the warmongers and America-Last globalists in the Deep State , the Pentagon , the State Department , and the national security industrial complex." [ 99 ] [ 100 ] "The defense bureaucracy, the intelligence services, and all the rest need to be completely overhauled and reconstituted to fire the Deep Staters and put America First", and "reevaluating NATO 's purpose and mission".

[ 101 ] Increasing military funding, asking "Europe to reimburse us for the cost of rebuilding the stockpiles sent to Ukraine", and increasing military recruitment by restoring "the proud culture and honor traditions of America's armed forces".

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] During the 2024 campaign , Trump developed his propositions, adding: sending troops to Mexico to attack cartel leadership and infrastructure (with the possibility of bombing it), seeking to deport all " resident aliens " who are Hamas sympathizers, and pulling out of the Paris Agreement .

[ 104 ] [ 6 ] After Trump's electoral victory , the possibilities of invading Mexico, [ 105 ] annexing Canada , [ 106 ] retaking the Panama Canal , [ 107 ] and buying Greenland , [ 108 ] [ 109 ] or taking them by force, were discussed.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] Trump also declared his intent of changing the name of the Gulf of Mexico to Gulf of America.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Healthcare and social security Keeping Medicare and Social Security intact and cutting other federal expenses such as help to foreign countries, and eliminating "mass-releases of illegal aliens ..., left-wing gender programs from our military [and] climate extremism".

[ 115 ] Reinstating the ban on environmental, social, and governance (ESG) investments in 401(k)s , pensions, and retirement accounts via executive order, and working with Congress to enact a permanent ban.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Establishing a commission of "independent minds who are not bought and paid for by Big Pharma " to investigate the rise in chronic illnesses and health problems, especially in children (" autism , auto-immune disorders , obesity , infertility , serious allergies , and respiratory challenges ").

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] An increase in chronic conditions in children and youth has been observed.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] Yahoo! News observed that Trump does not mention vaccines in the video discussing this policy, but it was a dog-whistle to anti-vaccine voters, as he was facing Ron DeSantis during the primaries , and the possibility of having Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

as a challenger for the presidency.

[ 122 ] On its part, Axios said that Trump's message could undermine public health , that its language was reminiscent of Robert Kennedy Jr., and that the mentions to Big Pharma appeared in other policies related to education, gender-affirming care, and dismantling the deep state .

[ 123 ] Ever since, it was repeatedly reported that Trump said he would cut federal funds from schools with masks and vaccine mandates, raising concerns about whether he referred to COVID-19 exclusively or to all vaccines, since all 50 states and Washington, D.C. have laws requiring specific vaccines for students, including measles, rubella, chickenpox, tetanus, pertussis, and polio. Trump's spokespeople said it was only about COVID-19, for which no student vaccination mandates exist.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] In July 2024, an accidentally leaked call from Trump to Kennedy showed the former president questioning the safety of childhood vaccines.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] It was also reported that Trump and Kennedy had been in conversations about Kennedy giving his endorsement to Trump in exchange for an appointment in his cabinet.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] In an interview with Chris Cuomo , Kennedy talked about having conversations with Trump, but denied that he was seeking an appointment.

[ 131 ] [ f ] On August 23, Kennedy suspended his campaign and endorsed Trump.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] In a rally in Arizona on the same day, Trump presented Kennedy, and repeated his "pledge to establish a panel of top experts working with Bobby to investigate what is causing the decades-long increase in chronic health problems and childhood diseases, including auto-immune disorders, autism, obesity, infertility, and many more." [ 135 ] : min.05:53 Kennedy told how he got in contact with Trump via "safe food advocate" Calley Means , [ 135 ] : min.07:35 [ 136 ] [ 137 ] and said, "Our children are now the unhealthiest, sickest children in the world. Don't you want healthy children?" [ 135 ] : min.09:23 After his electoral victory , Trump nominated Robert F. Kennedy Jr. to be his Secretary of Health and Human Resources; [ 138 ] [ 139 ] he also selected Dr.

Mehmet Oz to be administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), [ 140 ] [ 141 ] and Casey Means as Surgeon General of the United States .

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Attempting to reduce drug costs by signing an executive order telling "Big Pharma that we will only pay the best price they offer to foreign nations ... this will force Big Pharma to RAISE prices on foreign countries and REDUCE prices very substantially for American Patients".

[ 144 ] JAMA Health Forum commented on the possible outcome of the 2024 election, saying that it "will have momentous consequences for the future of health care". After comparing the records of Trump and Biden regarding the high price of prescription drugs and health care services, it said, "[h]ow Trump would approach drug price negotiations if elected is unclear. Trump supported federal negotiation of drug prices during his 2016 campaign, however, as president, he did not pursue drug price negotiation and opposed a Democratic price negotiation plan. ... Even though Trump has been inconsistent in his positions on drug prices, his public comments suggest the possibility of bipartisan cooperation." [ 145 ] [ 146 ] Ending "Joe Biden's pharmaceutical shortages", returning the manufacture of essential drugs to the United States, and phasing in tariffs and import restrictions on China.

[ 147 ] Immigration reforms See also: Birthright citizenship in the United States and Immigration policy of the second Donald Trump administration "A total ban on Biden using taxpayer dollars to free illegal aliens – and criminal penalties for administrative noncompliance." [ 148 ] Signing an executive order "making clear to federal agencies that under the correct interpretation of the law, going forward, the future children of illegal aliens will not receive automatic U.S. citizenship ." The order will also end " birth tourism " and consequent " chain migration ". At least one parent will have to be a citizen or a legal resident for the child to qualify for citizenship. This is based on the "clear meaning of the 14th Amendment , that U.S. Citizenship extends only to those both born in AND 'subject to the jurisdiction' of the United States". Therefore, children of undocumented immigrants "should not be issued passports, Social Security numbers , or be eligible for certain taxpayer funded welfare benefits", nor have the right to vote.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] Ending "welfare for illegal immigrants and shut down Joe Biden’s abuse of parole authority". This includes reinstating the "action making illegals ineligible for public housing" and terminating "all work permits for illegal aliens". Also, demanding Congress to send a bill "blocking any future President from abusing his power to distribute welfare benefits in this manner".

[ 151 ] CNN commented, "[s]hould Congress refuse to fund the operation, Trump could turn to a tactic used in his first term to secure more funding for a border wall – redirecting funds from the Pentagon, the source confirmed." [ 17 ] After describing the record of Trump's immigration policies from the standpoint of healthcare, JAMA Health Forum said, "[they] had a chilling effect on access to care and benefits among immigrants, including those lawfully present ... Trump has continued these themes in his current campaign, saying that 'welfare is a gigantic magnet drawing people from all over the world.

' " [ 145 ] He has also promised mass deportations, [ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] especially in the context of the Springfield pet-eating hoax .

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] Infrastructure and urban planning Holding a contest to charter up to 10 new cities ("Freedom Cities") in undeveloped federal lands. Turning "forgotten communities into hives of industry". Lowering the cost of living for families, specifically, the cost of building a home and buying a new car. Helping young parents, by asking Congress to provide "baby bonuses". Challenging the governors of all 50 states to modernize and beautify cities and public spaces, and "building towering monuments to our true American heroes".

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] CNN criticized this policy for the lack of details of how would it be financed, "what 'baby bonuses' would amount to or who would qualify", and for how these plans differ from Democratic policies like the " enhanced child tax credit " whose extension beyond 2021 was blocked by Republicans.

[ 61 ] [ 161 ] Investing in flying car manufacturing.

[ 15 ] Repealing Biden's 2021 reversal of Trump's 2020 reversal of the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing provision.

[ 162 ] Celebrating the 250th Anniversary of the Declaration of Independence by convening a task force called "Salute to America 250", in charge of coordinating with state and local governments to produce an entire year of festivities across the nation, starting on Memorial Day 2025 and continuing through July 4, 2026. Working with all governors to create the "Great American State Fair", a one-year exhibition featuring pavilions from all states, to be built in the Iowa State Fairgrounds . Hosting "Patriot Games", major sporting contests for high school athletes. Signing an executive order to bring back the National Garden of American Heroes , commissioning artists for the first 100 statues. Inviting international leaders and citizens to visit the United States, favoring the tourism industry. Asking American religious communities to pray for the nation and the people. "As we chart a course toward the next 250 years, let us come together and rededicate ourselves as one nation under God." [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Journalism, information, and censorship "Shatter[ing] the left-wing censorship regime", i.e. labeling information as misinformation or disinformation , in the media or social networks, about subjects like the 2020 elections, Covid, and the "Biden Family's criminality". This will be achieved by banning every federal agency from performing that action, firing federal officials who have done it (and depriving them of their vote), investigating and prosecuting all parties involved, and curtailing federal economic support to universities that have done it.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] During his term , Trump made false or misleading statements , which often were spread via social media , [ 167 ] [ 168 ] resulting in social media banning him after the events of January 6, 2021 . Contemporary academic publications discussed freedom of speech , the fake news phenomenon, disinformation , and Trump's relationship with them.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] [ 171 ] On August 25, 2018, PJ Media published a story reporting that 96% of Google search results for Donald Trump were left-leaning.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] On March 21, 2019, Trump signed an Executive Order "aimed at improving transparency and promoting free speech on college campuses:" "Every year the federal government provides educational institutions with more than $35 billion dollars in research funding, all of that money is now at stake. That's a lot of money. They're going to have to not like your views a lot, right?" Trump said. "If a college or university does not allow you to speak, we will not give them money." The order received praise from Charlie Kirk , Sarah Ruger, then director of the toleration and free expression division of the Charles Koch Institute , the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (FIRE) , Liberty University , and criticism from Janet Napolitano , then president of the University of California , the American Council on Education , and the American Civil Liberties Union , among others.

[ 174 ] It was also reported that the Trump administration sought to censure scientific research related to climate change , [ 175 ] and that he downplayed the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 176 ] On May 15, 2019, the White House announced the launch of a "Tech Bias Reporting tool" for people to report instances of perceived social media bias, [ 177 ] that was met with criticism.

[ 178 ] After Trump stated on Twitter that mail-in voting would lead to massive fraud in the 2020 presidential election , moderators marked the message with a "potentially misleading" warning, linking the post to fact-checking websites. On May 28, 2020, Trump signed the "Executive Order on Preventing Online Censorship" (EO 13925), an executive order directing regulatory action at Section 230 .

[ 179 ] After considerable controversy , the order was later rescinded by President Biden.

In July 2021, after being deplatformed by social media companies, Trump sued them arguing they had violated his First Amendment rights to speak freely. These events elicited discussion about censorship in social media.

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] [ 182 ] In February 2022, Trump launched Truth Social , and in May, his lawsuit was dismissed.

[ 183 ] Law enforcement Increasing investment in police personnel, increasing their liability protections , enforcing stop-and-frisk and existing gun laws, cracking down on the open use of illegal drugs, and cooperating with ICE to arrest and deport undocumented immigrants. Directing the DOJ to open civil rights investigations into "radical left prosecutor's offices" (Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco) to determine whether they have "engaged in race-based enforcement of the law", and giving "the victims of their Marxist policies the right to sue local officials for harm and suffering". "Dismantling of all criminal organizations." The death penalty for drug dealers and human traffickers. Sending the National Guard to restore safety in cities "where there has been a complete breakdown of law and order". Ordering the Education and Justice Departments to "overhaul federal standards on disciplining minors". Legislating concealed carry reciprocity . Increasing border controls.

[ 184 ] "Waging war" on drug cartels, using Title 42 to return trafficked children to their home countries, urging Congress to "ensure that anyone caught trafficking children [and women] across our border receives the death penalty immediately", and a recommendation to watch Sound of Freedom .

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] Appointing 100 U.S. Attorneys who "will be the polar opposite of the Soros District Attorneys" (referring to a conspiracy theory that Alvin Bragg , the district attorney who indicted Trump in 2023 , has been "bought and paid for" by George Soros .). Overhauling the Department of Justice and the FBI. Launching civil rights investigations into "Marxist local district attorneys" in Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles and other cities, including "federal subpoenas of their staff, their emails, and their records to determine whether they have blatantly violated federal Civil Rights law". Launching a federal inquiry into the prosecutor of the Garret Foster case , and ordering the Department of Justice "to establish a task force on protecting the right to self-defense ". Investigating the "use of police state tactics by federal authorities to arrest conservatives and Christians". Confronting the "radicalization" of law schools, reforming bar associations, and stopping "the purge of conservative lawyers from major law firms".

[ 187 ] Deploying all necessary military assets to impose a full naval embargo on the cartels, ordering the " Department of Defense to make appropriate use of special forces, cyber warfare, and other overt and covert actions" against cartels, which will be designed as Foreign Terrorist Organizations , and cutting their access to global financial systems. Forging a partnership with neighboring governments, or "exposing their corruption". Asking "Congress to pass legislation ensuring that drug smugglers and human traffickers receive the Death Penalty".

[ 188 ] National security Building a missile defense shield similar to Israel's Iron Dome , as a deterrent of and protection from foreign missile attacks.

[ 189 ] Trump has repeatedly mentioned the idea of building an Iron Dome in his rallies, assuring it will create many jobs.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] Regarding this policy, Forbes commented that it would have "limited overall utility. At least 10 Iron Dome systems make up the lower tier of Israel's multilayered air defense, designed to intercept rockets, mortars, and artillery shells at a maximum distance of under 50 miles." An American Iron Dome would require hundreds of systems to cover the continental United States and its major population centers, and it would be inadequate to intercept large intercontinental ballistic missiles. However, it could be useful for the defense of military bases (specifically the overseas ones), and critical infrastructure.

[ 192 ] Haaretz called it a "fantasy", and after mentioning similar technical issues as Forbes, concluded that "[b]eyond all this, the United States has already spent hundreds of billions in missile defense research-and-development, and any upgrades similar to the ones Trump is vowing would need congressional support – something he failed to obtain for his border wall." [ 193 ] Reinstating the initiative at the Department of Justice to target Chinese espionage in the United States, terminated by the Biden administration at the request of faculty members from the University of Pennsylvania ; requesting from Congress to investigate the University's finances, its Chinese donors, the Biden Center , and the Biden family.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] The China Initiative was launched in November 2018 to address Chinese economic espionage . Of the 28 prosecutions brought under it, four were against professors of Chinese descent, of whom none were convicted for espionage or theft.

On January 5, 2021, APA Justice, the Brennan Center for Justice , and Asian Americans Advancing Justice sent an open letter to then president-elect Joe Biden , stating that a "consequence of these mandates has been that the FBI and federal agencies have put pressure on grant makers, universities and research institutions to participate in racial, ethnic and national origin profiling, collectively leading to discriminatory and stigmatising investigations of people of Chinese descent." [ 196 ] In September 2021, 177 Stanford University faculty members sent an open letter to Attorney General Merrick Garland calling for the termination of the initiative, stating that "these actions do not just affect the prosecuted faculty but affect the many more university researchers who are targeted, investigated and feel threatened by inquiries initiated without prior evidence of significant wrongdoing".

[ 197 ] Bloomberg stated that by December 2021, "[m]ore than 1,600 scholars and administrators from more than 200 universities have petitioned Garland to end the China Initiative, saying it disproportionately targets researchers of Chinese origin." [ 198 ] In February 2022, more than 150 University of Pennsylvania faculty members addressed an open letter to Attorney General Garland, "urging the U.S. Department of Justice to overturn the 'China Initiative' which they allege disproportionately targets researchers of Chinese descent." [ 199 ] On February 23, 2022, Matthew G. Olsen , Assistant Attorney General for National Security , announced the initiative "was being cast aside largely because of perceptions that it unfairly painted Chinese Americans and U.S. residents of Chinese origin as disloyal", but he "insisted that the decision amounted to a reframing and recalibration – not an abandonment – of a muscular law enforcement response to the national security threat posed by the People’s Republic of China", and said that "department officials had concluded that the enforcement program singling out China was ill-advised and better reframed as part of a more wide-ranging effort to counter threats posed by Russia, Iran and other countries." [ 200 ] Social issues Revoking Biden's Executive Order 13985 , to "eradicate any attempt to weaken America’s institutions through these harmful and discriminatory 'equity" programs". Instructing the DOJ to investigate the "unlawful domination and discrimination and civil right abuses carried out by the Biden administration". Terminating all staff, offices, and initiatives connected to the equity policies, reviewing and reversing its actions, and requesting Congress to establish a restitution fund for those "discriminated against" by that policy.

[ 201 ] Commenting on the possibility of a second Trump administration, Axios said, "close allies want to dramatically change the government's interpretation of Civil Rights-era laws to focus on 'anti-white racism' rather than discrimination against people of color", and quoted Trump campaign spokesperson Steven Cheung : "As President Trump has said, all staff, offices, and initiatives connected to Biden's un-American policy will be immediately terminated." [ 202 ] Using "every tool, lever, and authority to get the homeless off our streets", by using the resources otherwise spent upon Ukraine, and "by ending mass unskilled migration". Banning urban camping wherever possible, arresting the violators, but giving them the option of rehabilitation treatment. Creating " tent cities " where the homeless can be relocated, have their problems identified, and receive either help to reintegrate into a normal life or medical treatment, including commitment to mental institutions, "with the goal of reintegrating them back into society once they are well enough to manage".

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Eradicating the drug addiction crisis , by imposing a "full naval embargo on the drug cartels and deploy military assets to inflict maximum damage on cartel operations", insisting on the cooperation of neighboring governments to dismantle the trafficking networks in the region, requiring Congress that drug dealers and human traffickers receive the death penalty. Directing federal law enforcement to take down the gangs and organized street crime that distribute drugs locally. Permanently designating fentanyl as a federally controlled substance . Warning China that if they don't "clamp down" on the export of fentanyl precursors "they will pay a steep price". Also, to combat local addiction, "strengthen the pillars that give life meaning and hope for those struggling with addiction, in particular work, faith and family". Making easier for addicts to seek treatment without losing their jobs. Forging public-private partnerships to provide job opportunities and skills training to former addicts. Expanding federal support for "faith-based counseling, treatment, and recovery programs". Ensuring that if someone needs to take time to care for a relative fighting to overcome addiction, they can use a family leave program.

[ 205 ] Signing an executive order to cut off funding for shelter and transport of immigrants ("nearly $1 billion to house illegal aliens and foreign migrants in expensive luxury hotels"), and redirect a large portion of the savings to provide shelter and treatment for homeless American veterans , promising to totally eradicate veterans' homelessness by the end of next term.

[ 206 ] According to Snopes , the expenses for housing immigrants waiting to be expelled were $86.9 million during a period of six months in 2021. The places used were "family residential centers", "contracted shelters", and "hotels", like the "Quality Suites in San Diego; Hampton Inns in Phoenix and in McAllen and El Paso, Texas; a Comfort Suites Hotel in Miami; a Best Western in Los Angeles; and an Econo Lodge in Seattle". The funds were managed by the non-profit Endeavors , which also serves veterans. "Migrant families were similarly housed in U.S. hotels under the Obama and Trump administrations." [ 207 ] Trump made a similar claim during the debate on June 27, 2024 , which was fact-checked as false.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] Transgender and LGBT rights See also: Social policy of Donald Trump and LGBT rights in the United States Terminating all types of gender affirming care for minors. Instructing every federal agency to cease all programs that promote the concept of sex and gender transition "at any age", stopping federal funding for all gender-affirming procedures, and declaring that any hospital or healthcare provider participating in gender affirming care for minors will no longer meet federal health and safety standards for Medicaid and Medicare, terminating them from the program. Creating ways to sue physicians who have performed those procedures, and directing the DOJ to investigate pharmaceutical companies and hospitals to determine whether they have covered "horrific long-term side-effects of 'sex transitions' to get rich at the expense of vulnerable patients" and whether they have illegally marketed hormones and puberty blockers. The Department of Education will inform states and school districts that if anybody suggests to a child that they could be transgender , they will face potential civil rights violations cases for sex discrimination, and elimination from federal funding. Passing a bill establishing that the only genders recognized by the government are male and female, and they are assigned at birth.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] [ 212 ] The Advocate called these policies "devastating for LGBTQ + Americans and other marginalized communities", adding "that [they] threaten the LGBTQ+ community, spanning across education, health care, and the military".

[ 213 ] LGBTQ Nation qualified Trump's agenda as "troubling", ending with "[w]hether that agenda encompasses Project 2025 or Agenda 47 or both, the results would be disastrous." [ 214 ] Reception See also: Project 2025 § Reactions and responses , and First presidency of Donald Trump § Historical evaluations and public opinion Anthony Zurcher of BBC News said "some of [Trump's] pronouncements border on the fantastical" and "others are controversial." [ 27 ] Margaret Hartmann, writing in New York magazine, described some of the ideas as "unhinged".

[ 215 ] Frankie Taggart, writing for Barron's , argued that Trump's plans lack coherence and that some could exacerbate existing divisions in American society . He questioned the feasibility and practicality of some ideas, such as the promise to improve cities with classical architecture and create tent cities for the homeless.

[ 26 ] Prominent economists and investors criticized the economic agenda of Trump as inflationary, especially noting his proposed 10% universal tariff.

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] [ 218 ] [ 219 ] [ 220 ] Some columnists have described Agenda 47's plans as fascist [ 8 ] [ 9 ] or authoritarian .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Notes ^ Trump was previously the 45th president, but the precedent set by Grover Cleveland is that a nonconsecutive second term means a new presidential number.

^ The first capture of the "Platform" section in Archive.org dates from July 14, 2024.

[ 30 ] ^ The number of videos is 46, but two of them, uploaded on different dates, are the same.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] ^ The layout of the website has changed.

[ 2 ] As of September 2024, the access to the list of videos is in the main page's lower section titled "I AM YOUR VOICE. AMERICA FIRST!" via clicking on the red button "Watch more videos".

^ Both sources establish that this proposition was announced in a series of videos. The campaign website offers only one, without a verbatim transcription, which appears to be embedded from Rumble . The Forbes channel offers three consecutive messages, the first and last of which are the same. The words of those two messages approximately match the campaign website's text.

^ In the Last Week Tonight episode aired on August 4, 2024, John Oliver claimed that the show was informed by Kennedy's campaign of these talks, including the possibility of appointing Kennedy as Secretary of Health and Human Services .

[ 132 ] References ^ a b Allen, Mike (March 6, 2024).

"Scoop: Biden campaign's plan of attack" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2024 . Retrieved April 20, 2024 .

^ a b c Alison Durkee (September 10, 2024).

"What Is Agenda47? What To Know About Trump's Policy Agenda If Elected" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2024 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

^ Walrath-Holdridge, Mary.

"As Trump creates distance from Project 2025, the conservative Agenda47 comes into focus" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Gilman, Nils (July 30, 2024).

"Opinion: Trump 2.0 would be a disaster for the climate" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

^ Scott, Dylan (August 14, 2024).

"Trump's campaign against public health is back on" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2024 . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

^ a b Zack Beauchamp (July 29, 2024).

"Trump proposed bombing Mexico and it somehow wasn't a big story. Trump's extremist policy agenda is flying under the radar — and that's a problem" .

Vox . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ "Trump promises to 'save' America with mix of lofty, vague, legally dubious policies" .

Los Angeles Times . August 14, 2024.

Archived from the original on August 15, 2024 . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

^ a b DeVega, Chauncey (July 14, 2023).

"Commentary: Be very afraid: Trump's 'Agenda 47' is no joke" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2024 . Retrieved March 30, 2024 .

This is not a joke or funny: You should be very afraid of Trump's fascist Agenda 47 plan ^ a b Baba, Ahmed (December 6, 2023).

"Opinion: Trump is telling us exactly what he'll do and we should believe him" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

Countless authoritarian experts have raised alarms, comparing Trump's rhetoric and plans to those of 20th-century fascists.

^ a b Shephard, Alex (November 14, 2023).

"The Two Sides of Donald Trump Are Equally Bad" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 22, 2024 .

^ a b Kotsonis, Stefano; Chakrabarti, Meghna (August 2, 2023).

"The authoritarian's playbook in America" .

On Point on WBUR .

Archived from the original on July 22, 2024 . Retrieved July 22, 2024 .

^ "Team Trump Launches Agenda 47 Tour" . Donald J Trump for President 2024, Inc. September 3, 2024.

Archived from the original on September 12, 2024 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

The "Team Trump Agenda 47 Policy Tour" will enlist some of the most prominent figures in politics, influential celebrities, and a diverse array of every day Americans across key battleground states to champion President Trump and his Agenda 47 initiative, which will MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN. (...) In addition to the Agenda 47 Tour, the Trump Campaign will be unveiling a series of supplementary surrogate events. More announcements are coming soon.

^ Multiple sources.

"Events" . Donald J Trump for President 2024, Inc. 2024.

Archived from the original on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

[The list of events varies. As of edition date, there were: Team Trump to Hold an Agenda 47 Policy Tour in Morgantown, Pennsylvania Featuring Governor Doug Burgum and Governor Kristi Noem, September 12, 2024 / Team Trump to Hold an Agenda 47 Policy Tour in Bermuda Run, North Carolina Featuring Representative Byron Donalds, Representative Dan Bishop, and Kash Patel, Former Chief of Staff for the Department of Defense, September 12, 2024 / Team Trump's Agenda 47 Policy Tour featuring Governor Kristi Noem in Savannah, Georgia, September 14, 2024] J.D. Wolf (September 2, 2024).

"Trump Announces Project 2025 Contributor Will Join His "Agenda 47 Policy Tour" in Wisconsin" .

MSN . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

The Trump campaign announced a Milwaukee, Wisconsin "Agenda 47 Policy Tour" event featuring Project 2025 contributor Monica Crowley. Trump's campaign has attempted to distance itself from the Project 2025's policy manual by emphasizing Trump's "Agenda 47" policies instead, yet his upcoming event using a Project 2025 contributor to promote his Agenda 47 policies continues to blur the line between Trump and Project 2025.

Alison Dirr, Mary Spicuzza (September 5, 2024).

"Trump surrogates on 'Agenda 47' Milwaukee tour stop downplay talk of Project 2025" .

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2024 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

The town hall is part of the "Team Trump Agenda 47 Policy Tour." The tour coincides with Trump's efforts to distance himself from Project 2025, a conservative blueprint created by the Heritage Foundation, even as Democrats continue to point out his connections to the plan.

"Team Trump's Agenda 47 Policy Tour in Farmington Hills, Michigan featuring Vivek Ramaswamy, Congressman Tim Walberg (MI-5), Alina Habba, Hima Kolanagireddy, Aric Nesbitt, and Tudor Dixon" . Donald J Trump for President 2024, Inc. September 11, 2024.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

Vivek Ramaswamy, Congressman Tim Walberg (MI-5), Alina Habba, Hima Kolanagireddy, Aric Nesbitt, and Tudor Dixon will participate in a Town Hall at a Team Trump Agenda 47 Policy Tour Event in Farmington Hills, Michigan on Friday, September 13, 2024, at 6:00PM EDT.

^ VandeHei, Jim; Allen, Mike (November 13, 2023).

"Behind the Curtain: Trump allies pre-screen loyalists for unprecedented power grab" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2023 . Retrieved March 30, 2024 .

^ a b c Popielarz, Taylor (September 15, 2023).

"Trump's vision for 'freedom cities,' flying cars and more" .

Spectrum News NY1 .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2024 . Retrieved April 21, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Bump, Philip (June 18, 2024).

"Trump has unveiled an agenda of his own. He just doesn't mention it much" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2024 . Retrieved June 26, 2024 .

^ a b Holmes, Kristen (November 17, 2023).

"Trump's radical second-term agenda would wield executive power in unprecedented ways" .

CNN Politics .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2024 . Retrieved April 21, 2024 .

^ Mattingly, Phil (June 23, 2024).

"5 ways a second Trump administration would be different from the first" . CNN.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2024 . Retrieved July 31, 2024 .

Trump's agenda isn't a state secret. It's posted on his campaign website under 'Agenda 47' and regularly featured in the scripted portions of his remarks at rallies.

^ Hirsh, Michael (September 19, 2023).

"Inside the Next Republican Revolution" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2023 . Retrieved November 6, 2023 .

For Trump personally, of course, this is a live-or-die agenda, and Trump campaign officials acknowledge that it aligns well with their own 'Agenda 47' program.

^ Wendling, Mike (September 11, 2024).

"Project 2025: The right-wing wish list for another Trump presidency" .

BBC . Retrieved November 5, 2024 .

^ a b "Agenda47: President Trump's Plan to Dismantle the Deep State and Return Power to the American People" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. March 21, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 4, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Cai, Sophia (May 21, 2023).

"Trump's 2025 vision, revealed" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2024 . Retrieved July 3, 2024 .

^ Ordoñez, Franco (July 11, 2024).

"It seems like Project 2025 is everywhere. But what is it?" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

While Trump has sought to deny a connection, there is plenty of overlap between Project 2025 and his agenda. It proposes mass deportations of millions of undocumented immigrants. So does Trump. Trump has called for cuts to the federal agencies like the Department of Education. Project 2025 calls for its elimination.

^ Ulatowski, Rachel (June 3, 2024).

"The Right-Wing Manifesto Project 2025 Is as Real as It Is Terrifying" .

The Mary Sue .

Archived from the original on June 14, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

However, Agenda 47 shares many themes with Project 2025, including elevating the president's power, enforcing the death penalty for drug dealers, utilizing the National Guard in liberal-led cities, and cracking down on undocumented immigrants.

^ "Trump's 'Agenda 47' and the Republican National Convention: A Comprehensive Overview" .

BET .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2024 . Retrieved July 19, 2024 .

^ a b c Taggart, Frankie (June 3, 2023).

" 'Agenda 47': What Trump Has Promised If He Wins In 2024" .

Barron's .

Agence France-Presse .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2024 . Retrieved April 21, 2024 .

^ a b Zurcher, Anthony (November 3, 2023).

"What a Donald Trump second term would look like" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2024 . Retrieved April 21, 2024 .

^ "Where Biden and Trump stand on key 2024 issues heading into the 1st debate" .

ABC News . June 27, 2024.

Archived from the original on July 11, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ "Agenda 47. President Trump's 20 CORE PROMISES TO MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. 2024 . Retrieved September 17, 2024 .

^ "Agenda 47. President Trump's 20 CORE PROMISES TO MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN!" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. 2024.

Archived from the original on July 14, 2024 . Retrieved September 17, 2024 .

^ Bump, Philip (February 22, 2024).

"What might happen after another inauguration of Donald Trump" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

The campaign's Agenda47 website is mostly videos of Trump riffing on stuff.

^ a b "Agenda47: Protecting Students from the Radical Left and Marxist Maniacs Infecting Educational Institutions" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. May 2, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ a b "Agenda47: Protecting Students from the Radical Left and Marxist Maniacs Infecting Educational Institutions" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. July 17, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ a b "Agenda47: Rescuing America's Auto Industry from Joe Biden's Disastrous Job-Killing Policies" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. July 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 27, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Sherk, James; Sagert, Jacob (July 13, 2023).

Proposed EV Mandate Would Eliminate 117,000 Automanufacturing Jobs (PDF) (Report). America First Policy Institute. p. 11 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Katie Tubb (June 28, 2022).

"Biden's Radical, Anti-Fossil Fuel Energy Policy Costs Americans Dearly" . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Crosstabs. Monthly Harvard-Harris Poll: February 2029 (PDF) .

The Harris Poll (Report). February 2019. p. 470.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 10, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

This survey was conducted online within the United States from February 19–20, 2029 among 1,792 registered voters by The Harris Poll.

^ David Shepardson (April 1, 2022).

"U.S. boosts fuel efficiency rules as Biden reverses Trump rollback" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Scherer, Steve (January 11, 2023).

"Canada, Mexico win auto rules trade dispute with U.S." Reuters .

Archived from the original on August 31, 2023 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Nysveen, Per Magnus (July 2016).

"Reserve Estimates. U.S. Holds Most Recoverable Oil Reserves" .

The American Oil & Gas Reporter . Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Altus, Kristen (May 4, 2023).

"Oil industry giant torches Biden's war on energy: 'Dumbest thing this administration has done' " .

Fox Business .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ "President Trump Will Stop China From Owning America" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. January 18, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (January 19, 2023).

Trump Takes Aim At 'Biden Crime Family' In Pledge To Curb China's Influence In US (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: President Trump on Making America Energy Independent Again" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 9, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (February 9, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Calls Key Biden Policy 'A Gift To China' (Internet video).

Forbes . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: President Trump's New Trade Plan to Protect American Workers" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 27, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (February 27, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Lets Loose On 'Biden And The Globalists,' Proposes Major China Trade Overhaul (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Reclaiming America's Independence by Slashing Biden's Disastrous Trade Deficits" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 28, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (February 28, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Excoriates Biden For 'Nation-Wrecking Policies,' Pushes New Plan To Cut Trade Deficit (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Joe Biden Has Been a Disaster for the Economy" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. March 17, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (March 18, 2023).

Trump Reacts To Silicon Valley Bank Meltdown, Says Biden Is 'Leading Us Toward A Great Depression' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Cementing Fair and Reciprocal Trade with the Trump Reciprocal Trade Act" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. June 21, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 17, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (June 21, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Unveils Hardline New 'Reciprocal Trade Act' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (July 20, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Goes Off On Biden Electric Vehicle Goals, Unveils Plan To 'Save' Auto Industry (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ "President Trump's Message to America's Auto Workers" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. October 23, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (August 31, 2023).

Trump: 'Auto Workers Are Getting Totally Ripped Off' By 'Crooked Joe Biden' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Uptin Saiidi (August 17, 2018).

How do tariffs work? CNBC Explains (Internet video).

CNBC . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

[From video description:] The U.S. imports more than $500 billion worth of goods from China, of which some goods are subject to a customs duty. CNBC's Uptin Saiidi explains how increased tariffs can impact an economy.

^ Katie Lobosco (January 14, 2020).

"Breaking down the costs of Trump's trade war with China" . CNN . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

Trump used tariffs as a negotiating tactic, meant to hurt China's economy and pressure Beijing to agree to a new trade deal that addresses unfair trade practices, such as intellectual property theft and forced technology transfers. That's a goal that business leaders across the country, as well as lawmakers on both sides of the aisle agree on.

But the tariffs have hurt Americans, too. They've cut into US businesses' bottom lines, forcing owners to make decisions about job cuts and raising prices on consumers. Plus, the uncertainty around how long the tariffs will be in place and whether Trump will escalate the rate – which he did last May with just days' notice – deter businesses from making long-term investments, potentially costing the US growth. (...) Trump is wrong when he claims that China is paying the tariffs. The cost of the tariff comes directly out of the bank account of an American importer when the good arrives at the port.

^ Rachel Layne (September 12, 2019).

"Trump trade war with China has cost 300,000 U.S. jobs, Moody's estimates" .

CBS News . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

Tariffs on imported Chinese goods are paid for by U.S. companies, not China as President Donald Trump has erroneously claimed. In July alone, tariffs cost American businesses $6.8 billion, according to figures released Wednesday by Tariffs Hurt the Heartland, a coalition of companies and trade associations that oppose the taxes. Rising trade uncertainty can hurt companies' ability to plan and hold back spending, which in turn can slow economic growth.

^ Harry G. Broadman (March 31, 2019).

"Mr. Trump Failed 'Trade Tariffs 101' At Wharton" .

Forbes . Retrieved November 4, 2024 .

In a nutshell, no matter how high or expansive are tariffs, they will not create effective incentives for China to execute the fundamental market-oriented reforms Beijing legally obligated itself to undertake in its 2001 WTO Accession Agreement.  That is the real endgame.

Achieving that goal--necessitating a reduction in the fundamental role of the state in China's economy, which of course Chinese President Xi Jinping is loath to do since that is the raison d'etre of the Communist Party--is a wholly different matter.  That would require both using a different arsenal and employing a fundamentally different strategy, especially marshaling a multilateral coalition of the world's leading trading partners.  Our President seems to be moving us further away from that path each passing day.

^ a b Bradner, Eric; Holmes, Kristen; Wallace, Alicia (March 3, 2023).

"Trump proposes building 10 'freedom cities' and flying cars" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2024 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

^ Hans Nichols (June 25, 2024).

"Scoop: 16 Nobel economists see a Trump inflation bomb" .

Axios . Retrieved June 18, 2024 .

"Many Americans are concerned about inflation, which has come down remarkably fast. There is rightly a worry that Donald Trump will reignite this inflation, with his fiscally irresponsible budgets," they write.

The message was spearheaded by Joseph Stiglitz, who won the Nobel prize for economics in 2001.

He was joined by George A. Akerlof (2001), Sir Angus Deaton (2015), Claudia Goldin (2023), Sir Oliver Hart (2016), Eric S. Maskin (2007), Daniel L. McFadden (2000), Paul R. Milgrom (2020), Roger B. Myerson (2007), Edmund S. Phelps (2006), Paul M. Romer (2018), Alvin E. Roth (2012), William F. Sharpe (1990), Robert J. Shiller (2013), Christopher A. Sims (2011), and Robert B. Wilson (2020). (...) Zoom out: Biden has presided over a period of solid growth, a strong labor market, and stubbornly high inflation.

^ Matt Egan (June 26, 2024).

"Trump would make America's inflation crisis worse, 16 Nobel economists warn" .

CNN . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

In particular, the economists point to Trump's "fiscally irresponsible budgets" and nonpartisan research from the likes of the Peterson Institute, Oxford Economics and Allianz that finds the Trump agenda — if successfully enacted — would increase inflation.

Trump approved $8.4 trillion of new 10-year borrowing during his term — nearly twice as much as President Joe Biden has so far in office, according to fiscal watchdog group the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.

Not only does Trump want to extend his 2017 tax cuts — a move that the Congressional Budget Office warns would cost nearly $5 trillion — but the former president recently told CEOs during a closed-door meeting that he'd like to cut the corporate tax rate even further.

However, cutting taxes would risk accelerating an economy at a time when the Federal Reserve is working hard to slow it down to fight inflation. (...) The Stiglitz-led letter did not directly mention Trump's trade and immigration policies, but some mainstream economists warn they would be inflationary, too.

Trump has called for raising tariffs on China and all other trading partners — a move that Moody's Analytics predicted would kill jobs and worsen inflation. Trump argues the tariffs would save jobs and punish China for trade practices that both parties are fed up with.

^ "Trump Campaign Slams 'Worthless' Nobel Prize Winning Economists" .

Newsweek . June 27, 2024 . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

Trump campaign national press secretary Karoline Leavitt told Newsweek that the American people don't need "worthless out of touch" economists telling them which president "put more money in their pockets," after 16 Nobel Prize winners said in a letter that "Joe Biden's economic agenda is vastly superior to Donald Trump's." (...) [Professor Stiglitz] said that in the short term inflation will be higher because of Trump's "protectionist tariff policies, marked reductions in immigration, likely large budget deficit, abandoning Biden's attacks against monopolies, and repeal of critical elements of the Inflation Reduction Act." Stiglitz also argued that, "in the long run, the undermining of the rule of the law, attacks on our universities, and cutbacks in the funding of science will undermine growth." Leavitt responded, "President Trump built the strongest economy in American history. In just three years, Joe Biden's out of control spending created the worst inflation crisis in generations. Americans know we cannot afford four more years of Bidenomics." ^ Scott Bessent (June 27, 2024).

"16 Nobel Prize-winning economists claim Trump will wreck our economy. This is the reason I don't trust them. One of the first signatures comes from George Akerlof, a 2001 Nobel laureate who is married to President Biden's Treasury Secretary, Janet Yellen" .

Fox News . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

There they go again. Sixteen Nobel Prize-winning economists recently penned an open letter arguing that "[President] Biden's economic agenda is vastly superior to [President] Trump [sic]."  The principal argument, echoing recent Democratic talking points, is that a second Trump presidency could actually increase inflation.  Never mind that inflation never materially exceeded 2% during the Trump administration, nor that President Biden has presided over the highest inflation in 40 years.

The field of economics purports to be a science, priding itself on intellectual rigor and evidence-based assessments.  Yet just as campus protests lifted the veil on the radical, fact-free academic culture that infects many American universities, academic economists' recent record of political advocacy is a potent reminder of why Americans have come to dismiss the dismal science.

The contrast between President Trump and President Biden's economic records could not be more clear.  President Trump's record of tax reform and deregulation powered the American economy to the fastest real wage increases in a generation.  Real incomes increased by nearly 10% from 2017 to 2019, with real wages rising fastest among lower income workers.

^ Yuval Rosenberg, Michael Rainey (August 27, 2024).

"Trump Economic Plans Would Cost More Than $4 Trillion: Analysis" .

The Fiscal Times . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

An array of tax and spending proposals put forth by former President Donald Trump would raise the federal budget deficit by more than $4 trillion over the next 10 years, according to an analysis by the Penn Wharton Budget Model.

The Trump proposals were scored on both a static and dynamic basis, with the latter approach incorporating feedback loops from policy to the economy to tax revenues. On a conventional static basis, the Penn Wharton analysts estimated the 10-year cost of Trump's proposals to be $5.8 trillion, while on a dynamic basis, the cost was estimated to be $4.1 trillion.

Here's a breakdown, with costs provided on a static basis: (...) The analysts did, however, provide a sense of who would benefit from Trump's tax and spending proposals. While every income group would gain, some would do so more than others. The biggest winners would be very rich, with the top 1% taking home an additional $47,515 by 2034, and the top 0.1% gaining $214,935. Those in the bottom 20% of the income distribution, by comparison, would see an additional $465.

^ Rebecca Picciotto (August 28, 2024).

"Trump budget would spike deficits by nearly 5 times Harris proposal, says Penn Wharton" .

NBC 4 . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

Former President Donald Trump's economic proposals would increase federal deficits by $5.8 trillion over the next decade, almost five times more than those of Vice President Kamala Harris, which would add $1.2 trillion, according to a new pair of studies from the nonpartisan Penn Wharton Budget Model.

The Trump report found that his plan to permanently extend the 2017 tax cuts would add more than $4 trillion to deficits over the next 10 years. His proposal to eliminate taxes on Social Security benefits comes with a $1.2 trillion price tag, while his pledge to further reduce corporate taxes would add nearly $6 billion.

The Harris analysis showed that her plan to expand the child tax credit, the earned income tax credit and other tax credits would raise deficits by $2.1 trillion in the coming 10 years. And her proposal to create a $25,000 subsidy for all qualifying first-time homebuyers would add $140 billion over a decade.

But the Harris report found that raising the corporate tax rate to 28% from its current level of 21%, as the vice president has floated, could partially offset the costs of her spending by $1.1 trillion.

Along with corporate tax hikes, Harris has said she supports the $5 trillion worth of revenue raisers contained in President Joe Biden's budget proposal for the 2025 fiscal year. (...) ^ Nikki McCann Ramirez (September 4, 2024).

"Goldman Sachs Says Trump Win Would Lead to Economic Downturn" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

As financial institutions weigh the potential impact of November's election, Goldman Sachs is warning that a victory by former President Donald Trump would likely lead to an economic downturn.

According to a Tuesday note from Goldman, economists at the firm "estimate that if Trump wins in a sweep or with divided government, the hit to growth from tariffs and tighter immigration policy would outweigh the positive fiscal impulse." They project that GDP growth would peak at 0.5 percentage points in 2025, the positive effects of which would abate in 2026.

By contrast, Goldman predicts that if Vice President Kamala Harris wins the White House and Democrats sweep, "new spending and expanded middle-income tax credits would slightly more than offset lower investment due to higher corporate tax rates, resulting in a very slight boost to GDP investment due to higher corporate tax rates, resulting in a very slight boost to GDP growth on average over 2025-2026." ^ Christopher Anstey (September 4, 2024).

"Goldman sees US GDP hit if Trump wins, boost if Democrats sweep" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

The Trump campaign said forecasters failed to anticipate the pickup in growth that followed his victory in 2016. "These Wall Street elites would be wise to review the record and acknowledge the shortcomings of their past work if they'd like their new forecasts to be seen as credible," said Brian Hughes, a senior advisor on the campaign.

Harris campaign spokesperson Joe Costello said that "right, left, or center, experts agree that Trump is threatening an economic disaster" of skyrocketing unemployment, an inflation "bomb," exploding debt and a potential recession.

^ Multiple sources.

Taylor Giorno (June 20, 2024).

"Trump win, GOP sweep would fuel inflation: Moody's Analytics" .

The Hill . Retrieved October 19, 2024 .

Inflation could reaccelerate if former President Trump wins the White House and Republicans win control of Congress, according to a recent report by Moody's Analytics.

Under the so-called Republican Sweep scenario, which the forecasters place at a 35 percent probability, consumer price inflation accelerates from 3 percent in 2024 to 3.6 percent in 2025, according to the three economists who authored the report.

Trump policies — including higher tariffs, tax cuts that stimulate the economy and an exodus of foreign immigrants that could tighten the labor market and increase labor costs — would fuel the uptick in inflation.

"The Federal Reserve, which is focused on labor costs and inflation, may feel compelled to resume its rate hikes, or at the very least wait longer to cut rates. Recession becomes a serious threat once again," the economists wrote.

Aimee Picchi (July 19, 2024).

"Trump says he'll end the "inflation nightmare." Economists say Trumponomics could drive up prices" .

CBS News . Retrieved October 19, 2024 .

Former President Donald Trump is campaigning on a pledge to end the "inflation nightmare," vowing that if he wins a second term, he'll bring down prices "very quickly." And if that scenario came to pass, it would be cheered by the millions of Americans who say higher costs remain a major problem.

There's only one problem: Key policies that undergird so-called Trumponomics — a combination of tariffs, tax cuts and a crackdown on immigration — are likely to cause a flare-up in inflation, according to many Wall Street economists. That would be a painful outcome for consumers and businesses sapped by more than two years of surging prices. More broadly, renewed inflationary pressures would also come as inflation is finally inching closer to the Federal Reserve's goal of 2% per year.

But experts warn that Trump's economic policies could cause such progress to stall, and even reverse. They note that tariffs effectively act as a consumption tax, increasing the cost of goods imported into the U.S. — costs that businesses typically pass on to consumers.

Matt Egan (September 26, 2024).

"Trump's promises would spike inflation and wipe out jobs, study finds" .

CNN . Retrieved October 19, 2024 .

Former President Donald Trump has promised to attack the United States affordability crisis by imposing immense tariffs, carrying out unprecedented deportations and even influencing interest rate decisions.

However, a new analysis finds that the Republican presidential nominee's plans for tariffs, deportations and the Federal Reserve would not only fail to solve inflation – they would make it much worse.

The Trump agenda would cause weaker economic growth, higher inflation and lower employment, according to a working paper released Thursday by the Peterson Institute for International Economics . In some cases, the damage could continue through 2040.

"We find that ironically, despite his 'make the foreigners pay' rhetoric, this package of policies does more damage to the US economy than to any other in the world," the Peterson Institute working paper from researchers Warwick McKibbin, Megan Hogan and Marcus Noland concluded.

Derek Saul (October 14, 2024).

"Two-Thirds Of Economists Think Inflation Would Be Worse Under Trump Than Harris, Poll Finds" .

Forbes . Retrieved October 19, 2024 .

Topline. A majority of economists believe former President Donald Trump's proposed economic policies would lead to higher inflation than those of Vice President Kamala Harris, according to a survey published Monday by the Wall Street Journal, findings which go against a far stronger inflation record under Trump than Joe Biden.

Key facts.

Some 68% of economists said inflation would be higher under Trump's economic proposals than Harris, according to the Journal's survey of 50 economists conducted Oct. 4-8.

That compares to 12% who believed Harris inflation would be worse and 20% who didn't anticipate a noticeable gap.

It's a wider gap than was found in a similar poll conducted July 5–9 before President Joe Biden exited the race, when 56% of economists said inflation would be worse under Trump than Biden compared to 16% for the opposite.

Perhaps Trump's most notable potentially inflationary policy put forth on the campaign trail is a 60% tariff, or import tax, on Chinese goods and a 10% tariff on other imports.

^ "President Trump's Plan to Save American Education and Give Power Back to Parents" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. January 26, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 4, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (January 29, 2023).

'Pink-Haired Communists Teaching Our Kids!': Trump Reveals Plan To 'Save American Education' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (May 2, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Unveils Attack Plan On DEI, 'Marxist Maniacs And Lunatics' In Higher Education (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Dahlkamp, Owen (July 5, 2024).

"Donald Trump's Secret Weapon to Dismantle American Education" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on July 5, 2024 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: President Trump's Ten Principles For Great Schools Leading To Great Jobs" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. September 13, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 7, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (September 13, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Pledges To Close Education Department, Rips Biden's Education Record (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: President Trump's Pledge to Homeschool Families" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. September 14, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (September 14, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Issues Pledge To Families That Homeschool Their Children (Internet video).

Forbes . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: The American Academy" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. November 1, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 5, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (November 1, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Announces Massive Higher Education Overhaul To Create 'The American Academy' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 18, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Trump wants to build a free online university – and make Harvard pay for it" .

Politico . November 1, 2023.

Archived from the original on November 13, 2023 . Retrieved July 9, 2024 .

^ Klawans, Justin (February 26, 2024).

"The Heritage Foundation's Project 2025 wants to reshape America under Trump" .

The Week .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2024 . Retrieved May 16, 2024 .

^ Dorf, Michael C.

(June 19, 2023).

"The Misguided Unitary Executive Theory Gains Ground" .

Justia .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2024 . Retrieved April 19, 2024 .

^ Wendling, Mike (July 7, 2024).

"Project 2025: A wish list for a Trump presidency, explained" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2024 . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

... a controversial idea known as 'unitary executive theory' ^ Dodds, Graham G.; Kelley, Christopher S. (2024).

"Presidential Leadership and the Unitary Executive Theory: Temptations and Troubles" . In Akande, Adebowale (ed.).

Leadership and Politics . Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. p. 547.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-56415-4_22 .

ISBN 978-3-031-56414-7 .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 18, 2024 .

"Constitutionally, the unitary executive theory is not some long-established doctrine that is widely accepted by courts and other political actors. Far from it, the constitutional status of the theory is rather controversial." ^ "Executive Order on Creating Schedule F In The Excepted Service" .

whitehouse.gov . October 21, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 30, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2020 – via National Archives .

^ Donald J. Trump (March 21, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Unveils Plan To 'Dismantle The Deep State' As Possible Indictment Looms (Internet video).

Forbes . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Federal workers around nation's capital worry over Trump's plans to send some of them elsewhere" .

AP News . September 2, 2024.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved September 2, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Liberating America from Biden's Regulatory Onslaught" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. April 16, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (April 14, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Proposes New Mandatory Civil Service Test For All Federal Employees (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Using Impoundment to Cut Waste, Stop Inflation, and Crush the Deep State" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. June 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (June 20, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Unveils Plan To 'Crush The Deep State' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Stein, Jeff; Bogage, Jacob (June 7, 2024).

"Trump plans to claim sweeping powers to cancel federal spending" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2024 . Retrieved July 9, 2023 .

^ Rampell, Catherine (June 11, 2024).

"Trump telegraphs plans to neuter Congress, this time by seizing spending" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2024 . Retrieved July 9, 2024 .

^ Tori Otten (July 17, 2023).

"Inside Trump's Fascist Plan to Control All Federal Agencies if He Wins" .

The New Republic . The New Republic.

Archived from the original on August 2, 2024 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

Trump also wants to be able to impound funds, meaning refuse to spend money appropriated for programs he doesn't like. The tactic was banned under Richard Nixon, but Trump insists on his campaign website that presidents have a constitutional right to impound funds.

^ Paoletta, Mark ; Shapiro, Daniel (June 24, 2024).

"Opinion: Trump is right about the Impoundment Control Act – it's unconstitutional" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2024 . Retrieved July 9, 2024 .

^ "President Trump Calls for Immediate De-escalation and Peace" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 1, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

President Donald J. Trump released a series of video statements on the Russia-Ukraine War, calling for immediate de-escalation and peace in Ukraine ^ Donald J. Trump (February 1, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Warns We're At 'Brink Of Nuclear War', Explains How Ukraine-Russia Conflict Can End (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

In a series of videos released to social media, former President Trump gave his take on Russia's invasion of Ukraine and warned that world is at the 'brink of nuclear war.' ^ "Agenda47: President Trump Announces Plan to Stop the America Last Warmongers and Globalists" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 22, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (February 21, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Warns 'World War III Has Never Been Closer' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Preventing World War III" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. March 16, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Rebuilding America's Depleted Military" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. July 18, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (July 18, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Drops Hammer On Biden For Handling Of Ukraine, Details New Military Policy (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2024 . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Gram Slattery (July 17, 2024).

"Trump's foreign policy: rethink NATO, troops to Mexico, boost tariffs" .

Reuters .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2023 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 .

Here is a look at the foreign policy proposals Trump has pledged to advance should he win the 2024 presidential election, having secured the party's nomination this week in Milwaukee ^ Asawin Suebsaeng, Andrew Perez (November 27, 2024).

"Team Trump Debates 'How Much Should We Invade Mexico?' In Trump's government-in-waiting, the only question is how massive the U.S. assault on Mexican drug cartels should be" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Julia Mueller (January 8, 2025).

"What to know about Trump's calls to make Canada the '51st state' " .

The Hill . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Maria Abi-Habib (January 15, 2025).

"Panama Wants to Preserve U.S. Alliance, but Trump Could Push It Closer to China" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

President-elect Donald J. Trump's threat to take back the Panama Canal may be posturing, but it could dampen the Panamanian government's wish to broaden relations with the United States, analysts say.

^ Laura Paddison (January 8, 2025).

"Trump wants to buy Greenland again. Here's why he's so interested in the world's largest island" .

CNN . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

On Tuesday, Donald Trump Jr. landed in Greenland, the Arctic island his father, President-elect Donald Trump, has expressed a strong desire to purchase, despite sharp statements from Greenland that it is not for sale.

^ Miranda Bryant (January 16, 2025).

" 'Homeless people given free lunch' to attend Trump Jr event in Greenland. People in Maga hats at meal last week did not know Donald Trump's son and were invited off the street, hotel boss says" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Peter Suciu (January 14, 2025).

"Could Trump Actually Invade Canada? The United States could invade and occupy Canada easily enough, but it would have little to gain by doing so" .

The National Interest . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Antonio De Loera-Brust (January 14, 2025).

"Latin America's Trump Backlash Is Already Underway. Imperialist posturing by the United States has always spurred resistance from its southern neighbors" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

U.S. President-elect Donald Trump's public threats to retake the Panama Canal, by force if necessary, have already done meaningful damage to U.S. standing in Latin America. Panamanian President José Raúl Mulino responded immediately: no way. Other Latin American states, including Mexico, Chile, and Colombia, were quick to offer their solidarity to Panama.

^ Laura Kayali and Hanne Cokelaere (January 10, 2025).

"Trump's invasion of Greenland would be 'the shortest war in the world' " .

Politico Europe . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

We took the president-elect literally not seriously and charted out how the U.S. military would fare against Denmark — which recently boosted the island's security by financing two dog sled patrols.

^ Meg Kinnard (January 7, 2025).

"Trump says he will change the name of the Gulf of Mexico. Can he do that?" .

Associated Press . Retrieved January 18, 2025 .

^ "Mexico president trolls Trump with "Mexican America" map after his "Gulf of America" name change proposal" .

CBS News . January 9, 2025 . Retrieved January 18, 2025 .

^ "We Must Protect Medicare and Social Security" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. January 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: President Trump Continues to Lead on Protecting Americans from Radical Leftist ESG Investments" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 25, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (February 24, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Erupts On 'Woke Left' And 'Radical Left Communists,' Unveils Proposed ESG Ban (Internet video).

Forbes . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Addressing Rise of Chronic Childhood Illnesses" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. June 6, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (June 6, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Announces Probe Into Uptick In Chronic Illnesses In Children (Internet video). [[Forbes|]].

Archived from the original on July 30, 2024 . Retrieved July 30, 2024 .

^ Perrin, James M.; Bloom, Sheila R.; Gortmaker, Steven L. (June 27, 2007).

"The Increase of Childhood Chronic Conditions in the United States" .

JAMA .

297 (24): 2755– 2759.

doi : 10.1001/jama.297.24.2755 .

PMID 17595277 .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 30, 2024 .

The number of children and youth in the United States with chronic health conditions (a health condition that lasts ≥12 months or at time of diagnosis is likely to have a duration of ≥12 months) has increased dramatically in the past 4 decades.

^ Perrin, James M.; Anderson, L. Elizabeth; Van Cleave, Jeanne (December 1, 2014).

"The Rise In Chronic Conditions Among Infants, Children, And Youth Can Be Met With Continued Health System Innovations" .

Health Affairs .

33 (12): 2755– 2759.

doi : 10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0832 .

PMID 25489027 .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 30, 2024 .

However, over the past fifty years chronic health conditions and disabilities among children and youth have steadily risen, primarily from four classes of common conditions: asthma, obesity, mental health conditions, and neurodevelopmental disorders.

^ Skalka, Liz (June 6, 2023).

"Under Fire From DeSantis, Trump Dog-Whistles To Anti-Vaccine Community" .

Yahoo! News .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 30, 2024 .

^ Owens, Caitlin (December 18, 2023).

"Trump embraces conspiratorial language to attack Big Pharma" . Axios.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 30, 2024 .

^ "COVID-19 Vaccine Requirements for Childcare and School (K-12)" . Immunize.org. 2024.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

[Map of the United States and List of the states] NOTE: As of May 2024, no state required COVID-19 vaccine for any grade level.

^ Multiple sources: Phillips, Aleks (August 31, 2023).

"Donald Trump Blasts New Mask Mandates: 'We Will Not Comply' " .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

In a video address on X, formerly Twitter, posted on Wednesday, the Republican primary frontrunner pledged that, if re-elected, he would 'use every available authority to cut federal funding to any school, college, airline or public transportation system that imposes a mask mandate or a vaccine mandate.' Hartmann, Margaret (March 5, 2024).

"Did Trump Really Vow to Defund Schools With Vaccine Mandates?" .

Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

During a rally in Richmond, Virginia, last weekend, Donald Trump made a number of wild, headline-generating remarks ... 'I will not give one penny to any school that has a vaccine mandate or a mask mandate,' Trump declared.

Andrew Stanton (March 5, 2024).

"Donald Trump's Plan Would Destroy Funding for Schools in Republican States" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

Trump said during a rally in Rock Hill, South Carolina, last month that he would not support federal funds for any schools requiring vaccine or mask mandates ...

Weixel, Nathaniel (March 9, 2024).

"Trump's vaccine rhetoric sends chills through public health circles" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

Public health advocates are watching in growing alarm as former President Trump increasingly embraces the anti-vaccine movement. ... Trump's campaign says his comments only apply to states that mandate COVID-19 vaccines – making it essentially an empty threat.

"Trump's vaccine remarks require rebuke" .

Star Tribune . May 29, 2024.

Archived from the original on August 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

Trump was in St. Paul for Minnesota Republicans' annual Lincoln Reagan dinner. 'The crowd erupted into the loudest applause of the night and a standing ovation when Trump said he would cut off funding to any school teaching critical race theory as well as any school with a vaccine mandate' ...

O'Connor, Lydia (June 19, 2024).

"Trump Makes Bizarre Threat About Schools And Vaccine Mandates" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

'I will not give one penny to any school that has a vaccine mandate or a mask mandate,' he declared at his rally in Racine, Wisconsin. ... Last month, he even attacked independent presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr., one of the most prominent voices in the anti-vaccine movement, as not being anti-vaccine enough.

^ Treisman, Rachel (July 16, 2024).

"Leaked video shows Trump criticizing vaccines on phone with RFK Jr" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2024 . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ Kelly, Stephanie (July 16, 2024).

"Trump courts RFK Jr's support in leaked phone call" .

Reuters . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ Donald Trump, Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (July 16, 2024).

Video shows Robert Kennedy Jr. on the phone with Trump one day after rally shooting (Internet video).

NBC News .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2024 . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ Bade, Rachael; Lizza, Ryan (July 15, 2024).

"Trump met with Robert F. Kennedy Jr. to seek endorsement" .

Politico . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ Dawsey, Josh; Scherer, Michael (July 22, 2024).

"RFK Jr. floated a job in a Trump White House as he weighed endorsing Trump" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 10, 2024 . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

Independent presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr. held talks this month with former president Donald Trump about endorsing his campaign and taking a job in a second Trump administration, overseeing a portfolio of health and medical issues, according to four people familiar with the matter. ... The conversations ended without any definitive conclusion, the people said.

^ Chris Cuomo, Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (July 22, 2024).

RFK Jr. denies asking Trump for job in his administration. Cuomo (Internet video).

NewsNation .  Event occurs at min. 02:45 . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ John Oliver (August 8, 2024).

RFK Jr.: Last Week Tonight with John Oliver (HBO) (Internet video). Last Week Tonight.  Event occurs at min. 29:50.

Archived from the original on August 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

^ Kathryn Watson, Allison Novelo (August 23, 2024).

"RFK Jr. endorses Trump and suspends presidential campaign" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2024 . Retrieved August 23, 2024 .

Kennedy said three issues encouraged him to leave the Democratic Party and "to throw my support to President Trump": free speech, the war in Ukraine and the "war on our children." ^ Brandy Zadrozny (August 23, 2024).

"RFK Jr. as Trump's health secretary? Here's what he wants to do" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2024 . Retrieved August 23, 2024 .

Kennedy's campaign has been supported and led by the anti-vaccine movement he helped build. In November, he credited activists at Children's Health Defense, which he chaired until he took leave to run for president, for boosting his campaign. Accepting an award at the group's annual conference, he said he would stop the National Institutes of Health from studying infectious diseases, like Covid and measles, and pivot it to studying chronic diseases, like diabetes and obesity. Kennedy believes environmental toxins, a category in which he places childhood vaccines, to be the major threat to public health, rather than infectious disease.

"I'm going to say to NIH scientists, God bless you all," Kennedy said at the time. "Thank you for public service. We're going to give infectious disease a break for about eight years." ^ a b c Donald J. Trump , Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

(August 23, 2024).

RFK Jr. speaks at Trump rally: FULL SPEECH (Internet video). FOX 4 Dallas-Fort Worth.

Archived from the original on August 24, 2024 . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

^ "Calley Means" . Calley Means. 2024 . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

My mission is to steer more healthcare dollars to incentivize metabolic habits at the root of disease (healthy food, exercise, sleep, stress management). (...) Right now, we have a sick-care system where 95% of healthcare dollars are spent to manage disease after people get sick. It is a big problem when the largest (and fastest growing) industry in the country is incentivized for us to be sick.

^ Saleem H. Ali (August 24, 2024).

"Environmental Health and the Kennedy-Trump Alliance" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

In a lengthy speech, announcing a suspension of his presidential campaign, Robert Kennedy Jr., spent nearly 20 minutes talking about environmental health and chronic diseases in children. (...) He also noted his supportive interactions with bestselling authors Dr. Casey Means and her brother Calley Means on metabolic health, which has been quite impactful in health education through their bestselling book Good Energy.

^ Sheryl Gay Stolberg (November 14, 2024).

"Trump Picks R.F.K. Jr. to Be Head of Health and Human Services Dept" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 18, 2025 .

Whether the Senate would confirm Robert F. Kennedy Jr., a vaccine skeptic who has unorthodox views about medicine, is an open question.

^ Jill Colvin, Amanda Seitz (November 14, 2024).

"Trump chooses anti-vaccine activist Robert F. Kennedy Jr. as health secretary" .

Associated Press . Retrieved January 18, 2025 .

^ Dan Mangan (November 19, 2024).

"Trump picks Dr. Oz to lead massive Medicare and Medicaid agency CMS" .

CNBC . Retrieved January 18, 2025 .

^ May Kekatos (November 19, 2025).

"What to know about Dr. Oz as Trump picks him to lead Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Oz has made controversial statements about vaccines and weight loss products" .

ABC News . Retrieved January 18, 2025 .

^ Mike Wendling (May 8, 2025).

"Trump nominates doctor and influencer for US surgeon general" .

BBC News . Retrieved May 31, 2025 .

^ Will Stone (May 9, 2025).

"Casey Means, Trump's new pick for surgeon general, faces pushback" .

NPR . Retrieved May 31, 2025 .

^ "Agenda47: Protecting Americans by Taking on Big Pharma and Ending Global Freeloading" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. June 23, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ a b Levitt, Larry (February 15, 2024).

"What Would Another Trump Presidency Mean for Health Care?" .

JAMA Health Forum .

5 (2): e240262.

doi : 10.1001/jamahealthforum.2024.0262 .

PMID 38358751 .

^ Ayanian, John Z.; Buntin, Melinda (May 6, 2021).

"The Debut of JAMA Health Forum as a Peer-Reviewed Journal" .

JAMA Health Forum .

2 (5): e210847.

doi : 10.1001/jamahealthforum.2021.0847 .

ISSN 2689-0186 .

PMID 36218671 .

^ "Agenda47: Returning Production of Essential Medicines Back to America and Ending Biden's Pharmaceutical Shortages" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. July 24, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ "Total Ban on Taxpayer Dollars Used to Free Illegal Aliens and Criminal Penalties for Administrative Noncompliance" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. December 21, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Day One Executive Order Ending Citizenship for Children of Illegals and Outlawing Birth Tourism" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. May 30, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (May 30, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Reveals Plan To End Birthright Citizenship For Undocumented Immigrants' Babies (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: No Welfare for Illegal Aliens" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. November 1, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 2, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Jasmine Garsd (July 19, 2024).

"Trump has promised deportations on an unprecedented scale" .

NPR .

NPR . Retrieved September 14, 2024 .

The idea of deporting millions of undocumented immigrants gained traction during the RNC. Speakers talked about how a second Trump administration will carry out the "largest deportation in history." ^ Bernd Debusmann Jr., Mike Wendling (August 16, 2024).

"Could Trump really deport one million immigrants?" .

BBC . Retrieved September 14, 2024 .

If he's re-elected president, Donald Trump has promised the mass deportation of people who do not have legal permission to be in the United States.

While his campaign has given various answers as to how many could be removed, his vice-presidential nominee JD Vance gave one figure during an interview to ABC News this week.

"Let's start with one million," he said. "That's where Kamala Harris has failed. And then we can go from there." (...) If a US administration was able to legally move ahead with plans for mass deportations, authorities would still have to contend with enormous logistical challenges.

^ Adeola Adeosun (September 7, 2024).

"Donald Trump Warns Getting Migrants Out Will Be a 'Bloody Story' " .

Newsweek . Retrieved September 14, 2024 .

Former President Donald Trump intensified his rhetoric on immigration on Saturday, warning that removing migrants from the United States would be a "bloody story" if he's reelected in November.

Trump's remarks were made during a campaign rally in Mosinee, Wisconsin, and align with the Republican National Committee's newly released 2024 platform, which calls for aggressive immigration enforcement and mass deportations.

^ Lalee Ibssa, Soo Rin Kim, Kelsey Walsh, Alexandra Hutzler (September 13, 2024).

"Trump vows mass deportation of protected migrants in Springfield, dismisses threats to town" .

ABC News . Retrieved September 14, 2024 .

Former President Donald Trump on Friday said he would conduct a mass deportation of immigrants living in Springfield, Ohio, and dismissed a question from ABC News about the bomb threats the town is experiencing in the wake of unsubstantiated claims about Haitian migrants.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ariana Baio (September 13, 2024).

"Trump says his mass deportation will begin in Ohio town where he falsely claimed Haitians were eating pets" .

The Independent . Retrieved September 14, 2024 .

Donald Trump said he would conduct the "largest deportation in the history" of the United States and begin by removing immigrants and migrants in Springfield, Ohio – the same town in which he falsely claimed Haitian immigrants were eating pets.

On Friday, the former president repeated his anti-immigration policies and amplified familiar unsubstantiated claims of "migrant crime" during a press conference at his golf course in Racho Palos Verdes, California ^ Dan Gooding (September 13, 2024).

"Trump Promises Mass Deportations Will Begin in Springfield and Aurora" .

Newsweek . Retrieved September 14, 2024 .

Former president Donald Trump promised his mass deportation plan would begin in Springfield, Ohio, and Aurora, Colorado—two cities at the center of anti-immigration talk this week.

Speaking at a press conference in Los Angeles, the Republican nominee in the 2024 election repeated claims of a Venezuelan gang takeover of Aurora, as well as unfounded accusations that Haitian migrants in Springfield have been eating residents' pets.

^ "Agenda47: A New Quantum Leap to Revolutionize the American Standard of Living" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. March 3, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (March 3, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Proposes Building Ten New US 'Freedom Cities,' Offering 'Baby Bonuses' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 21, 2024 . Retrieved July 21, 2024 .

^ Hartmann, Margaret (June 28, 2024).

"Trump's Most Unhinged Plans for His Second Term" .

Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

Obviously, there's nothing wrong with investing in urban areas or making it easier to buy a home. But as economist Richard McGahey explained in Forbes, 'Waving a magic wand isn't how cities develop.' Plans released by the Trump campaign offer no further detail on how this massive undertaking would work. It's almost like Trump is pitching the idea solely because the term 'Freedom Cities' sounds cool.

^ Luhby, Tami (December 20, 2022).

"Child tax credit enhancement fails to make it into federal spending bill" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2024 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

Though the child tax credit has long enjoyed bipartisan backing, GOP lawmakers have been wary of making it fully refundable because they claim it could discourage parents from working.

^ "Agenda47: Ending Biden's War on the Suburbs That Pushes the American Dream Further From Reach" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. March 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ "Celebration Of 250 Years Of American Independence at the Iowa State Fairgrounds" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. May 31, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (May 31, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Unveils Massive Plans For The United States' 250th Anniversary (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2024 . Retrieved July 21, 2024 .

^ "President Donald J. Trump  –  Free Speech Policy Initiative" . Donald J. Trump For President, Inc. December 15, 2022.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ "President Donald J. Trump Calls for Probe into Intelligence Community's Role in Online Censorship" . Donald J. Trump For President, Inc. January 11, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Fact Checker (January 20, 2021).

"In four years, President Trump made 30,573 false or misleading claims" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2021 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

^ "Donald Trump has now said more than 5,000 false things as president" .

Toronto Star . June 5, 2019.

Archived from the original on September 10, 2019 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

^ PEN America (2017).

"TRUMP THE TRUTH: A TIMELINE OF ASSAULTS ON FREE EXPRESSION" . PEN America.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2024 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 .

The Trump the Truth timeline, maintained and updated by PEN America during the first year of the Trump Administration, was used to track important developments during the Trump Administration that posed a threat to undermine free expression and press freedoms.

Events documented in this timeline include attacks on the institution of the press; attacks on free expression; attacks on those who disagree with the administration's agenda; issues regarding freedom of information and government transparency; and instances when the administration has distorted or undermined the truth. This timeline is intended to be comprehensive, but not exhaustive, of the first year of the administration.

^ Duncan J. Watts, David M. Rothschild (December 5, 2017).

"ANALYSIS. Don't blame the election on fake news. Blame it on the media" .

Columbia Journalism Review .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2017 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 .

Since the 2016 presidential election, an increasingly familiar narrative has emerged concerning the unexpected victory of Donald Trump. Fake news, much of it produced by Russian sources, was amplified on social networks such as Facebook and Twitter, generating millions of views among a segment of the electorate eager to hear stories about Hillary Clinton's untrustworthiness, unlikeability, and possibly even criminality.

^ Darrell M. West (December 18, 2017).

"RESEARCH. How to combat fake news and disinformation" .

Brookings Institution .

Archived from the original on August 21, 2024 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 .

Journalism is in a state of considerable flux. New digital platforms have unleashed innovative journalistic practices that enable novel forms of communication and greater global reach than at any point in human history. But on the other hand, disinformation and hoaxes that are popularly referred to as "fake news" are accelerating and affecting the way individuals interpret daily developments. Driven by foreign actors, citizen journalism, and the proliferation of talk radio and cable news, many information systems have become more polarized and contentious, and there has been a precipitous decline in public trust in traditional journalism.

^ Oscar Schwartz (December 4, 2018).

"Are Google and Facebook really suppressing conservative politics?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 22, 2024 .

(...) PJ Media , Breitbart , the Daily Caller , and the Washington Examiner foreground stories of Silicon Valley being "hostile" towards conservatives (...) PragerU accused YouTube and Facebook of "deliberate censorship of conservative ideas" after a number of their videos were taken down. (...) Alex Jones gatecrashed a congressional hearing where Republicans were questioning tech executives Jack Dorsey and Sheryl Sandberg about political bias on their platforms (...) Mike Cernovich , Milo Yiannopoulos , and Laura Loomer (who also interrupted proceedings by beseeching Donald Trump to "save" conservatives from social media censorship) ^ Louis Jacobson (August 29, 2018).

"No, 96% of Google news stories on Trump aren't from left-wing outlets" .

PolitiFact . Retrieved August 22, 2024 .

This figure is based on a non-scientific study from a conservative website that categorized any media outlet not expressly conservative as being part of the "left." These outlets include wire services, broadcast networks and most major newspapers and collectively account for a large percentage of original news reports produced in the United States. The methodology essentially preordains that a large percentage of coverage captured by Google will be what the study defines as "left," which is wrong.

^ Multiple sources.

Maegan Vazquez, Betsy Klein (March 21, 2019).

"Trump signs executive order on campus free speech" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on September 2, 2024 . Retrieved September 2, 2024 .

Earlier in his presidency, Trump called for bumping up further restrictions on the press by "opening up" libel laws. However, Trump's new executive order is happening against the backdrop of conservative voices highlighting instances of alleged violence directed toward student activists in viral videos on social media. (...) Aside from certification, the official would not offer key details -- including how the order would be implemented or enforced, as well as how much grant money will be affected or what specific language higher education institutions are being told to agree to. It's largely unclear how the measure will affect college campuses in practice.

"Trump threatens to cut funding for colleges 'hostile to free speech' " .

The Guardian . Associated Press. March 21, 2019.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved September 2, 2024 .

Under the order, colleges would need to agree to protect free speech in order to tap into more than $35bn a year in research and educational grants.

For public universities, that means vowing to uphold the first amendment, which they're already required to do. Private universities, which have more flexibility in limiting speech, will be required to commit to their own institutional rules.

"We will not stand idly by to allow public institutions to violate their students' constitutional rights," Trump said. "If a college or university doesn't allow you to speak, we will not give them money. It's very simple." Andrew Kreighbaum (March 21, 2019).

"Trump Signs Broad Executive Order" .

Inside Higher Ed .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2024 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 .

President delivers on promise to punish colleges that don't show they guarantee free speech on campus, and includes language on outcomes data and risk sharing. But it's unclear what force it will carry.

Zack Beauchamp (March 21, 2019).

"Trump's free speech executive order isn't about free speech" .

VOX .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved September 2, 2024 .

(...) But the fact that Trump issued the executive order at all shows just how central universities are in the conservative cultural imagination, and how devoted the current right is to a political vision in which radical professors and left-wing students are responsible for America's problems. They are so concerned, in fact, that they are willing to endorse the federal government interfering to punish universities they deem insufficiently friendly to conservatives.

That's because this isn't a battle about free speech. it's a fight over political power and cultural control.

Lee C. Bollinger (June 12, 2019).

"Free Speech on Campus Is Doing Just Fine, Thank You" .

Columbia University. Office of the President . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

Earlier this year, President Donald Trump signed an executive order requiring colleges and universities that receive federal funds to do what they're already required by law to do: extend free-speech protections to men and women on campus.

The executive order was a transparent exercise in politics. Its intent was to validate the collective antipathy that many Trump boosters feel toward institutions of higher learning. Its major impact, though, has been to shed light on how serious the purported censorship crisis on campus really is—or, rather, is not.

^ Multiple sources.

Columbia Law School (2024).

"Silencing Science Tracker" .

Columbia University .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

The Silencing Science Tracker is a joint initiative of the Sabin Center for Climate Change Law and the Climate Science Legal Defense Fund. It tracks government attempts to restrict or prohibit scientific research, education or discussion, or the publication or use of scientific information, since the November 2016 election.

Read more about the tracker and related resources . [Ongoing; there are entries from the current (2024) states' legislature.] Umair Irfan (January 11, 2018).

" "Climate change" and "global warming" are disappearing from government websites" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2024 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

After a year of the Trump administration, one of the most distinctive changes we've seen across the government is the removal of language around climate change on government websites.

It's happened not just at agencies that deal directly with the issue like the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy, but also at the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Health and Human Services.

Hannah Waters (2018).

"How the U.S. Government Is Aggressively Censoring Climate Science" .

Audubon .

Archived from the original on February 28, 2024 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

In its new strategic plan, published in March, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) describes 2017 as an "unprecedented year" of natural disasters. Photos of FEMA staff helping survivors of massive hurricanes in Texas, Florida, and Puerto Rico pepper the 38-page document, which notes that the average number of major disaster declarations per year has increased from 25 in the 1980s to nearly 90 per year since 2010. "Due to rising natural hazard risk," the plan says, "the need for forward leaning [sic] action is greater than ever before." To an observant reader, these are clear references to climate change. Yet the document fails to directly mention, even once, the root cause of natural disasters' growing intensity.

Jim Martin (June 7, 2019).

"Guest Commentary: CU regents have let Trump's administration get away with censorship of academic research" .

The Denver Post .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

You can't have it both ways with the First Amendment.

But President Donald Trump is trying to do just that.

On the one hand, he issued an executive order that mandates free speech on college campuses.

On the other, Trump has created an atmosphere in which research scientists are subject to censorship of their results if they commit the grave sin of attributing any global warming to human activity.

Laura Tenenbaum (February 10, 2021).

"NASA's Climate Communications Might Not Recover From the Damage of Trump's Systemic Suppression" .

Time . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

Before former U.S. President Donald Trump incited a hostile insurrection against the Capitol, he'd already smashed wrecking balls through the ranks of government agencies. Among the many casualties was the truth about climate science, which NASA was routinely prevented from sharing with the public that supports it.

I was the senior science editor for NASA's Global Climate Change website and witnessed the impact of science suppression firsthand.

Webb, Romany M.; Kurtz, Lauren (January 27, 2022).

"Politics v. science: How President Trump's war on science impacted public health and environmental regulation" .

Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science .

188 (1): 65– 80.

doi : 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.11.006 .

PMC 8793038 .

PMID 35168747 .

During President Trump's time in office (including the transition period), there were 154 documented instances of federal government censorship of scientists, and 19 instances of scientists engaging in self-censorship. Approximately 72% involved the suppression of information about climate change. This began even before President Trump took office. In November 2016, staff at Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) deleted content discussing the relationship between climate change and human health from at least four webpages, reportedly to "avoid drawing the new president's ire." Similar changes were made to other federal agency websites after President Trump took office. In total, during the Trump administration, climate change and other scientific information was removed from the websites of twelve federal bodies, in most cases at the direction of administration officials.[5] This made it more difficult for Americans to educate themselves about climate change and other scientific issues, which may, in turn, have made it easier for the Trump administration to act on those issues by allowing them to "fly under the radar" or obscuring the consequences of administration action.

^ Multiple sources.

Altheide, David L. (July 25, 2020).

"Pandemic in the Time of Trump: Digital Media Logic and Deadly Politics" .

Symbolic Interaction .

43 (3): 514– 540.

doi : 10.1002/symb.501 .

Archived from the original on August 16, 2021 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

This paper examines the power of a mediatized President to use reflexive propaganda—the rules and assumptions of digital media—to define a public health crisis. During the 2020 coronavirus pandemic, President Trump engaged in attention-based politics, or the use of media to draw attention of the largest audience to himself, at the expense of an efficient response to a major public health crisis. (...) Bolsen, Toby; Palm, Risa (November 10, 2021).

"Politicization and COVID-19 vaccine resistance in the U.S." Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science .

188 (1): 81– 100.

doi : 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.10.002 .

PMC 8577882 .

PMID 35168748 .

(...) President Donald Trump initially downplayed the threat posed by COVID-19 and compared it to the flu in public remarks.[9] The President also labeled it a "new hoax" [and said that] "the Democrats are politicizing the coronavirus—they're politicizing it."[10] President Trump also promoted claims that the virus could be combatted by injecting or drinking disinfectant or bleach, and promoted hydroxychloroquine as a cure.[11, 12] He also appeared in public without a mask and criticized his rival for the presidency, Joe Biden, for wearing one: "Did you ever see a man that likes a mask as much as him?… If I were a psychiatrist, I'd say this guy has some big issues."[13] Kellner, Douglas (March 1, 2021).

"Trump, Authoritarian Populism, and COVID-19 from a US Perspective" .

Cultural Politics .

17 (1): 28– 36.

doi : 10.1215/17432197-8797487 .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

This article engages the contemporary crises of health, the economy, and democracy in the United States during the era of Trump and the COVID-19 pandemic. The author begins with a discussion of the COVID-19 pandemic and Trump's chaotic and inept responses. The author follows with a discussion of Trump and authoritarian populism, arguing that Trump's floundering fortunes in the context of a hotly contested 2020 presidential campaign triggered his chaotic and contradictory responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, producing a crisis of democracy.

Union of Concerned Scientists (March 17, 2022).

"Trump administration interfered with CDC's public outreach on COVID-19" . Union of Concerned Scientists.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

What happened: In 2020, President Trump and White House officials interfered with the work of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) by blocking scientists and officials from speaking to the media about the dangers of COVID-19.

Parker, Charles F.; Stern, Erik K. (March 29, 2022).

"The Trump Administration and the COVID-19 crisis: Exploring the warning-response problems and missed opportunities of a public health emergency" .

Public Administration .

100 (3): 616– 632.

doi : 10.1111/padm.12843 .

PMC 9115435 .

PMID 35601345 .

This article examines the Trump Administration's inability to mount a timely and effective response to the COVID‐19 outbreak, despite ample warning. Through an empirical exploration guided by three explanatory perspectives—psychological, bureau‐organizational, and agenda‐political—developed from the strategic surprise, public administration, and crisis management literature, the authors seek to shed light on the mechanisms that contributed to the underestimation of the coronavirus threat by the Trump Administration and the slow and mismanaged federal response.

^ The White House 45 Archived [@WhiteHouse45] (May 15, 2019).

"The Trump Administration is fighting for free speech online.

No matter your views, if you suspect political bias has caused you to be censored or silenced online, we want to hear about it!

wh.gov/techbias" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Multiple sources.

Makena Kelly (May 15, 2019).

"White House launches tool to report censorship on Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, and Twitter" .

The Verge . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

(...) Over the past few months, Republicans have taken aim at social media networks, citing claims that conservatives have been wrongly censored on these platforms. Some committees, like House Energy and Commerce and Senate Judiciary, have even held hearings on the issue where lawmakers questioned officials from companies like Facebook and Twitter over the alleged bias.

The outrage started last April when the House Judiciary Committee invited pro-Trump online personalities Diamond and Silk to discuss being "censored" on social media. This spun off into the Senate where Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) later made it a key policy issue by holding a hearing with Facebook and Twitter executives to discuss the alleged bias. (...) Just last month, President Trump met with Twitter founder and CEO Jack Dorsey. Twitter representatives said that the meeting was supposed to focus on what the platform was doing to aid the opioid epidemic and discuss the health of the platform, but it was later reported that Trump spent a significant portion of their 30-minute discussion complaining that he was losing followers.

Other members of the Trump family, like Don Jr., have also voiced concern of the deplatforming of right-wing activists. In a tweet last month, President Trump's eldest son wrote "The purposeful & calculated silencing of conservatives on Facebook & the rest of the Big Tech monopoly men should terrify everyone," after Facebook announced that it would banning [sic] conspiracy theorist Alex Jones along with other far-right pundits and activists.

Oliver Darcy (May 15, 2019).

"White House creates tool for people to report alleged social media bias" .

CNN . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

(...)The White House's tweet directed people to a form which first asked users for personal information, such as their name and whether they are an American citizen.

After users entered the personal information, the form then asked them to describe the alleged bias that occurred, which platform it occurred on, and if they had screenshots of any messages they received from the company that took action.

Toward the end, the form also requested permission to add the user to an email newsletter so it could provide updates "without relying on platforms like Facebook and Twitter." The move by the White House came on the same day it announced that the United States will not be joining the Christchurch Call for Action , an effort that encouraged technology companies to collaborate with governments to stymie the use of social media in acts of terrorism.

It also came just weeks after Facebook banned several high-profile extremists, prompting the President to rage against social media companies in a weekend Twitter tirade.

Max Read (May 16, 2019).

"The White House's 'Tech Bias' Reporting Form Is a Masterpiece of Trumpism" .

Intelligencer . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

(...) A core aspect of Trumpism is its ability to articulate in starkly partisan terms the sense, felt by a wide swath of voters, of having been left behind, skipped in line, or otherwise cut out of the benefits of technological advancement and economic growth. But this often-legitimate sense of alienation is twisted by Trumpism into a personal politics of grievance and resentment, in which "liberals" and Democrats are conspiring to restrain, stifle, and censor Republicans — like, say, on social media. (...) At the howling heart of Trumpism, beneath the veneer of nationalist-workerist politics and policies, is the con. Trump may have been elected because he promised to address the alienation and resentment of the rural and suburban white voters who make up his base, but he's done very little in office to materially address their concerns. Instead, the presidency has mostly been used to directly enrich Trump and his family, and indirectly enrich the already wealthy through expensive tax cuts. (...) But the most important function of the tech-bias tool almost certainly isn't to gather evidence to address a genuine problem. "The thing about the Trump Facebook bias survey is it's just going to be used to assemble a voter file," the Times' Kevin Roose points out, "which Trump will then pay Facebook millions of dollars to target with ads about how biased Facebook is." That is, none of the people who submit grievances to the form will have their accounts restored or content promoted. They won't get explanations for why social media isn't working the way they think it should, and they almost certainly won't get satisfying regulation out of their complaints. Instead, they'll be advertised to about Trump — and whatever else the Trump campaign uses the list for — for the rest of their digital lives, on the very platforms they feel completely alienated from.

Emily Stewart (May 17, 2019).

"The White House's social media bias tool is a ploy to get your email. It's a scheme to rile up conservatives — and get some voter data in the process" .

Vox . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

This latest ploy illustrates the disingenuous nature of complaints from Trump and other Republicans that social media is biased against conservatives. For one thing, it's not clear that's the case — platforms such as Facebook and Twitter say that when they block or censor users, it's because they've violated their policies, not because of some secret liberal political agenda. What's more, platforms can block and censor content however they choose. It's within their legal rights. The federal government owes you free speech. Google doesn't.

Beyond building out a contact list and, as the form states, gathering potential examples of social media bias, it's not clear what else the White House plans to do with the data it's asking people to hand over. The user agreement accompanying the form grants the government permission to "use, edit, display, publish, broadcast, transmit, post, or otherwise distribute" the content people submit, which is pretty broad.

Marc Rotenberg, president of privacy watchdog the Electronic Privacy Information Center, told Politico the information the White House is requesting is "very sensitive" and warned that there is "no indication that the White House has given any thought to the privacy risks of providing this personal data to the federal government." Todd Spangler (May 28, 2019).

"Trump Wants to Roll Back Social Media Legal Protections; Facebook and Twitter CEOs Weigh In" .

Vanity Fair . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

(...) Legal experts have said any proposed changes to Section 230 would likely get struck down by courts. Indeed, on Wednesday, the D.C. Court of Appeals ruled in favor of Google, Facebook, Twitter and Apple in a lawsuit filed by right-wing activists alleging the tech giants suppressed "politically conservative voices." The court threw out the suit, ruling that the U.S. Constitution's First Amendment applies only to government entities and not private companies. (...) In 2019, Trump floated the notion of targeting social-media companies with an order intended to restrict the ability of platforms to remove content — but the FCC and FTC reportedly pushed back on the idea over concerns that it was unconstitutional.

After Twitter labeled Trump's tweets as misleading, the president's supporters and a top White House aide launched targeted attacks on an individual Twitter employee who has posted anti-conservative tweets in the past. Dorsey, in his comments Wednesday, said "there is someone ultimately accountable for our actions as a company, and that's me. Please leave our employees out of this." Separately, Twitter has taken no action against Trump's account after the president posted multiple tweets promoting a long-debunked conspiracy theory that MSNBC host Joe Scarborough may have killed a former congressional aide in 2001. The company apologized for the "pain" Trump's comments have caused to the family of the dead woman, Lori Klausutis, after her widowed husband appealed to Dorsey to remove Trump's noxious posts.

^ "Executive Order on Preventing Online Censorship" .

whitehouse.gov . May 28, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2024 – via National Archives .

^ Sébastien Monnet (May 10, 2021).

" 'Deplatforming' Donald Trump was a necessary quick fix. What now?" .

DiploFoundation . Retrieved October 14, 2024 .

In the twilight of a presidency characterised by 30,573 lies and constant misinformation, most social media platforms have permanently suspended Donald Trump's accounts – a move also known as 'the Great Deplatforming'. In doing so, platforms have taken away the megaphone Donald Trump had been using relentlessly and without accountability for years. Adopting a practice of preferentially lying over telling the truth to achieve his goals, Donald Trump promoted falsehoods on everything from the mundane to the 'big lie' of rigged elections for months to excuse, by anticipation and then justify, what would have been otherwise a humiliating defeat. Beyond their beneficial impact in the short term, I consider the measures taken by social platforms not only ineffective and lacking in consistency, but also counterproductive.

^ Will Oremus (January 7, 2022).

"Tech giants banned Trump. But did they censor him? A year later, Facebook, Twitter and YouTube's suspension of the president leaves lingering questions about their power to control speech" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved October 14, 2024 .

(...) Under U.S. law, social media companies generally have been understood to enjoy the same broad leeway as traditional media in deciding whose views to air — and whose they'd rather not. Initially more laissez-faire, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and others have taken on increasing responsibility over the years for monitoring their networks for misinformation, harassment, hate speech and propaganda campaigns, a function they call "content moderation." They've done so largely in response to pressure from the public, the media and their own workers — not the U.S. government. (...) In fact, tech giants resisted wielding it against Trump for the majority of his presidency, fashioning murky new policies to justify exempting him and other public figures from the rules they applied to ordinary users. In the final months of his presidency, Twitter and Facebook began to take escalating actions against his accounts, fact-checking and removing specific posts before they both issued temporary suspensions in the wake of the Jan. 6 Capitol insurrection. (...) Trump's efforts over the past year to build a social media presence that doesn't depend on the big platforms have only underscored their dominance. In May, he launched a blog called "From the Desk of Donald Trump." It failed to attract readers and he shut it down after just a month. In October, he announced to fanfare that he planned to launch his own social network, called Truth Social. A beta version of it was defaced by pranksters immediately, and its launch has been delayed amid questions from regulators.

^ Nunziato, Dawn Carla (July 10, 2022).

"Protecting Free Speech and Due Process Values on Dominant Social Media Platforms" .

UC Law Journal .

73 (5): 1255– 1304.

Dominant social media platforms have been increasingly perceived as engaging in discrimination against conservative and right-wing viewpoints. Trump's deplatforming, coupled with the platforms' recent removal of Covid- and election-related misinformation, led to cries of censorship by conservatives and increased calls for regulation of the platforms. Supreme Court Justice Thomas took up this charge, suggesting a regulatory path forward for lawmakers seeking to hold the platforms liable for alleged viewpoint discrimination and censorship.

This Article examines the desirability and constitutionality of recent legislative initiatives that seek to provide remedies for these alleged ills and to rein in the dominant platforms' discretion exercised in content moderation decisions by prohibiting them from engaging in viewpoint discrimination, and by imposing notice, transparency, and other due process-type obligations. This Article analyzes the proposed legislation in light of the obligations that the U.S. government historically has historically imposed on common carriers and broadcasters. This Article then examines the procedural dimensions of our free speech commitments and values and our commitments to due process, including those enshrined in the Constitution and in International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

This Article concludes with a favorable assessment of the desirability and constitutionality of proposed legislation that would require platforms to comport with principles of nondiscrimination and due process. This Article contends that, while the platforms should continue to enjoy the discretion to regulate many categories of speech that are protected by the First Amendment and to restrict speakers in clear and blatant violation of their terms of service, the dominant platforms should generally be prohibited from engaging in blatant viewpoint or speaker-based discrimination and should be required to accord their users certain due process type protections.

^ Nate Kral, Logan Richman (June 3, 2022).

"Trump sues Facebook, Twitter, Google for 'censorship', launches his own social media platform" .

The Free Speech Project. Georgetown University . Retrieved October 14, 2024 .

[Detailed chronology of the events, with links to external references] ^ "Agenda47: President Trump Announces Plan to End Crime and Restore Law and Order" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: President Trump Calls for Death Penalty for Human Traffickers" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. July 21, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 12, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (July 21, 2023).

BREAKING NEWS: Trump Calls For Death Penalty For Human Traffickers, Praises 'Sound Of Freedom' (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2024 . Retrieved August 3, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Firing the Radical Marxist Prosecutors Destroying America" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. April 13, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ "President Donald J. Trump Declares War on Cartels" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. December 22, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 5, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ "President Trump Will Build a New Missile Defense Shield" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 2, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Rumpf-Whitten, Sarah (June 15, 2024).

"Trump vows to build Israel-style 'Great Iron Dome' over US if re-elected: 'Made in America' " .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2024 . Retrieved July 10, 2024 .

'It's a missile defense shield, and it'll all be made in America,' he said. 'Jobs, jobs, jobs.' ^ Lavine, Owen (June 23, 2024).

"Trump's New Promises: 'Immunity' for Cops, an Iron Dome, Cheaper Bacon" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on July 12, 2024 . Retrieved July 10, 2024 .

He promised that the construction of the missile defense system would 'create jobs,' though he offered no specifics whatsoever.

^ Iddon, Paul (June 17, 2024).

"Trump's Proposed Iron Dome-Style Missile Shield Is Ill-Suited For U.S." Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 10, 2024 .

^ Samuels, Ben (June 17, 2024).

" 'A Big, Beautiful Iron Dome Over Our Country': Inside Trump's Fantasy to Bring Israel's Missile Defense System to America" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2024 . Retrieved July 10, 2024 .

^ "Stopping Chinese Espionage" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 3, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (February 3, 2024).

JUST IN: Trump Demands Investigation Into China's Ties To Biden's UPenn Center Over Spy Concerns (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Greenfield, Nathan M.

(September 25, 2021).

"Professor acquittal – Is China Initiative out of control?" .

University World News .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ Thomas, Will (September 16, 2021).

"Judge Acquits Nanotechnologist as Pressure Mounts on DOJ China Initiative" .

American Institute of Physics . Archived from the original on July 6, 2022 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

Last week, 177 Stanford University faculty members listed similar grievances in an open letter to Garland ...

^ Prasso, Sheridan (December 14, 2021).

"China Initiative Set Out to Catch Spies. It Didn't Find Many" .

Bloomberg .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ Tran, Emi Tuyetnhi (February 11, 2022).

"Over 150 Penn faculty rebuke U.S. government for racial profiling of Chinese academics" .

The Daily Pennsylvanian .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2022 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ Gerstein, Josh (February 23, 2022).

"DOJ shuts down China-focused anti-espionage program" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2022 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Reversing Biden's EO Embedding Marxism in the Federal Government" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. March 2, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Thompson, Alex (April 1, 2024).

"Exclusive: Trump allies plot anti-racism protections – for white people" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2024 . Retrieved July 10, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Ending the Nightmare of the Homeless, Drug Addicts, and Dangerously Deranged" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. April 18, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (April 18, 2023).

BREAKING: Trump Unveils Hardline Plan To End Homelessness, Pitches Massive Relocation Plan (Internet video).

Forbes . Retrieved July 21, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Ending the Scourge of Drug Addiction in America [This video has no transcription]" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. June 6, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ "Agenda47: Ending Veteran Homelessness in America" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. November 1, 2023.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ Jordan Liles (March 22, 2021).

"Is Biden Spending $86 Million for Hotels To House Migrant Families?" .

Snopes .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2024 . Retrieved August 3, 2024 .

They confirmed that the news was true and provided a statement from U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) Acting Director Tae D. Johnson : 'U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has signed a short-term contract with the non-profit division of Endeavors to provide temporary shelter and processing services for families who have not been expelled and are therefore placed in immigration proceedings for their removal from the United States. The $86.9 million contract provides 1,239 beds and other necessary services. The families will receive a comprehensive health assessment that includes COVID-19 testing. Our border is not open. The majority of individuals continue to be expelled under the Centers for Disease Control's public health authority.' ^ Farley, Robert; Kiely, Eugene; Gore, D'Angelo; McDonald, Jessica; et al. (June 28, 2024).

"FactChecking the Biden-Trump Debate" .

FactCheck.org .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2024 . Retrieved August 3, 2024 .

Trump said immigrants crossing the border illegally were living in 'luxury hotels'. New York City has provided hotel and motel rooms to migrant families, but there is no evidence that they are being placed in 'luxury' hotels.

^ Jordan, Miriam (June 27, 2024).

"Debate Fact Check: Biden and Trump on the Economy, Immigration and Foreign Policy" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2024 . Retrieved August 3, 2024 .

'Just take a look at where they are living. They are living in luxury hotels in New York City and other places.' ... False. Tens of thousands of migrants who crossed the border into the United States were offered free bus rides to Democratic cities under a program started by Gov.

Greg Abbott of Texas in an attempt to spread the burden of the large influx. Some cities, like New York and Denver, have housed migrants in hotels, especially during the winter months. The migrants were not in luxury hotels.

^ "President Trump's Plan to Protect Children from Left-Wing Gender Insanity" . Donald J Trump For President, Inc. February 1, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (January 31, 2023).

JUST IN: Trump Reveals Plan To Ban Gender-Affirming Care For Minors Including Punishment For Doctors (Internet video).

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Donald J. Trump (January 31, 2023).

Trump: I Will Try To Pass Bill That Says Only Genders Acknowledged By US Govt Are Male And Female (Internet video).

Forbes . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Adamczeski, Ryan (July 9, 2023).

"If you think Project 2025 is scary, take a look at Donald Trump's Agenda 47" .

The Advocate .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 9, 2023 .

^ Russell, John (July 17, 2024).

"Donald Trump's 'Agenda 47' is just as bad for LGBTQ+ people as Project 2025" .

LGBTQ Nation .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2024 . Retrieved July 31, 2024 .

^ Hartmann, Margaret (March 8, 2024).

"Trump's Most Unhinged Plans for His Second Term" .

Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2024 . Retrieved March 30, 2024 .

Many of Trump's proposals for his second term are surprisingly extreme, draconian, and weird, even for him. Here's a running list of his most unhinged plans.

^ Burns, Tobias (July 10, 2024).

"Experts see potential for higher inflation under Trump" .

The Hill .

But Trump's 10-percent tariff is still ringing inflation alarm bells for some investors, who expect it to increase costs to businesses that could then be passed onto consumers.

^ Picchi, Aimee (June 25, 2024).

"16 Nobel Prize-winning economists warn that Trump's economic plans could reignite inflation" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

Trump's policies could prove to be inflationary, other economists also warned, such as his proposal to create a 10% across-the-board tariff on all imports to deporting immigrants. The tariff plan would add $1,700 in annual costs for the typical U.S. household, essentially acting as an inflationary tax, according to experts at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

^ Boehm, Eric (August 22, 2023).

"Trump floats tariff plan that will make everything more expensive" .

Reason .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

Among people who actually understand economics, Trump's newest proposal has been roundly criticized.

^ Levitz, Eric (April 24, 2024).

"Trump's team keeps promising to increase inflation" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

^ Wiseman, Paul (May 21, 2024).

"Trump or Biden? Either way, US seems poised to preserve heavy tariffs on imports" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on May 21, 2024 . Retrieved July 12, 2024 .

Trump has vowed more of the same in a second term. He's threatening to impose a 10% tariff on all imports – and a 60% tax on Chinese goods ... Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics, warns that the consequences would be damaging. Trump's tariff plans, Zandi said, 'would spark higher inflation, reduce GDP and jobs and increase unemployment, all else equal.' External links Agenda 47 page on the donaldjtrump.com website v t e Donald Trump 45th (2017–2021) and 47th (2025–present) President of the United States Life and politics Business career The Trump Organization legal affairs business projects in Russia links between business partners and Russian government officials wealth tax returns Trump Media & Technology Group Media career The Apprentice American football Golf Honors and awards Political positions Trumpism Relationship to fascism Relationship to antisemitism Views on the American Civil War Rhetoric 2021 CPAC speech Political endorsements False or misleading statements Promotion of conspiracy theories Protests timeline Racial views Security incidents Attempted assassinations Las Vegas rally incident in Pennsylvania raised-fist photographs perpetrator in Florida suspect Age and health concerns Religion Family Ivana Trump (first wife) Marla Maples (second wife) Melania Trump (third wife) Donald Trump Jr.

(son) Ivanka Trump (daughter) Eric Trump (son) Tiffany Trump (daughter) Barron Trump (son) Fred Trump (father) Mary Anne MacLeod Trump (mother) Maryanne Trump Barry (sister) Fred Trump Jr.

(brother) Robert Trump (brother) Frederick Trump (grandfather) Elizabeth Christ Trump (grandmother) Jared Kushner (son-in-law) Lara Trump (daughter-in-law) Michael Boulos (son-in-law) Vanessa Trump (former daughter-in-law) Blaine Trump (former sister-in-law) Amalija Knavs (mother-in-law) John G. Trump (uncle) Mary L. Trump (niece) Fred Trump III (nephew) John W. Walter (cousin) Books The Art of the Deal (1987) Trump: Surviving at the Top (1990) Trump: The Art of the Comeback (1997) The America We Deserve (2000) Trump: How to Get Rich (2004) The Way to the Top (2004) Trump 101 (2006) Why We Want You to Be Rich (2006) Think Big and Kick Ass (2007) Time to Get Tough (2011) Midas Touch (2011) Crippled America (2015) Our Journey Together (2021) Letters to Trump (2023) Save America (2024) Campaigns 2000 presidential campaign 2016 presidential campaign announcement " Make America Great Again " hat rallies links between campaign officials and Russian government officials Crossfire Hurricane 2016 Republican primaries debates running mate selection convention 2016 general election endorsements debates reactions transition Republican opposition Never Trump movement 2016 Mitt Romney speech 2020 2024 Sexual misconduct allegations Access Hollywood recording 2020 presidential campaign rallies 2020 Tulsa rally 2020 Republican primaries convention 2020 general election political endorsements non-political endorsements debates attempts to overturn fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Republican reactions to Trump's election fraud claims Biden transition 2024 presidential campaign announcement rallies 2024 Republican primaries debates running mate selection convention 2024 general election eligibility endorsements debates transition Kamala is for they/them (attack ad) Trump Bible " God Bless the U.S.A.

" (campaign song) " Y.M.C.A.

" (campaign song) Legal affairs FBI investigation into handling of government documents FBI search of Mar-a-Lago Gulf of Mexico naming controversy New York investigations of the Trump Organization Stormy Daniels scandal civil criminal Carroll v. Trump Trump v. United States (2022) Relationship of Donald Trump and Jeffrey Epstein State prosecutions Georgia New York Smith special counsel investigation Federal prosecution classified documents case election obstruction case Trump mug shot Trump v. United States Related Family Foundation Presidential library In popular culture Best Sex I've Ever Had Trump dance filmography in music SNL parodies Residences 85-15 Wareham Place Trump Tower penthouse apartment Bedminster Mar-a-Lago The Visionary Colorado State Capitol portrait Social media media use conflict Feud with Elon Musk Twitter wiretapping allegations Real News Update covfefe Donald J. Trump State Park Nicknames used Trump Force One Trump derangement syndrome Fort Trump Official portraits Support groups Bikers for Trump Blacks for Trump Black Voices for Trump Gays for Trump Women for Trump Pseudonyms Wikipedia coverage ← Barack Obama ← Joe Biden → Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agenda_47&oldid=1306120230 " Categories : 2024 in American politics Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign Trumpism American political manifestos Climate change denial Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use mdy dates from July 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from July 2024 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2025 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 02:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agenda 47 8 languages Add topic

