Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Islands Toggle Islands subsection 2.1 Territorial claims 3 Ecology 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents New Zealand Subantarctic Islands 37 languages Afrikaans Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Malti მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 پنجابی Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Southernmost parts of the South Pacific country This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "New Zealand Subantarctic Islands" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) New Zealand Subantarctic Islands UNESCO World Heritage Site Location New Zealand Includes Antipodes Islands Auckland Islands Bounty Islands Campbell Islands Snares Islands / Tini Heke Criteria Natural: (ix), (x) Reference 877 Inscription 1998 (22nd Session ) Area 764.8 km 2 (295.3 sq mi) [ 1 ] Coordinates 50°45′S 166°6′E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.750°S 166.100°E ﻿ / -50.750; 166.100 The New Zealand Subantarctic Islands comprise the five southernmost groups of the New Zealand outlying islands . They are collectively designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site .

[ 2 ] Most of the islands lie near the southeast edge of the largely submerged continent centred on New Zealand called Zealandia , which was riven from Australia 60–85 million years ago, and from Antarctica 85–130 million years ago. They share some features with Australia's Macquarie Island to the west.

History [ edit ] These islands were uninhabited at the time of European discovery, nonetheless, there is evidence of Māori and/or Polynesian visits to some of the island groups, and some were still known to Māori at the time of European contact.

Antipodes Islands – Claims of a pottery shard found here in 1886, although this is contested.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Auckland Islands – Traces of Polynesian settlement, possibly dating to the 13th century, have been found by archaeologists on Enderby Island .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] This is the most southerly settlement by Polynesians yet known.

[ 7 ] Snares Islands – The islands were already known to the Māori, who called one of the larger islands Te Taniwha ("The sea-monster"). They are visible from near Stewart Island in good conditions.

European exploration took place in the 19th century, often involving exploiting the natural resources of the area for sealing and whaling etc. Some shipwrecks took place in the region, with crews being forced to live off the land.

Hardwicke on Auckland Island represents one of the few serious attempts by whites to set up a settlement in the islands, subsequently abandoned.

Until 1995, scientific research staff were stationed permanently at a meteorological station on Campbell Island . Since then, the islands have been uninhabited, though they are periodically visited by researchers and tourists. Protection of reserves was strengthened in 2014, becoming the largest natural sanctuary in the nation.

[ 8 ] Islands [ edit ] Antipodes Islands Antipodes Island, Bollons Island , the Windward Islands, Orde Lees Island, Leeward Island, South Islet Auckland Islands Auckland Island , Adams Island , Disappointment Island , Enderby Island , Ewing Island , Rose Island Bounty Islands Main Group, Centre Group, and Eastern Group islets Campbell Islands Campbell Island / Motu Ihupuku , Dent Island , Folly Island , Jacquemart Island Snares Islands / Tini Heke Alert Stack, Broughton Island , High Island, North East Island , Western Chain islets Territorial claims [ edit ] New Zealand also has territorial claims, held in abeyance under the Antarctic Treaty System , over several islands close to the Antarctic mainland, including: Ross Island and the rest of the Ross Archipelago Balleny Islands : Young Island , Buckle Island , Sturge Island , plus several smaller islets Roosevelt Island Scott Island and Haggits Pillar Of these, Ross Island is inhabited by the scientific staff of several research stations, notably at McMurdo Sound and Scott Base .

Ecology [ edit ] The Antipodes, Auckland, Bounty and Campbell Islands are collectively designated the Antipodean Islands in the World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions . The Snares Islands / Tini Heke are included with the South Island in New Zealand South under the scheme.

See also [ edit ] List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands List of islands of New Zealand New Zealand outlying islands Solander Islands Stewart Island Macquarie Island , an Australian administered island which neighbours these islands.

References [ edit ] ^ "Data Table – Protected Areas – LINZ Data Service" .

Land Information New Zealand . Retrieved 27 August 2019 .

^ "New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre . World Heritage List . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .

^ "NGA-IWI-O-AOTEA" .

Te Ao Hou . 1967 . Retrieved 9 July 2012 .

^ "Captain Fairchild to the Secretary, Marine Department, Wellington" . Appendix to the Journals of the House of Representatives, 1886 Session I, H-24. Wellington: Marine Department. p. 6 . Retrieved 9 July 2012 .

^ Anderson, Atholl (December 2005).

"Subpolar settlement in South Polynesia" .

Antiquity .

79 (306): 791– 800.

doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00114930 .

ISSN 0003-598X .

^ "4. Early human settlement – Subantarctic islands" . Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand. 24 January 2013 . Retrieved 2 August 2013 .

^ Don Macnaughtan (11 February 2014).

"Mystery Islands of Remote South Polynesia: Bibliography of Prehistoric Settlement on Norfolk Island, the Kermadecs, Lord Howe, and the Auckland Islands" . Retrieved 30 May 2018 .

^ Fox, M. (2 March 2014).

"Birds, seals, penguins protected" .

Stuff News . Retrieved 9 August 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Subantarctic islands , Department of Conservation UNESCO classification for the sub-antarctic islands Castaways: Wrecked on a subantarctic island – Te Ara – the Encyclopedia of New Zealand v t e Peri-Antarctic countries and overseas territories Argentina Australia Heard Island and McDonald Islands Macquarie Island Bouvet Island Chile Falkland Islands French Southern Territories Amsterdam Island Crozet Islands Kerguelen Islands Saint Paul Island New Zealand NZ Subantarctic Islands South Africa Prince Edward Islands South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands "Peri-Antarctic" (meaning "close to the Antarctic ") does not include territorial claims in Antarctica itself.

v t e World Heritage Sites in New Zealand New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands ( Snares Islands / Tini Heke , Bounty Islands , Antipodes Islands , Auckland Islands , and Campbell Island / Motu Ihupuku ) Te Wahipounamu – South West New Zealand Tongariro National Park See also: List of World Heritage Sites in Oceania Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Zealand_Subantarctic_Islands&oldid=1305392909 " Categories : Archipelagoes of New Zealand New Zealand outlying islands New Zealand subantarctic islands Subantarctic islands World Heritage Sites in New Zealand Zealandia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Use dmy dates from July 2025 Articles needing additional references from April 2009 All articles needing additional references Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 20:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New Zealand Subantarctic Islands 37 languages Add topic

