Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Mechanical chronometers Toggle Mechanical chronometers subsection 2.1 Complications 3 More recent times 4 Certified chronometers 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Chronometer watch 38 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia High-precision time piece This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chronometer watch" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Inside a chronometer mechanism ( c.

1904 ) A chronometer ( Ancient Greek : χρονόμετρον , khronómetron , "time measurer") is an extraordinarily accurate mechanical timepiece, with an original focus on the needs of maritime navigation. In Switzerland , timepieces certified by the Contrôle Officiel Suisse des Chronomètres ( COSC ) may be marked as Certified Chronometer or Officially Certified Chronometer . Outside Switzerland, equivalent bodies, such as the Japan Chronometer Inspection Institute, have in the past certified timepieces to similar standards, although use of the term has not always been strictly controlled.

History [ edit ] The term chronometer was coined by Jeremy Thacker of Beverley , England in 1714, referring to his invention of a clock ensconced in a vacuum chamber.
The term chronometer is also used to describe a marine chronometer used for celestial navigation and determination of longitude. The marine chronometer was invented by John Harrison in 1730. This was the first of a series of chronometers that enabled accurate marine navigation . From then on, an accurate chronometer was essential to open-ocean marine or air navigation out of sight of land. Early in the 20th century the advent of radiotelegraphy time signals supplemented the onboard marine chronometer for marine and air navigation, and various radio navigation systems were invented, developed, and implemented during and following the Second World War (e.g., Gee , Sonne (a.k.a. Consol), LORAN (-A and -C), Decca Navigator System and Omega Navigation System ) that significantly reduced the need for positioning using an onboard marine chronometer. These culminated in the development and implementation of global satellite navigation systems (GSN- GPS ) in the last quarter of the 20th century. The marine chronometer is no longer used as the primary means for navigation at sea, although it is still required as a backup, since radio systems and their associated electronics can fail for a variety of reasons.

Once mechanical timepiece movements developed sufficient precision to allow for accurate marine navigation, there eventually developed what became known as "chronometer competitions" at astronomical observatories located in Europe. The Neuchâtel Observatory , Geneva Observatory , Besancon Observatory , and Kew Observatory are prominent examples of observatories that certified the accuracy of mechanical timepieces. The observatory testing regime typically lasted for 30 to 50 days and contained accuracy standards that were far more stringent and difficult than modern standards such as those set by COSC . When a movement passed the observatory, it became certified as an observatory chronometer and received a Bulletin de Marche from the Observatory, stipulating the performance of the movement. Because only very few movements were ever given the attention and manufacturing level necessary to pass the Observatory standards, there are very few observatory chronometers in existence.

Most observatory chronometers had movements so specialized to accuracy that they could never withstand being used as wristwatches in normal usage. They were useful only for accuracy competitions, and so never were sold to the public for usage. However, in 1966 and 1967, Girard Perregaux manufactured approximately 670 wristwatches with the Calibre 32A movement, which became Observatory Chronometers certified by the Neuchatel Observatory , while in 1968, 1969 and 1970 Seiko had 226 wristwatches with its 4520 and 4580 Calibres certified. These observatory chronometers were then sold to the public for normal usage as wristwatches, and some examples may still be found today.

The observatory competitions ended with the advent of the quartz watch movement, in the late 1960s and early 1970s, which generally has superior accuracy at far lesser costs. In 2009, the Watch Museum of Le Locle renewed the tradition and launched a new chronometry contest based on ISO 3159 certification. In 2017, the Observatory Chronometer Database (OCD) [ 1 ] went online, which contains all mechanical timepieces ("chronometres-mecaniques") certified as observatory chronometers by the observatory in Neuchatel from 1945 to 1967, due to a successful participation in the competition which resulted in the issuance of a Bulletin de Marche . All database entries are submissions to the wristwatch category ("chronometres-bracelet") at the observatory competition.

The term chronometer is often wrongly used by the general public to refer to timekeeping instruments fitted with an additional mechanism that may be set in motion by pushbuttons to enable measurement of the duration of an event. Such an instrument, typically called a stopwatch , is in fact a chronograph or chronoscope. It may be chronometer certified, provided it meets the criteria set for the standard.

Mechanical chronometers [ edit ] A 1928 Movado Ermeto mechanical chronometer.

A mechanical chronometer is a spring-driven escapement timekeeper, like a watch, but its parts are more massively built. Changes in the elasticity of the balance spring caused by variations in temperature are compensated for by devices built into it.

[ 2 ] Chronometers often included other innovations to increase their efficiency and precision. Hard stones such as diamond, ruby , and sapphire were often used as jewel bearings to decrease friction and wear of the pivots and escapement. Chronometer makers also took advantage of the physical properties of rare metals such as gold, platinum , and palladium .

Complications [ edit ] In horological terms, a complication in a mechanical watch is a special feature that causes the design of the watch movement to become more complicated. Examples of complications include: Tourbillon Perpetual calendar Minute repeater Equation of time Power reserve Moon phases Chronograph Rattrapante Grande sonnerie More recent times [ edit ] Quartz and atomic timepieces have made mechanical chronometers obsolete for time standards used scientifically and/or industrially. Most watchmakers do still produce them. However, they are mostly considered status symbols promoted by luxury watchmakers as a symbol of fine craftmanship and aesthetics.

Certified chronometers [ edit ] More than 1.8 million officially-certified chronometer certificates, mostly for mechanical wristwatch chronometers ( wristwatches ) with sprung balance oscillators, are being delivered each year, after passing the COSC 's most extreme tests and being singly identified by an officially-recorded individual serial number . According to COSC, an officially-certified chronometer is a high-precision watch capable of displaying the seconds and housing a movement that has been tested over several days, in different positions, and at different temperatures, by an official, neutral body (COSC). Each movement is individually tested for several consecutive days, in five positions and at three temperatures. Any watch with denominations "certified chronometer" or "officially-certified chronometer" contains a certified movement and matches the criteria in ISO 3159 Timekeeping instruments—wristwatch chronometers with spring balance oscillator.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Horology Chronograph COSC Marine chronometer Railroad chronometer Tachymeter Clock Mechanical watch Jewel bearing Navigation Observatory chronometer The Nautical Almanac American Practical Navigator Webb C. Ball Watchmaker References [ edit ] ^ Observatory Chronometer Database (OCD) ^ The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, 2008, Columbia University Press ^ PDF file Archived 2007-09-25 at the Wayback Machine (of 1976 version) External links [ edit ] American Watchmakers-Clockmakers Institute Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry Contrôle Officiel Suisse des Chronomètres - COSC Accuracy of wristwatches Observatory Chronometer Database (OCD) Chronometer certification chronometer Cronosurf - The online chronometer watch - Web Chronograph Chronometer web version v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper v t e Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) UTC offset for standard time and Daylight saving time (DST) Italics: historical or unofficial 180° to 90°W −12:00 −11:00 −10:30 −10:00 −09:30 −09:00 −08:30 −08:00 −07:00 90°W to 0° −06:00 −05:00 −04:30 −04:00 −03:30 −03:00 −02:30 −02:00 −01:00 −00:44 −00:25:21 0° to 90°E +00:00 +00:20 +00:30 +01:00 +01:24 +01:30 +02:00 +02:30 +03:00 +03:30 +04:00 +04:30 +04:51 +05:00 +05:30 +05:40 +05:45 90°E to 180° +06:00 +06:30 +07:00 +07:20 +07:30 +08:00 +08:30 +08:45 +09:00 +09:30 +09:45 +10:00 +10:30 +11:00 +11:30 180° to 90°W +12:00 +12:45 +13:00 +13:45 +14:00 Time zone data sources tz database Lists of time zones Time zones by country Time zones by UTC offset Military time zone Time zone abbreviations Daylight saving time by country Related topics Abolition of time zones Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronometer_watch&oldid=1298981394 " Categories : Clocks Watches Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 22:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronometer watch 38 languages Add topic

