Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophical and political struggles in the Soviet Union 2 After the 20th Congress of the CPSU 3 Others 4 Publications and propaganda 5 Scholarly evaluations 6 See also 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophy in the Soviet Union 9 languages Azərbaycanca Čeština Español Français Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Philosophy in the Soviet Union was officially confined to Marxist–Leninist thinking, which theoretically was the basis of objective and ultimate philosophical truth. During the 1920s and 1930s, other tendencies of Russian thought were repressed (many philosophers emigrated, others were expelled).

Joseph Stalin enacted a decree in 1931 identifying dialectical materialism with Marxism–Leninism, making it the official philosophy which would be enforced in all communist states and, through the Comintern , in most communist parties . Following the traditional use in the Second International , opponents would be labeled as " revisionists ".

From the beginning of Bolshevik regime, the aim of official Soviet philosophy (which was taught as an obligatory subject for every course [ citation needed ] ), was the theoretical justification of communist ideas. For this reason, " Sovietologists ", among whom the most famous were Józef Maria Bocheński , professor of philosophy at the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas and Gustav Wetter , have often claimed Soviet philosophy was close to nothing but dogma .

After the 1917 October Revolution , it was marked by both philosophical and political struggles, which call into question any monolithic reading.

Evald Vasilevich Ilyenkov was one of the main philosophers of the 1960s, who revisited the 1920s debate between "mechanicists" and "dialecticians" in Leninist Dialectics and Metaphysics of Positivism (1979). During the 1960s and 1970s Western philosophies including analytical philosophy and logical positivism began to make a mark in Soviet thought.

Philosophical and political struggles in the Soviet Union [ edit ] Dialectical materialism was initially expounded by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels ; one of the early works on the subject is Engels's 1878 polemic Anti-Dühring . It was elaborated by Vladimir Lenin in Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1908) around three axes: the "materialist inversion" of Hegelian dialectics ; the historicity of ethical principles ordered to class struggle ; and the convergence of " laws of evolution " in physics ( Helmholtz ), biology ( Darwin ) and political economy (Marx). Lenin hence took position between a historicist Marxism ( Labriola ) and a determinist Marxism, close to what was later called " social Darwinism " ( Kautsky ). Lenin's most important philosophical rival was Alexander Bogdanov (1873–1928), who tried to synthesize Marxism with the philosophies of Ernst Mach , Wilhelm Ostwald , and Richard Avenarius (which were harshly criticized in Lenin's Materialism and Empirio-criticism ). Bodganov wrote a treatise on " tectology " and was one of the founders of Proletkult after the First World War.

Following the 1917 October Revolution , Soviet philosophy divided itself between "dialecticians" ( Deborin ) and " mechanists " ( Bukharin , who would detail Stalin's thesis upheld in 1924 concerning " socialism in one country ", was not a "mechanist" per se, but was seen as an ally.) The mechanists ( A.K. Timiryasev , Axelrod , Skvortsov-Stepanov etc.), came mostly from scientific backgrounds, claimed that Marxist philosophy found its basis in a causal explanation of nature. They upheld a positivist interpretation of Marxism which asserted that Marxist philosophy had to follow the natural sciences. Stepanov thus wrote an article flatly titled "The Dialectical Understanding of Nature is the Mechanistic Understanding". To the contrary, "dialecticians", whose background was Hegelian, insisted that dialectics could not be reduced to simple mechanism. Basing themselves mainly on Engels' Anti-Dühring and Dialectics of Nature , they maintained that the laws of dialectics could be found in nature. Taking support from the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics , they responded that the mechanists' conception of nature was too restricted and narrow. Deborin, who had been a student of Georgi Plekhanov , the "father of Russian Marxism", also disagreed with the mechanicists concerning the place of Baruch Spinoza . The latter maintained that he was an idealist metaphysician, while Deborin, following Plekhanov, saw Spinoza as a materialist and a dialectician. Mechanism was finally condemned as undermining dialectical materialism and for vulgar evolutionism at the 1929 meeting of the Second All-Union Conference of Marxist–Leninist Scientific Institutions. Two years later, Stalin settled by fiat the debate between the mechanist and the dialectician tendencies by issuing a decree which identified dialectical materialism as the philosophical basis of Marxism–Leninism. Henceforth, the possibilities for philosophical research independent of official dogmatics virtually vanished, while Lysenkoism was enforced in the scientific fields (in 1948, genetics were declared a " bourgeois pseudoscience "). However, this debate between "mechanists" and "dialecticians" would retain importance long after the 1920s.

Otherwise, David Riazanov was named director of the Marx–Engels Institute , which he had founded, in 1920. He then created the MEGA ( Marx-Engels-Gesamt-Ausgabe ), which was supposed to edit Marx and Engels' complete works. He also published other authors, such as Diderot , Feuerbach or Hegel. Riazanov was however excluded from any political functions in 1921 for defending trade unions' autonomy.

During the Fifth Comintern Congress, Grigory Zinoviev condemned for "revisionism" the works of Georg Lukács , History and Class Consciousness (1923) and of Karl Korsch , Marxism and Philosophy .

History and Class Consciousness was disavowed by its author, who made his self-criticism for political reasons (he thought that, for a revolutionary, being part of the party was the priority). It became however a leading source of Western Marxism , starting with the Frankfurt School , and even influenced Heidegger 's Sein und Zeit (1927). Lukács then went to Moscow in the beginnings of the 1930s where he would continue his philosophical studies, and returned to Hungary after World War II . He then took part in Imre Nagy 's government in 1956 , and was closely watched afterwards.

Lev Vygotsky 's (1896–1934) studies in developmental psychology , which opposed themselves to Ivan Pavlov 's works, would be expanded in the activity theory developed by Alexei Nikolaevich Leont'ev , Pyotr Zinchenko (a member of Kharkov School of Psychology ), and Alexander Luria , a neuropsychologist who developed the first lie detector .

After the 20th Congress of the CPSU [ edit ] Nevertheless, the conditions for creative philosophical work began to emerge in the mid-1950s, after the 20th Congress of the CPSU in 1956, albeit only on the 'outskirts' of philosophy: the philosophy of the natural science ( B. Kedrov , I. Frolov ), theory of perception and gnoseology ( P. Kopnin , V. Lektorsky , M. Mamardashvili , E. Ilyenkov ), the history of philosophy ( V. Asmus , A. Losev , I. Narski ), ethics ( O. Dobronitski ), aesthetics ( M. Kagan , L. Stolovitsh ), logics ( G. Shchedrovitsky , A. Zinovyev ) and semiotics and system theories ( J. Lotman , who set up the Sign Systems Studies journal, the oldest semiotics periodical; V. Sadovsky ). The works of the young Marx , such as the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 , which had been first published in 1932 but suppressed under Stalin because of its incomplete break with German Idealism , also started being discussed.

Others [ edit ] 1) Vasily Nalimov (1910-1997) was interested mainly in the philosophy of probability and its biological, mathematical, and linguistic manifestations. He also studied the roles of gnosticism and mysticism in science. Nalimov is usually credited with proposing the concept of citation index .

2) The so-called "communist morality" was an important part of Soviet Union philosophy. According to Lenin and Stalin, morality should be subordinated to the ideology of proletarian revolution. Denying the validity of religion-based morality, they wrote: what is useful to us (the Soviet people) is moral, what is harmful to us is immoral. Morality is a weapon in class struggle. Party and Komsomol members were drilled to accept that position, and to act accordingly.

[ citation needed ] Publications and propaganda [ edit ] First All-Union Conference on the Problems of Medical Deontology (1970) The USSR published voluminous materials to disseminate its philosophical ideals and justifications. These took the form of academic or professional journals or notes in the pattern of peer-reviewed material. For example, the book First All-Union Conference on the Problems of Medical Deontology challenges the idea of a medical deontology , [ citation needed ] or ethics based on moral rules, versus ethics based on utilitarian rules decided on the best outcome for the greatest number of people.

[ citation needed ] Scholarly evaluations [ edit ] According to Marxist philosopher Helena Sheehan , Stalin had a detrimental impact on the Soviet philosophical tradition with most Soviet sources considering his influence to have negatively affected the creative development of Soviet philosophy.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Dialectical materialism Dialectical logic Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Historical Materialism Marxist sociology Marxist philosophy Russian philosophy Activity theory Western Marxism Sources [ edit ] ^ Sheehan, Helena (23 January 2018).

Marxism and the Philosophy of Science: A Critical History . Verso Books. p. 230.

ISBN 978-1-78663-428-3 .

Wetter, Gustav A. (1958).

Dialectical Materialism: A Historical and Systematic Survey of Philosophy in the Soviet Union . American Political Science Association.

Sommerville, John (1946).

Soviet Philosophy: A Study of Theory and Practice . New York Philosophical Library.

Bakhurst, David (1991).

Consciousness and Revolution in Soviet Philosophy: From the Bolsheviks to Evald Ilyenkov . Cambridge University Press.

V.A. Bazhanov . Philosophy in Post-Soviet Russia (1992 - 1997): Background, Present State, and Prospects // Studies in East European Thought, 1999, vol. 15, N 4, pp. 1–23.

External links [ edit ] Excerpts from Consciousness and Revolution in Soviet Philosophy, From the Bolsheviks to Evald Ilyenkov (1991), David Bakhurst "Marxism-Thaxis" - Mechanists versus Dialecticians in early Soviet philosophy Russian and Soviet Women's Studies - Religion and Philosophy Gallery of Russian Thinkers edited by Dmitry Olshansky Ovcharenko, Victor (ed.).

Bolshevistskaya Filosofiya (The Bolshevist Philosophy) (in Russian). Vol. 3 vols . Retrieved 2011-01-20 .

Oizerman, Teodor ; Creighton, H. Campbell (1988).

The Main Trends in Philosophy. A Theoretical Analysis of the History of Philosophy (PDF) . Translated by M.A., Oxon (2nd ed.).

Moscow : Progress Publishers .

ISBN 5-01-000506-9 . Archived from the original (DjVu, etc.) on 2012-03-06 . Retrieved 2011-01-20 This monograph, the Plekhanov prize winner, presents the Soviet, i.e. Marxist-Leninist, understanding of the history of philosophy {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) Spirkin, Alexander (1990).

Fundamentals of Philosophy (PDF) . translated from the Russian by Sergei Syrovatkin.

Moscow : Progress Publishers .

ISBN 5-01-002582-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-03-06 . Retrieved 2011-01-20 A popular Soviet textbook on dialectical and historical materialism; first published in Russian, as "Основы философии" {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_in_the_Soviet_Union&oldid=1300413630 " Categories : Education in the Soviet Union Science and technology in the Soviet Union 20th century in philosophy Russian philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2007 CS1: long volume value CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 maint: postscript This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 05:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy in the Soviet Union 9 languages Add topic

