Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of waste Toggle Types of waste subsection 1.1 Main causes of waste 1.1.1 Steel reinforcement 1.1.2 Premixed concrete 1.1.3 Pipes and wires 1.1.4 Improper material storage 2 Recycling, disposal and environmental impact Toggle Recycling, disposal and environmental impact subsection 2.1 Recycling and reuse of material 2.2 Landfilling 2.3 Incineration and health risks 3 Management strategies Toggle Management strategies subsection 3.1 Waste management fees 3.2 Europe 3.3 United States 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Construction waste 16 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی Hausa עברית Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Română Slovenčina Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unwanted material produced directly or incidentally by the construction industries Part of a series on Pollution Polyurethane insulator material marked for removal of the construction site (of a residential building) Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Construction waste causing substantial fugitive dust emission in a densely populated area in Hong Kong Construction waste or debris is any kind of debris from the construction process. Different government agencies have clear definitions. For example, the United States Environmental Protection Agency EPA defines construction and demolition materials as “debris generated during the construction, renovation and demolition of buildings, roads, and bridges.”  Additionally, the EPA has categorized Construction and Demolition (C&D) waste into three categories:  non-dangerous, hazardous, and semi-hazardous.

[ 1 ] Of total construction and demolition (C&D) waste in the United States, 90% comes from the demolition of structures, while waste generated during construction accounts for less than 10%.

[ 2 ] Construction waste frequently includes materials that are hazardous if disposed of in landfills. Such items include fluorescent lights, batteries, and other electrical equipment.

[ 3 ] Waste from a construction project can contain "microplastics, PFAS, titanium dioxide, dyes and various chemicals and toxins that originate from the resin and masonry-based finishes used in buildings, such as paint, stain, plaster, grout, adhesives and patching compounds." [ 4 ] When waste is created, options of disposal include exportation to a landfill, incineration, direct site reuse through integration into construction or as fill dirt, and recycling for a new use if applicable. In dealing with construction and demolition waste products, it is often hard to recycle and repurpose because of the cost of processing. Businesses recycling materials must compete with often the low cost of landfills and new construction commodities.

[ 5 ] Data provided by 24 states reported that solid waste from construction and demolition (C&D) accounts for 23% of total waste in the U.S.

[ 6 ] This is almost a quarter of the total solid waste produced by the United States. During construction a lot of this waste spends in a landfill leaching toxic chemicals into the surrounding environment.  Results of a recent questionnaire demonstrate that although 95.71% of construction projects indicate that construction waste is problematic, only 57.14% of those companies collect any relevant data.

[ 7 ] Types of waste [ edit ] C&D Materials, construction and demolition materials, are materials used in and harvested from new building and civil engineer structures.

[ 3 ] Much building waste is made up of materials such as bricks , concrete and wood damaged or unused during construction. Observational research has shown that this can be as high as 10 to 15% of the materials that go into a building, a much higher percentage than the 2.5-5% usually assumed by quantity surveyors and the construction industry . Since considerable variability exists between construction sites, there is much opportunity for reducing this waste.

[ 8 ] There has been a massive increase in construction and demolition waste created over the last 30 years in the United States. In 1990, 135 million tons of construction and demolition debris by weight were created and had risen to 600 million tons by the year 2018. This is a 300% increase, but it is important to note that since 2015 the EPA has kept records of how the waste is disposed of. In 2018, 600 million tons of waste was created due to construction and demolition, and 143 million tons of it resides in landfills.

[ 2 ] This means that about 76% of waste is now retained and repurposed in the industry, but there is still more waste being exported to landfills than the entire amount of waste created in 1990.

This unsustainable consumption of raw materials creates increasing business risks. This includes higher material costs or disruptions in the supply chains .

[ 9 ] In 2010, the EPA created the Sustainable Materials Management (SMM) Program Strategic Plan which marked a strategic shift by the EPA to move emphasis from broad resource recovery initiative to sustainable materials management. Since material management regulations largely exist at a state and local level, this is no real standard practice across the nation for responsible waste mitigation strategies for construction materials . The EPA aims to increase access to collection, processing, and recycling infrastructure in order to meet this issue head on.

Main causes of waste [ edit ] Construction waste can be categorized as follows: Design, Handling, Worker, Management, Site condition, Procurement and External.  These categories were derived from data collected from past research concerning the frequency of different types of waste noted during each type of these activities.

[ 10 ] Examples of this type of waste are as follows: Steel reinforcement [ edit ] Construction site in Amsterdam Steel is used as reinforcement and structural integrity in the vast majority of construction projects. The main reasons steel is wasted on a site is due to irresponsible beam cutting and fabrication issues. The worst sites usually end up being the ones that do not have adequate design details and standards, which can result in waste due to short ends of bars being discarded due to improper planning of cuts.

[ 11 ] Many companies now choose to purchase preassembled steel reinforcement pieces. This reduces waste by outsourcing the bar cutting to companies that prioritize responsible material use.

Concrete Mixer Premixed concrete [ edit ] Premixed concrete has one of the lowest waste indices when compared to other building materials. Many site managers site the difficulties controlling concrete delivery amounts as a major issue in accurately quantifying concrete needed for a site. The deviations from actually constructed concrete slabs and beams and the design amounts necessary were found to be 5.4% and 2.7% larger than expected, respectively, when comparing the data from 30 Brazilian sites. Many of these issues were attributed to inadequate form layout or lack of precision in excavation for foundation piles . Additionally, site managers know that additional concrete may be needed, and they will often order excess material to not interrupt the concrete pouring.

[ 11 ] Pipes and wires [ edit ] It is often difficult to plan and keep track of all the pipes and wires on a site as they are used in so many different areas of a project, especially when electrical and plumbing services are routinely subcontracted. Many issues of waste arise in this area of the construction process because of poorly designed details and irresponsible cutting of pipes and wires leaving short, wasted pipes and wires.

[ 11 ] Improper material storage [ edit ] The second leading cause of construction waste production is improper material storage. Exposure to the elements and miss handling by persons are due to human error.

[ 11 ] Part of this human error can lead to illegal dumping and illegal transportation volume of waste from a jobsite.

[ 12 ] Recycling, disposal and environmental impact [ edit ] Recycling and reuse of material [ edit ] Recycling Trucks Most guidelines on C&D waste management follows the waste managing hierarchy framework. This framework involves a set of alternatives for dealing with waste arranged in descending order of preference. The waste hierarchy is a nationally and internationally accepted concept used to priorities and guide efforts to manage waste. Under the idea of Waste Hierarchy, there is the concept of the "3R's," often known as "reduce, reuse, recycle." Certain countries adopt different numbers of "R's." The European Union, for example, puts principal to the "4R" system which includes "Recovery" in order to reduce waste of materials.

[ 13 ] Alternatives include prevention, energy recovery, (treatment) and disposal.

It is possible to recycle many elements of construction waste. Often roll-off containers are used to transport the waste.

Rubble can be crushed and reused in construction projects. Waste wood can also be recovered and recycled.

Landfilling [ edit ] Some certain components of construction waste such as plasterboard are hazardous once landfilled . Plasterboard is broken down in landfill conditions releasing hydrogen sulfide , a toxic gas. Once broken down, Plasterboard poses a threat for increases Arsenic concentration Levels in its toxic inorganic form.

[ 14 ] The traditional disposal way for construction waste is to send it to landfill sites. In the U.S., federal regulations now require groundwater monitoring, waste screening, and operator training, due to the environmental impact of waste in C&D landfills (CFR 1996).

[ 15 ] Sending the waste directly to a landfill causes many problems: Landfill Waste of natural resources Increases construction cost, especially the transportation process [ 16 ] Occupies a large area of land Reduces soil quality Causes water pollution ( Leachate ) Causes air pollution Produces security risks etc.

[ 17 ] Incineration and health risks [ edit ] Where recycling is not an option, the disposal of construction waste and hazardous materials must be carried out according to legislation of relevant councils and regulatory bodies. The penalties for improper disposal of construction waste and hazardous waste , including asbestos, can reach into the tens of thousands of dollars for businesses and individuals.

Waste Incinerator Waste-to-energy facilities burn more than 13% of solid municipal waste. The toxic fumes emitted by WTE plants can contain harmful chemicals such as mercury and other heavy metals , carbon monoxide , sulfur dioxide , and dioxins .

Dioxin was used as a waste oil in Times Beach, Missouri . Days after the chemicals were introduced to the community animals began dying. By the time the EPA deemed dioxins to be highly toxic in the 1980s, the CDC recommended the town be abandoned entirely due to contaminated waste products in the area. By 1985, the entire population of Times Beach had been relocated, prompting Missouri to build a new incinerator on the contaminated land . They continued to burn 265,000 tons of dioxin-contaminated waste until 1997.

Dioxins are a family of chemicals produced as a byproduct during the manufacturing of many pesticides and construction materials like carpeting and PVC . These chemicals exist in the environment attached to soil or dust particles that are invisible to the naked eye.

Dioxins break down slowly. It still threatens public health at low levels. Since industry has mostly stopped producing dioxins, one of the largest contributors releasing harmful dioxins left in the United States is waste incineration. Dioxins have been proven to cause cancer, reproductive and developmental issues, and immune system damage. Rates of cancer such as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and soft tissue sarcoma rise significantly the closer one lives to the pollutants' source.

[ 18 ] Management strategies [ edit ] Waste management fees [ edit ] Waste management fees, under the 'polluter pays principle', can help mitigate levels of construction waste.

[ 19 ] There is very little information on determining a waste management fee for construction waste created. Many models for this have been created in the past, but they are subjective and flawed. In 2019, a study method was proposed to optimize the construction waste management fee. The new model expands on previous ones by considering life-cycle costs of construction waste and weighs it against the willingness to improve construction waste management. The study was based out of China. China has a large waste management issue, and their landfills are mostly filled in urban areas. The results of the study indicated different waste management fees for metal, wood, and masonry waste as $9.30, $5.92, and $4.25, respectively. The cost of waste management per square meter, or just under 11 square feet, on average was found to be $0.12.

[ 20 ] This type of waste management system requires top-down legislative action. It is not a choice the contractor has the luxury of making on his/her own.

Europe [ edit ] In the European Union (EU), there is now significant emphasis on recycling building materials and adopting a cradle-to-grave ideology when it comes to building design, construction, and demolition. Their suggestions are much clearer and easier at the local or regional level, depending on government structure. In the 2016 EU Construction & Demolition Waste Management Protocol, they emphasize the benefits beyond financial gains for recycling such as job creation and reduced landfilling. They also emphasize the consideration of supply and demand geography ; if the recycling plants are closer to urban areas than the aggregate quarries this can incentivize companies to use this recycled product even if it is not initially cheaper. In Austria , there are new improvements in the recycling of unusable wood products to be burnt in the creation of cement which offsets the carbon footprint of both products.

[ 21 ] The EU urges local authorities who issue demolition and renovation permits to ensure that a high-quality waste management plan is being followed, and they emphasize the need for post-demolition follow-ups in order to determine if the implemented plans are being followed. They also suggest the use of taxation to reduce the economic advantage of the landfills to create a situation where recycling becomes a reasonable choice financially. However, they do include the fact that the tax should only apply to recyclable waste materials. The main points of how the Europeans choose to address this issue of waste management is through the utilization of the tools given to a governing body to keep its people safe. Unlike in the United States, the EU's philosophy on waste management is not that it is an optional good thing to do when you can but a mandatory part of construction in the 21st century to ensure a healthy future for generations to follow.

Taxing landfill has been most effective in Belgium, Denmark and Austria, which have all decreased their landfill disposal by over 30% since introducing the tax. Denmark successfully cut its landfill use by over 80%, reaching a recycling rate over 60%. In the United Kingdom, all personnel performing builders or construction waste clearance are required by law to be working for a CIS registered business.

[ 22 ] However, the waste generation in the UK continues to grow, but the rate of increase has slowed.

[ 23 ] A panorama of construction waste in Horton, Norway United States [ edit ] The United States has no national landfill tax or fee, but many states and local governments collect taxes and fees on the disposal of solid waste. The California Department of Resource Recycling and Recovery ( CalRecycle ) was created in 2010 to address the growing C&D waste problem in the United States. CalRecycle aids in the creation of C&D waste diversion model ordinance in local jurisdictions. They also provide information and other educational material on alternative C&D waste facilities. They promote these ordinances by creating incentive programs to encourage companies to participate in the waste diversion practices. There are also available grants and loans to aid organizations in their waste reduction strategies.

[ 23 ] According to a survey, financially incentivizing stakeholders to reduce construction waste demonstrates favorable results.  This information provides an alternative way to reduce the cost so that the industry is more careful in their project decisions from beginning to end.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] ATSDR Carcinogen Construction dust | Metal dust | Metal swarf | Lead dust | Asbestos | Cement dust | Concrete dust | Wood dust | Paint dust Concrete recycling COPD COSHH Demolition waste NIEHS Particulates | Ultrafine particle Power tool Recycling Silicosis VOC Waste management Welding Embodied carbon References [ edit ] ^ Broujeni, Omrani, Naghavi, Afraseyabi (February 2016).

"Construction and Demolition Waste Management (Tehran Case Study)" .

Journal of Solid Waste Technology & Management .

6 (6): 1249– 1252.

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.225510 – via Environment Complete.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b US EPA, OLEM (2016-03-08).

"Sustainable Management of Construction and Demolition Materials" .

US EPA . Retrieved 2020-12-17 .

^ a b "Construction and Demolition Materials" .

www.calrecycle.ca.gov . Retrieved 2020-12-17 .

^ "The construction industry is trying to end waste pollution" .

World Economic Forum . Archived from the original on 2025-03-23 . Retrieved 2025-05-09 .

^ Hubbe, Martin A. (2014-11-03).

"What Next for Wood Construction/Demolition Debris?" .

BioResources .

10 (1): 6– 9.

doi : 10.15376/biores.10.1.6-9 .

ISSN 1930-2126 .

^ "Municipal Solid Waste and Construction & Demolition Debris | Bureau of Transportation Statistics" .

www.bts.gov . Retrieved 2020-12-17 .

^ Tafesse, Girma, Dessalegn (March 2022).

"Analysis of the socio-economic and environmental impacts of construction waste and management practices" .

Heliyon .

8 (3) e09169.

Bibcode : 2022Heliy...809169T .

doi : 10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09169 .

PMC 8971575 .

PMID 35368528 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Skoyles ER. Skoyles JR. (1987) Waste Prevention on Site. Mitchell Publishing, London.

ISBN 0-7134-5380-X ^ Thibodeau, Kenneth (2007-07-02).

"The Electronic Records Archives Program at the National Archives and Records Administration" .

First Monday .

doi : 10.5210/fm.v12i7.1922 .

ISSN 1396-0466 .

^ Nagapan, Rahman, Asmi (October 2011).

"A Review of Construction Waste Cause Factors" .

ACRE 2011 Conference Paper – via researchgate.net.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d Formoso, Carlos T.; Soibelman, Lucio; De Cesare, Claudia; Isatto, Eduardo L. (2002-08-01).

"Material Waste in Building Industry: Main Causes and Prevention" .

Journal of Construction Engineering and Management .

128 (4): 316– 325.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(2002)128:4(316) .

ISSN 0733-9364 .

^ Liu, Jingkuang; Liu, Yedan; Wang, Xuetong (October 2020).

"An environmental assessment model of construction and demolition waste based on system dynamics: a case study in Guangzhou" .

Environmental Science and Pollution Research .

27 (30): 37237– 37259.

Bibcode : 2020ESPR...2737237L .

doi : 10.1007/s11356-019-07107-5 .

ISSN 0944-1344 .

PMID 31893359 .

S2CID 209509814 .

^ Zhang, Chunbo; Hu, Mingming; Di Maio, Francesco; Sprecher, Benjamin; Yang, Xining; Tukker, Arnold (2022-01-10).

"An overview of the waste hierarchy framework for analyzing the circularity in construction and demolition waste management in Europe" .

Science of the Total Environment .

803 149892.

Bibcode : 2022ScTEn.80349892Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.149892 .

hdl : 1887/3212790 .

ISSN 0048-9697 .

PMID 34500281 .

S2CID 237468721 .

^ Zhang, Jianye; Kim, Hwidong; Dubey, Brajesh; Townsend, Timothy (2017-01-01).

"Arsenic leaching and speciation in C&D debris landfills and the relationship with gypsum drywall content" .

Waste Management .

59 : 324– 329.

Bibcode : 2017WaMan..59..324Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.wasman.2016.10.023 .

ISSN 0956-053X .

PMID 27838158 .

^ Weber, Jang, Townsend, Laux (March 2002).

"Leachate from Land Disposed Residential Construction Waste" .

Journal of Environmental Engineering .

128 (3): 237– 244.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9372(2002)128:3(237) – via ASCE Library.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "RECYCLING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTES A Guide for Architects and Contractors" (PDF) . April 2005.

^ "Construction Waste Management | WBDG Whole Building Design Guide" .

www.wbdg.org . Retrieved 2017-05-06 .

^ Rogers, Harvey W. (December 1995).

"Incinerator air emissions: inhalation exposure perspectives" .

Journal of Environmental Health .

58 – via EBSCOhost.

^ Poon, C. S.; Yu, Ann T. W.; Wong, Agnes; Yip, Robin (2013-05-01).

"Quantifying the Impact of Construction Waste Charging Scheme on Construction Waste Management in Hong Kong" .

Journal of Construction Engineering and Management .

139 (5): 466– 479.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000631 .

hdl : 10397/6714 .

ISSN 1943-7862 .

^ Wang, Jiayuan; Wu, Huanyu; Tam, Vivian W. Y.; Zuo, Jian (2019).

"Considering life-cycle environmental impacts and society's willingness for optimizing construction and demolition waste management fee: An empirical study of China" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

ISSN 0959-6526 .

^ Anonymous (2018-09-18).

"EU Construction and Demolition Waste Protocol and Guidelines" .

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs - European Commission . Retrieved 2020-12-17 .

^ "Construction Industry Scheme (CIS)" .

GOV.UK . Archived from the original on 27 April 2022 . Retrieved 2020-02-21 .

^ a b Yu, A.; Poon, C.; Wong, A.; Yip, R.; Jaillon, L. (2013). "Impact of Construction Waste Disposal Charging Scheme on work practices at construction sites in Hong Kong".

Waste Management .

33 (1): 138– 146.

Bibcode : 2013WaMan..33..138Y .

doi : 10.1016/j.wasman.2012.09.023 .

hdl : 10397/6713 .

PMID 23122205 .

S2CID 20266040 .

^ Mahpour & Mortaheb, Ph.D. (May 2018).

"Financial-Based Incentive Plan to Reduce Construction Waste" .

Journal of Construction Engineering and Management .

144 (5) 04018029: 04018029-1 to 04018029-10.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0001461 – via ASCE Library.

External links [ edit ] Construction Waste Management Database from the Whole Building Design Guide of the National Institute of Building Sciences v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations v t e Construction Types Home construction Offshore construction Underground construction Tunnel construction History Architecture Construction Industrialization Infrastructure Structural engineering Timeline of architecture Water supply and sanitation World's tallest buildings Professions Architect Building engineer Building estimator Building officials Chartered Building Surveyor Civil engineer Civil estimator Clerk of works Project manager Quantity surveyor Site manager Structural engineer Superintendent Trades workers ( List ) Banksman Boilermaker Bricklayer Carpenter Concrete finisher Construction foreman Construction worker Electrician Glazier Ironworker Millwright Plasterer Plumber Roofer Steel fixer Welder Organizations American Institute of Constructors (AIC) American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Asbestos Testing and Consultancy Association (ATAC) Associated General Contractors of America (AGC) Association of Plumbing and Heating Contractors (APHC) Build UK Construction History Society Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (CICES) Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering (CIPHE) Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) The Concrete Society Construction Management Association of America (CMAA) Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) FIDIC Home Builders Federation (HBF) Lighting Association National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) National Kitchen & Bath Association (NKBA) National Railroad Construction and Maintenance Association (NRC) National Tile Contractors Association (NTCA) Railway Tie Association (RTA) Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) Scottish Building Federation (SBF) Society of Construction Arbitrators By country India Iran Japan Romania Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Regulation Building code Construction law Site safety Zoning Architecture Style List Industrial architecture British Indigenous architecture Interior architecture Landscape architecture Vernacular architecture Engineering Architectural engineering Building services engineering Civil engineering Coastal engineering Construction engineering Structural engineering Earthquake engineering Environmental engineering Geotechnical engineering Methods List Earthbag construction Modern methods of construction Monocrete construction Slip forming Other topics Building material List of building materials Millwork Builder's signature Builders' rites Construction bidding Construction delay Construction equipment theft Cornerstone Floor loan Construction management Construction waste Demolition Design–build Design–bid–build DFMA Heavy equipment Interior design Illegal construction Lists of buildings and structures Megaproject Megastructure Plasterwork Damp Proofing Parge coat Roughcast Harling Real estate development Real-estate bubble Stonemasonry Sustainability Topping out Unfinished building Urban design Urban planning Outline Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Construction_waste&oldid=1304430564 " Categories : Construction Waste Building materials Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 00:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Construction waste 16 languages Add topic

