Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic property rights 2 Variations on the concept 3 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 3.1 Examples of component rights 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Bundle of rights 3 languages Hausa Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal rights that protect ownership of property This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bundle of rights" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e The bundle of rights is a metaphor to explain the complexities of property ownership.

[ 1 ] Law school professors of introductory property law courses frequently use this conceptualization to describe "full" property ownership as a partition of various entitlements of different stakeholders .

[ 2 ] The concept originated with Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld in 1913, although he himself never used the phrase "bundle of rights".

[ 3 ] It was further developed and propagated to a broader audience in the form of the first Restatement of Property (published in five volumes between 1936 and 1944), because the Restatement's first reporter, Harry Bigelow , was a fan of Hohfeld's ideas.

[ 3 ] The bundle of rights is commonly taught in first-year property courses in law schools in the United States to explain how property can simultaneously be "owned" by multiple parties. Before it was developed, the idea of property was seen in terms of dominion over a thing, as in the ability of the owner to place restrictions on others from interfering with the owner's property. The "bundle of rights," however, implies rules specifying, proscribing, or authorizing actions on the part of the owner.

[ 4 ] Ownership of land is a much more complex proposition than simply acquiring all the rights to it. It is useful to imagine a bundle of rights that can be separated and reassembled. A " bundle of sticks " – in which each stick represents an individual right – is a common analogy made for the bundle of rights. Any property owner possesses a set of "sticks" related directly to the land.

[ 5 ] For example, perfection of a mechanic's lien takes some, but not all, rights out of the bundle held by the owner. Extinguishing that lien returns those rights or "sticks" to the bundle held by the owner. In the United States (and under common law) the fullest possible title to real estate is called " fee simple absolute." Even the US federal government's ownership of land is restricted in some ways by state property law.

Basic property rights [ edit ] Traditionally, the bundle of rights concept encompassed five basic rights that may be held with respect to a parcel of real property [ 6 ] Right of possession ( ius possidendi ): an entity is the legal owner of the property.

Right of control: the owner of this right can prescribe what activity takes place on the property, such as the building of structures or operating a business. This right is often shared between the title owner and governments or organizations that have some form of administrative jurisdiction over the property, such as a city with Zoning regulations, or a homeowner association .

Right of exclusion ( ius prohibendi ): the owner of this right is able to prohibit others from entering the property (that is, trespassing ).

Right of enjoyment ( ius utendi fruendi ): the owner of this right is able to use the property as they see fit, including activities such as inhabitation and resource extraction. These activities are generally constrained by laws by jurisdictional agencies. In many legal regimes, portions of this right may be held or owned separately; For example, while the title owner may have the general right, a lease holder has been granted a temporary subsidiary right to inhabit the property, while someone else may own the rights to any subsurface minerals or water.

Right of disposition ( ius disponendi ): the owner of the property is able to transfer any of the rights they hold to another party, whether temporarily (as in a lease) or permanently (as through inheritance or sale ).

Variations on the concept [ edit ] Variations on the division between public and private property use can be found throughout the world. While the bundle of rights concept is strongly rooted in common law , there are comparable ideas in civil law systems and religious law systems. National, sub-national, and municipal laws strongly influence what title owners can do with their property in terms of physical development. Quasi-governmental bodies (such as utility companies) are also permitted to create easements across private property.

Historically the degrees of individual and community control over real property have varied greatly. The differences between capitalism, despotism, socialism, feudalism, and traditional societies often define different standards for land ownership. The bundle of rights concept looks much different when examined by different types of societies. For instance, a laissez-faire government would allow a much different bundle of rights than a communist government.

Applications [ edit ] Community land trusts and land banking are examples of efforts to rearrange the bundle of rights. This is typically done by dividing the responsibilities of ownership and management from the rights to use the property. A typical community land trust strategy is to hold ownership over the land and sell the structural improvements (residential or other buildings) to low-income homebuyers. This allows people to buy a home at a price far below the market rate and to realize the benefits of their property value improving.

Real Estate Investment Trusts divide up the bundle of rights in order to allow commercial investments in real property. These legal structures are becoming more common throughout the developed world.

Squatting presents a non-economic way for people to transfer parts of the bundle of rights. Depending on the applicable laws, a squatter can acquire property rights by simply occupying vacant land for an extended period of time. Areas with high concentrations of squatters are sometimes thought of as informal settlements.

Squatters face great instability due to their lack of title and governmental efforts at " blight removal".

"Squatting" can result in " adverse possession ", that in common law , is the process by which title to another's real property is acquired without compensation , by holding the property in a manner that conflicts with the true owner 's rights for a specified period of time. Circumstances of the adverse possession determine the type of title acquired by the adverse possessor, which may be fee simple title, mineral rights, or another interest in real property.

Examples of component rights [ edit ] This table breaks down some of the various rights involved in real property ownership. Several of these rights can be transferred between different parties through sale or trade. Third parties can obtain the rights to access and profit from several of the public use rights without the consent of the title owner. This is often the case with resource extraction companies such as mines.

Title Owner Public Use Government Third Party Possession (right to use and occupy) Legal title Mortgage Lease Sell Subdivide the property Create a covenant running with the land Railroad Public works Electric power transmission lines Air rights Riparian water rights Mineral rights Grazing rights Collect Property tax Enforce a Lien Protect Endangered species Protect Wetlands Zoning Planning Permission/Development Rights (United Kingdom) Eminent domain Prohibit noxious or nuisance uses Possession – right to use and occupy as tenant Freedom to roam Homeowners association Historic preservation Conservation easement Adverse possession For example, a husband and wife can be owners (technically, title owners ) of real property that is also encumbered by a mortgage and a mechanics lien . Their neighbor may have an easement for a utility line, and a license for entry and exit to a nearby plot of land. Airplanes have the right to fly through their airspace. Constitutionally, the state and federal governments always hold the right to condemnation , also called eminent domain , and the government at multiple levels retains various regulatory rights such as environmental regulation , zoning , and building code enforcement.

See also [ edit ] List of real estate topics Property rights (economics) Real estate References [ edit ] ^ Baron, Jane B. (2014), "Rescuing the Bundle-of-Rights Metaphor in Property Law" , University of Cincinnati Law Review , vol. 82, no. 1, University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, pp.

57– 101 .

^ Ellickson, Robert C. (2011), "Two Cheers for the Bundle-of-Sticks Metaphor, Three Cheers for Merrill and Smith" (PDF) , Econ Journal Watch , vol. 8, no. 3, pp.

215– 222 .

^ a b Merrill, Thomas W.; Smith, Henry E. (January 2014).

"Why Restate the Bundle?: The Disintegration of the Restatement of Property" .

Brooklyn Law Review .

79 (2): 681– 708.

^ Klein, Daniel B. and John Robinson. "Property: A Bundle of Rights? Prologue to the Property Symposium," Econ Journal Watch 8(3): 193-204 , Sept 2011.

[1] ^ E.g.

, United States v. Craft , 535 U.S. 274, 278, 152 L.Ed. 2d 437, 446, 122 S.Ct. 1414, 1420 (2002) (describing the "bundle of sticks" as a "collection of individual rights which, in certain combinations, constitute property").

^ "Bundle of Rights" .

Investopedia .

Daniel R. Mandelker (2003).

Land use law . [Charlottesville, Va.]: LexisNexis Matthew Bender.

ISBN 0-327-16269-4 .

Introduction to Property Rights: A Historical Perspective Benedikt Koehler , Muhammad's conception of property as a bundle of rights , Economic Affairs, vol. 35, number 1, Feb 2015 Introduction to Property Rights: A Historical Perspective v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bundle_of_rights&oldid=1254714643 " Category : Property law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2012 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 1 November 2024, at 09:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bundle of rights 3 languages Add topic

