Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Art of the mentally ill 2 Jean Dubuffet and art brut 3 Cultural context 4 Terminology and criticism 5 Notable outsider artists 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Outsider art 41 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Picard Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Walon 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art created outside the boundaries of official culture by those untrained in the arts "Art brut" redirects here. For the band, see Art Brut (band) .

Adolf Wölfli 's Irren-Anstalt Band-Hain , 1910 Anna Zemánková , No title, 1960s Niko Pirosmani , Deer , 1901 Outsider art is art made by self-taught individuals who are untrained and untutored in the traditional arts with typically little or no contact with the conventions of the art worlds .

The term outsider art was coined in 1972 as the title of a book by art critic Roger Cardinal .

[ 1 ] It is an English equivalent for art brut ( French: [aʁ bʁyt] , "raw art" or "rough art"), a label created in the 1940s by French artist Jean Dubuffet to describe art created outside the boundaries of official culture. Dubuffet focused particularly on art by those on the outside of the established art scene, using as examples psychiatric hospital patients, hermits, and spiritualists.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Outsider art has emerged as a successful art marketing category; an annual Outsider Art Fair [ 4 ] has taken place in New York since 1993, and there are at least two regularly published journals dedicated to the subject. The term is sometimes applied as a marketing label for art created by people who are outside the mainstream "art world" or "art gallery system", regardless of their circumstances or the content of their work.

[ 5 ] A more specific term, " outsider music ", was later adapted for musicians.

Art of the mentally ill [ edit ] See also: Creativity and mental illness Interest in the art of the mentally ill, along with that of children and the makers of " peasant art ", developed from the end of the 19th century onward, both by psychiatrists such as Cesare Lombroso , Auguste Marie or Marcel Réjà, and by artists, such as members of " Der Blaue Reiter " group: Wassily Kandinsky , August Macke , Franz Marc , Alexej von Jawlensky , and others.

What the artists perceived in the work of these groups was an expressive power born of their perceived lack of sophistication. Examples of this were reproduced in 1912 in the first and only issue of their publication, Der Blaue Reiter Almanac . During World War I , Macke was killed at Champagne in 1914 and Marc was killed at Verdun in 1916; the gap left by these deaths was to some extent filled by Paul Klee , who continued to draw inspiration from these 'primitives'.

Interest in the art of insane asylum inmates continued to grow in the 1920s. In 1921, Dr.

Walter Morgenthaler published his book Ein Geisteskranker als Künstler ( A Psychiatric Patient as Artist ) about Adolf Wölfli , a psychotic mental patient in his care. Wölfli had spontaneously taken up drawing, and this activity seemed to calm him. His most outstanding work was an illustrated epic of 45 volumes in which he narrated his own imaginary life story. With 25,000 pages, 1,600 illustrations, and 1,500 collages, it is a monumental work. Wölfli also produced a large number of smaller works, some of which were sold or given as gifts. His work is on display at the Adolf Wölfli Foundation in the Museum of Fine Art , Bern .

A defining moment was the publication of Bildnerei der Geisteskranken ( Artistry of the Mentally Ill ) in 1922, by Hans Prinzhorn . This was the first formal study of psychiatric works, based upon a compilation of thousands of examples from European institutions. The book and the art collection gained much attention from avant-garde artists of the time, including Paul Klee, Max Ernst , and Jean Dubuffet .

[ 6 ] People with some formal artistic training as well as well-established artists are not immune from mental illness, and may also be institutionalized. For example, William Kurelek , later awarded the Order of Canada for his artistic life work, as a young man was admitted to the Maudsley Psychiatric Hospital where he was treated for schizophrenia .

[ 7 ] In the hospital he painted, producing The Maze , a dark depiction of his tortured youth .

[ 8 ] He was transferred from the Maudsley to Netherne Hospital from November 1953 to January 1955, to work with Edward Adamson (1911–1996), a pioneer of art therapy , and creator of the Adamson Collection.

Jean Dubuffet and art brut [ edit ] View inside the Collection de l'art brut museum, Lausanne French artist Jean Dubuffet was particularly struck by Bildnerei der Geisteskranken and began his own collection of such art, which he called art brut or raw art . In 1948 he formed the Compagnie de l'Art Brut along with other artists, including André Breton and Claude Lévi-Strauss .

[ 9 ] The collection he established became known as the Collection de l'art brut and the curator was Slavko Kopač for almost three decades.

[ 10 ] It contains thousands of works and is now permanently housed in Lausanne , Switzerland.

Dubuffet characterized art brut as: Those works created from solitude and from pure and authentic creative impulses – where the worries of competition, acclaim and social promotion do not interfere – are, because of these very facts, more precious than the productions of professionals. After a certain familiarity with these flourishings of an exalted feverishness, lived so fully and so intensely by their authors, we cannot avoid the feeling that in relation to these works, cultural art in its entirety appears to be the game of a futile society, a fallacious parade.

— Jean Dubuffet, "Place à l'incivisme" (December 1987 – February 1988).

[ 11 ] Dubuffet argued that 'culture', that is mainstream culture, managed to assimilate every new development in art, and by doing so took away whatever power it might have had. The result was to asphyxiate genuine expression. Art brut was his solution to this problem – only art brut was immune to the influences of culture, immune to being absorbed and assimilated, because the artists themselves were not willing or able to be assimilated.

Dubuffet's championing of Art Brut would not last long. Scholars argue Dubuffet's distaste for the mainstream art world helped ensure that art brut and the Compagnie de l'Art Brut would not survive on a commercial basis. Dubuffet would kill art brut as he defined it in his quest for its authenticity.

[ 9 ] Three years after the Compagnie de l'Art Brut was formed, Dubuffet dissolved it, caving in to form the more conventional Collection de l'art brut afterward.

[ 9 ] Cultural context [ edit ] The interest in "outsider" practices among twentieth-century artists and critics can be seen as part of a larger emphasis on the rejection of established values within the modernist art milieu. The early part of the 20th century gave rise to Cubism and the Dada , Constructivist , and Futurist movements in art, all of which involved a dramatic movement away from cultural forms of the past. Dadaist Marcel Duchamp , for example, abandoned "painterly" technique to allow chance operations a role in determining the form of his works, or simply to recontextualize existing "ready-made" objects as art. Mid-century artists, including Pablo Picasso , looked outside the traditions of high culture for inspiration, drawing from the artifacts of what they deemed "primitive" societies, the unschooled art made by children, and vulgar advertising graphics. Dubuffet's championing of the art brut – of the insane and others at the margins of society – is yet another example of avant-garde art challenging established cultural values. As with analysis of these other art movements, current discourse indicates art brut is innately tied to primitivism [ 9 ] [ 12 ] due to its similarity in its borrowing of personal "de-patriation" and exoticization of familiar yet alien forms.

Terminology and criticism [ edit ] Two images of Joe Minter 's African Village in America , a half-acre visionary art environment in Birmingham, Alabama . Scenes include African warriors watching their descendants' struggles in Alabama, tributes to black scientists and military leaders, recreations of the epic civil rights confrontations in Alabama, and biblical scenes.

A number of terms are used to describe art that is loosely understood as "outside" of official culture .  Definitions of these terms vary and overlap.

[ 13 ] The editors of Raw Vision , a leading journal in the field, suggest that "Whatever views we have about the value of controversy itself, it is important to sustain creative discussion by way of an agreed vocabulary". Consequently, they lament the use of "outsider artist" to refer to almost any untrained artist. "It is not enough to be untrained, clumsy or naïve. Outsider Art is virtually synonymous with Art Brut in both spirit and meaning, to that rarity of art produced by those who do not know its name." Art Brut: Coined by Jean Dubuffet, the term translated literally from French means "raw art".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] 'Raw' is analogous in that it has not been through the academic 'cooking' process: i.e. the world of art schools, galleries, and museums. Dubuffet's original definition pertains strictly to the 'raw art' created by the autodidactic and shunned fringes of society.

[ 9 ] Folk art : Folk art originally suggested crafts and decorative skills associated with peasant communities in Europe – though presumably it could equally apply to any indigenous culture. It has broadened to include any product of practical craftsmanship and decorative skill – everything from chain-saw animals to hub-cap buildings. A key distinction between folk and outsider art is that folk art typically embodies traditional forms and social values, where outsider art stands in some marginal relationship to society's mainstream.

Intuitive art / Visionary art : Raw Vision Magazine ' s preferred general terms for outsider art. It describes them as deliberate umbrella terms. However, visionary art, unlike other definitions here can often refer to the subject matter of the works, which includes images of a spiritual or religious nature. Intuitive art is probably the most general term available.

Intuit Art Museum based in Chicago is dedicated to the study and exhibition of intuitive, self-taught and outsider art. The American Visionary Art Museum in Baltimore, Maryland is dedicated to the collection and display of visionary art.

Marginal art/Art singulier: Essentially the same as Neuve Invention ; refers to artists on the margins of the art world.

Naïve art : Another term commonly applied to untrained artists who aspire to "normal" artistic status, i.e. they have a much more conscious interaction with the mainstream art world than do outsider artists.

Neuve invention : Used to describe artists who, although marginal, have some interaction with mainstream culture. They may be doing art part-time for instance. The expression was coined by Dubuffet too; strictly speaking, it refers only to a special part of the Collection de l'art brut .

Visionary environments : Buildings and sculpture parks built by visionary artists – ranging from decorated houses to large areas incorporating a large number of individual sculptures with a tightly associated theme. Examples include Watts Towers by Simon Rodia , Buddha Park and Sala Keoku by Bunleua Sulilat , and The Palais idéal by Ferdinand Cheval .

In recent years, an increasingly critical view has developed of the different, often discriminatory terms and the separation of non-academic and academic art. According to art historian and curator Susanne Pfeffer, being an artist is not a choice but a destiny; only one's background, gender or class determines whether someone can study art and thus be socially recognized as an artist. Art that therefore does not take place within the recognized system is usually rejected by this system. Due to the system's power of definition, which always lies with the system and not with the artists themselves, exclusionary terms are used that are never intended to be inclusive.

[ 14 ] The art critic Jerry Saltz advocates abolishing the separation between ‘outsider art’ and institutionalized, official art and including non-academic art in the presentation of permanent collections in major museums. He calls for artists such as Hilma af Klimt , Bill Traylor , Adolf Wölfli and John Kane to be canonized, as their discrimination tells a false and untruthful story of art history .

[ 15 ] Roberta Smith , art critic for the New York Times , also advocates a dissolution of the separation of non-academic and academic art and calls for museums to integrate non-academic art equally into their collection presentations. Smith points to the outstanding artistic quality of works by self-taught artists, which require a rewriting of the 20th-century art canon.

[ 16 ] In 2023 and 2024, the Sprengel Museum Hannover and the Kunstsammlungen Chemnitz presented the exhibition Which Modernism? In- and Outsiders of the Avant-Garde , with the intention of correcting the view of ‘naive’ artists as ‘outsiders’ and demonstrating their close links to the avant-garde.

[ 17 ] The exhibition described ‘naive art’ as a part of modernism and a stylistic phenomenon of equal status. ‘Naïve’ artists followed their own style, influencing other artists and being influenced by other artists.

[ 18 ] Notable outsider artists [ edit ] Main article: List of outsider artists See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Society portal Fashion portal LGBTQ portal Avant-garde – Works that are experimental or innovative Asemic writing – Wordless open semantic form of writing Automatic writing – Claimed psychic ability Category: Outsider artists Collection de l'art brut – Outsider art museum in Lausanne, Switzerland David Bowie's art collection – Private collection of artworks Outside (David Bowie album) – 1995 studio album by David Bowie Exoticism – Trend in art and design Horror vacui – Latin phrase which means "fear of empty space" Kitsch – Art or other objects that appeal to popular rather than high art tastes Lille Métropole Museum of Modern, Contemporary and Outsider Art – Art Museum in Villeneuve d'Ascq, France Lowbrow (art movement) – Underground visual art movement Outsider music – Music genre Psychedelic art – Visual art inspired by psychedelic experiences Saving and Preserving Arts and Cultural Environments – Non-profit public benefit organization with an international focus Surrealism – International cultural movement (1920s–1950s) Syncretism – Combination of beliefs and traditions Vernacular architecture – Architecture based on local needs, materials, traditions World music – Non-Western traditional music References [ edit ] ^ Conley, Katharine (2006). "Surrealism and Outsider Art: From the ‘Automatic Message’ to André Breton’s Collection".

Yale French Studies , no. 109 (2006): 129–43.

^ a b Cardinal, Roger (1972).

Outsider Art . New York: Praeger. pp. 24–30.

^ a b Bibliography The 20th Century Art Book. New York, NY: Phaidon Press, 1996.

^ "Outsider Art Fair" .

Outsider Art Fair . Retrieved 19 July 2014 .

^ "What the Dickens is Outsider Art?" The Pantograph Punch, December 2016, retrieved 2024-04-13 ^ " "Outsider Art Sourcebook" (Raw Vision, Watford, 2009, p.4)" . Archived from the original on 2014-06-27 . Retrieved 2013-01-22 .

^ Cornell case study: Early Onset Schizophrenia – William Kurelek ^ "Psychiatry in Pictures" , British Journal of Psychiatry (2001) ^ a b c d e Sherman, Daniel J. (2011).

French Primitivism and the Ends of Empire, 1945-1975 . University of Chicago Press. pp. 12, 14, 111, 114.

ISBN 9780226752693 .

^ Fabrice Flahutez , Pauline Goutain et Roberta Trapani, Slavko Kopač. Ombres et matières, Shadows and Materials , Paris : Gallimard, Hors série Connaissance, 2022 352 p. (ISBN 978-2-07-295610-2) ^ Jean Dubuffet (December 1987 – February 1988). "Place à l'incivisme" ["Make Way for Incivism"].

Art and Text no. 27. p. 36.

^ Koenig, Raphael (2018), "Art Beyond the Norms: Art of the Insane, Art Brut, and the Avant-Garde from Prinzhorn to Dubuffet" (PDF) , Doctoral dissertation , Harvard University, Graduate School of Arts & Sciences., p. 99 , retrieved 2022-12-08 ^ Brut Force.

"The Many Terms in Our Continuum" .

Brut Force . Archived from the original on October 31, 2016 . Retrieved 8 February 2017 .

^ Pfeffer, Susanne (2023). "Being an Artist". In Zander, Susanne (ed.).

26 Artists. Works from the Zander Collection . Cologne: Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther und Franz König, Köln. p. 355.

ISBN 978-3-7533-0381-9 .

^ "Jerry Saltz on the Outsider Art Fair — and Why There's No Such Thing As 'Outsider' Art" .

^ "Curator, Tear Down These Walls" .

^ Bußmann, Frédéric; Spieler, Reinhard (2023).

Welche Moderne? In- und Outsider der Avantgarde . Berlin: Distanz Verlag. p. 15.

ISBN 978-3-95476-575-1 .

^ Bußmann, Frédéric; Spieler, Reinhard (2023).

Welche Moderne? In- und Outsider der Avantgarde . Berlin: Distanz Verlag. p. 51.

ISBN 978-3-95476-575-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bandyopadhyay, S. and I. Jackson, The Collection, the Ruin and the Theatre: architecture, sculpture and landscape in Nek Chand's Rock Garden, Chandigarh Liverpool, Liverpool University Press , 2007.

Greg Bottoms, I Colori dell'Apocalisse – Viaggi nell'outsider art , Odoya, Bologna 2009 ISBN 978-88-6288-026-8 Greg Bottoms, The Colorful Apocalypse: Journeys in Outsider Art , Chicago: University of Chicago Press , 2007 ISBN 978-0-226-06685-1 Roger Cardinal, Art Brut.

In: Dictionary of Art, Vol. 2, London, 1996, p. 515–516.

Marion Scherr, The Invention of 'Outsider Art' – Experiencing Practices of Othering in Contemporary Art Worlds in the UK , Transcript Verlag, 2022.

ISBN 9783837662504 Marc Decimo, Les Jardins de l'art brut , Les presses du réel, Dijon (France), 2007.

Turhan Demirel, "Outsider Bilderwelten", Bettina Peters Verlag, 2006, ISBN 3-939691-44-5 Jean Dubuffet : L’Art brut préféré aux arts culturels [1949](=engl in: Art brut. Madness and Marginalia , special issue of Art & Text , No. 27, 1987, p. 31–33).

Hal Foster, Blinded Insight: On the Modernist Reception of the Art of The Mentally Ill.

In: October , No. 97, Summer 2001, pp. 3–30.

Michael D. Hall and Eugene W. Metcalf, eds., The Artist Outsider: Creativity and the Boundaries of Culture Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, 1993.

ISBN 978-1560983354 Deborah Klochko and John Turner, eds., Create and Be Recognized: Photography on the Edge , San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2004.

John M. MacGregor, The Discovery of the Art of the Insane.

Princeton, Oxford, 1989.

David Maclagan, Outsider Art: From the margins to the marketplace , London: Reaktion books, 2009.

John Maizels, Raw Creation art and beyond, Phaidon Press Limited, London, 1996.

John Maizels (ed.), Outsider Art Sourcebook . Raw Vision, Watford, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-9543393-2-6 Lucienne Peiry, Art brut: The Origins of Outsider Art , Paris: Flammarion, 2001.

Lucienne Peiry (ed.), "Collection de l'Art Brut, Lausanne", Skira Flammarion, 2012.

Lyle Rexer, How to Look at Outsider Art, New York:Abrams, 2005.

Colin Rhodes, Outsider Art: Spontaneous Alternatives , London: Thames and Hudson, 2000.

Rubin, Susan Goldman.  (March 9, 2004).

Art Against the Odds: From Slave Quilts to Prison Paintings.

Publisher: Crown Books for Young Readers.

ISBN 0-375-82406-5 Michel Thévoz, Art brut, New York, 1975.

Maurice Tuchman and Carol Eliel, eds.

Parallel Visions. Modern Artists and Outsider Art.

Exhb. cat. Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles, 1992.

Bianca Tosatti, Arte e psichiatria. Uno sguardo sottile , (in collaboration with Giorgio Bedoni), Mazzotta, Milano, 2000.

Bianca Tosatti, Les Fascicules de l'Art brut', un saggio sull'artista Antonio dalla Valle , 2007.

Allen S. Weiss, Shattered Forms, Art Brut, Phantasms, Modernism, State University of New York, Albany, 1992.

Self Taught Artists of the 20th Century: An American Anthology San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1998 Daniel Wojcik, Outsider Art: Visionary Worlds and Trauma.

University Press of Mississippi , 2016.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Outsider art .

Raw Vision Magazine – International art magazine devoted to outsider art Gricha-rosov.com ( Archived 2016-05-23 at the Portuguese Web Archive) – Rich database and presentation of international outsider artists (in French language, but has extensive illustrations) Outsider Artists in the Collection of Museum of Naive and Marginal Art (MNMA) Jagodina Serbia ( Archived 2022-11-12 at the Wayback Machine ) Russian outsider art from the Bogemskaja-Turchin collection Outsider Art news [ usurped ] , wire, and announcements Collection: "Folk, Self-Taught, Amateur, and Visionary Art" at the University of Michigan Museum of Art v t e Folklore genres and types Narrative Animal tale Fable Fairy tale list Legend Tall tales Parable Personal narrative Urban legend Oral tradition Folk etymology False Joke Nursery rhyme Proverb Repositories Riddle Saying Word game Folk belief Birthstone Folk religion Folk saint Ghostlore Legend tripping Luminous gemstones Mythology Old wives' tale Ritual Silver bullet Weather lore Folk arts Folk art Folk costume Folk epic Folk dance Folk instrument Folk music Folk play Folk poetry Folk wrestling Foodways Society Cunning folk Fakelore Folk devil Folk healer Folk hero See also Folklore studies Morphology (folkloristics) Aarne–Thompson–Uther Index Motif-Index of Folk-Literature Storytelling Tradition Knowledge Medicine Story Vernacular v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐t8m88
Cached time: 20250818135444
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.800 seconds
Real time usage: 1.091 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4799/1000000
Revision size: 24140/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 155190/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2910/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83370/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.519/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15504878/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  899.415      1 -total
 17.20%  154.717      1 Template:Reflist
 15.08%  135.622     18 Template:Annotated_link
 13.89%  124.925      1 Template:IPA
 13.69%  123.125      1 Template:Short_description
 11.45%  102.973      5 Template:Navbox
 10.72%   96.455      5 Template:Cite_web
  8.78%   78.992      1 Template:Folklore_genres
  8.62%   77.509      8 Template:Main_other
  8.31%   74.716      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:173096:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818135444 and revision id 1300013834. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outsider_art&oldid=1300013834 " Categories : Outsider art Visual arts genres Art Informel and Tachisme 1970s neologisms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with French IPA Pages using div col with small parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template other archives Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 20:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outsider art 41 languages Add topic

