Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Communist activities 3 Exile in the Netherlands Toggle Exile in the Netherlands subsection 3.1 2007 arrest 3.1.1 Release from detention 4 Personal life 5 Later life and death 6 Controversies 7 Legacy 8 Works Toggle Works subsection 8.1 Selected writings 1968–1991 8.2 Selected writings 1991–2009 8.3 Peoples' struggles against oppression and exploitation: selected writings 2009–2015 8.4 Selected writings 2016–2021 8.5 Other works 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Jose Maria Sison 24 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Català Cebuano Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Русский Simple English Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Filipino Maoist leader (1939–2022) "Amado Guerrero" redirects here. For the Dominican Republic assassin, see Amado García Guerrero .

In this Philippine name , the middle name or maternal family name is Canlas and the surname or paternal family name is Sison .

Jose Maria Sison Sison in 2020 Founding Chairperson of the Communist Party of the Philippines In office December 26, 1968 – 1977 [ 1 ] Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Rodolfo Salas Personal details Born Jose Maria Canlas Sison ( 1939-02-08 ) February 8, 1939 Cabugao , Ilocos Sur , Commonwealth of the Philippines Died December 16, 2022 (2022-12-16) (aged 83) Utrecht , Netherlands Political party CPP (1968–2022) Other political affiliations NDF (1973–2022) PKP-1930 (1962–1968) Spouse Julieta de Lima ​ ( m.

1959) ​ Children 4 Alma mater University of the Philippines Diliman ( BA ) Website josemariasison .com Military service Allegiance New People's Army Battles/wars New People's Army rebellion Jose Maria Canlas Sison ( Tagalog: [hoˈse mɐˈɾija kɐnˈlas ˈsisɔn] ; February 8, 1939 – December 16, 2022), also known as Joma [ pronunciation?

] , was a Filipino writer, poet, and activist who founded and led the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and added elements of Maoism to its philosophy—which would be known as National Democracy . His ideology was formed by applying Marxism–Leninism-Maoism [ 2 ] to the history and circumstances of the Philippines.

Sison was born in Ilocos Sur to a landowning political family . He was educated in Manila , studying at Ateneo de Manila University , Colegio de San Juan de Letran , and the University of the Philippines . He then became a professor of literature, political science, and Rizal studies . During his youth, he learned about the rebellion of the communist Hukbalahap (Huk), which ended in 1954. Sison joined the Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas (PKP; "Philippine Communist Party") in 1962 and became a member of its executive committee in early 1963. In 1964 he co-founded the Kabataang Makabayan ("Patriotic Youth").  However, Sison's faction had several disagreements with the PKP leading to the First Great Rectification Movement . After Sison's faction were expelled from the PKP, he founded and became the chairman of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) in 1968. Three months later, Sison and Bernabe Buscayno , who led a faction of Huk holdouts, organized the New People's Army (NPA) to stage a proletarian revolution . Sison was captured in 1977 and was imprisoned, mostly in solitary confinement , until the People Power Revolution of 1986. The new government under President Corazon Aquino released him for the sake of "national reconciliation" and for his role in opposing the martial law regime of President Ferdinand Marcos . Nonetheless, he also criticized the Aquino administration. In 1988, while in the Netherlands as part of his international lecture tour, his passport was revoked and he was charged in the Philippines for violating the Anti-Subversion Act . From then on, he lived in the Netherlands but continued to advise the communist movement in the Philippines.

From August 2002, Sison had been classified as a "person supporting terrorism" by the United States. The European Court of First Instance ruled in September 2009 to delist him as a "person supporting terrorism" and reversed a decision by member governments to freeze his assets.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Sison was charged with several counts of murder in the Philippines and the Netherlands (later dropped). He died in exile in 2022.

The CPP, NPA, and the National Democratic Front (NDF) are considered terrorist organizations by the Philippines' Anti-Terrorism Council .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Early years [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Jose Maria Sison" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Jose Maria Canlas Sison was born on February 8, 1939, in Cabugao, Ilocos Sur to a prominent landowning family with ancestry from Spanish-Mexican-Malay mestizos and from Fujian , China, and with connections to other prominent clans such as the Crisólogos, Geraldinos, Vergaras, Azcuetas, Sollers, Serranos and Singsons.

[ 9 ] Sison's father, Salustiano Sison, was a "vocally strong support of Claro Mayo Recto and had a mix of "strong feudalist orientation" and "anti-imperialist sentiment." [ 10 ] His mother, Florentina Canlas Sison, was part of a landed family in Mexico, Pampanga . As a child, Sison's parent nicknamed him "Cheng." [ 11 ] His great-grandfather, Don Leandro Serrano, was the biggest landlord in northern Luzon at the end of the 19th century. His grandfather, Don Gorgonio Soller Sison, was the last gobernadorcillo of Cabugao under Spanish colonial rule, [ 12 ] the municipal president under the Philippine revolutionary government, and the first mayor under US colonial rule. His great-uncle, Don Marcelino Crisólogo was the first governor of Ilocos Sur . His uncle, Teófilo Sison was governor of Pangasinan and the first Defense Secretary in the Commonwealth government. He was convicted in 1946 of having collaborated with the Japanese occupation forces but was amnestied in 1947.

[ 13 ] During his childhood in Ilocos , he learned about the Huk rebellion in Central Luzon from Ilocano farm workers and from his mother. In his early high school years in Manila, he talked to his barber about Hukbalahap activities. Unlike his elder siblings, he attended a public school before entering Ateneo de Manila University and later studying at Colegio de San Juan de Letran .

Sison graduated from the University of the Philippines in 1959 with the degree of Bachelor of Arts in English literature with honors and then studied Indonesian in Indonesia before returning to the Philippines and becoming a university professor of literature and eventually Rizal Studies and Political Science .

[ 10 ] He joined the Lavaite Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas in December 1962 and became a member of its executive committee in early 1963. He was the Vice Chairman of the Lapiang Manggagawa (which eventually became the Socialist Party) and the general secretary of the Movement for the Advancement of Nationalism. In 1964, he co-founded the Kabataang Makabayan , or Patriotic Youth, with Nilo S. Tayag. This organization organized youth against the Vietnam War , Ferdinand Marcos , imperialism , bureaucrat capitalism and feudalism . The organization also spearheaded the study of Maoism as part of 'the struggle'.

Communist activities [ edit ] On December 26, 1968, he formed and led the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP), an organization founded on Marxism–Leninism-Maoism , stemming from his experience as a youth leader and labor and land reform activist. This was known as the First Great Rectification Movement where Sison and other radical youth criticized the existing party leadership for its errors and failures since 1942. The old Communist Party had been run under a series of Moscow-leaning general secretaries from the Lava family. The reestablished CPP set its general political line as a two-stage revolution comprising national-democratic as the first stage then proceeding to the socialist revolution. During this period, Sison went by the nom de guerre of Amado Guerrero , meaning "beloved warrior", under which he published the book manifesto Philippine Society and Revolution .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] After this, the old Communist Party sought to eliminate and marginalize Sison. However, the reorganized CPP had a larger base and renewed political line that attracted thousands to join its ranks.

[ 16 ] On March 29, 1969, the CPP, along with an HMB (Huk) faction led by Bernabe Buscayno , organized the New People's Army (NPA), the guerrilla -military wing of the party, whose guerrilla fronts, numbering more than 110, are nationwide and cover substantial portions of 75 of the 81 Philippine provinces. The NPA seeks to wage a peasant-worker revolutionary war in the countryside against landlords and foreign companies by operating in rural communities and mountains as strategy for protection.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Sison was arrested on November 8, 1977, [ 19 ] in La Union during the Marcos presidency and imprisoned for almost nine years, most of which were spent in solitary confinement.

[ 20 ] Sison wrote prolifically while incarcerated, including his Basic Principles of Marxism-Leninism: A Primer , which his wife Julie de Lima smuggled out of prison in 1982.

[ 21 ] Sison was released from military detention on March 5, 1986, after the overthrow of Marcos. He was released by the new administration of President Corazon Aquino for the sake of "national reconciliation" and for his role in opposing Marcos. The release of Sison was vehemently protested by the military . His experience in prison is described in Prison & Beyond , a book of poetry released in 1986 which won the Southeast Asia WRITE award for the Philippines.

Sison returned to teach at the University of the Philippines soon after. He then went on a global lecture tour, starting in September 1986. It is reported that upon his release, Sison and his followers actively sought to discredit the Aquino government in the European media by speaking out on Aquino's human rights violations , including the Mendiola massacre , in which members of the military were accused of firing on unarmed peasants in Manila , killing 17 people.

[ 22 ] Also in 1986, Sison embarked on a world tour. In October 1986, he accepted the Southeast Asia Writers Award for a book of his poems from the Crown Prince of Thailand in Bangkok .

In 1989, Sison was cited in journalist Gregg Jones ' book Red Revolution as having coordinated the Plaza Miranda bombing in August 1971 based on interviews with members of the CPP and the NPA.

[ 23 ] Exile in the Netherlands [ edit ] Since 1987, Sison had based himself in the Netherlands for his European lecture tour. While in the Netherlands in September 1988, he was informed that his passport had been revoked and that charges had been filed against him under the Anti-Subversion Law of the Philippines. The charges were ultimately dropped, including those that were subsequently filed by Philippine authorities. He applied for political asylum in the Netherlands in 1988 after his Philippine passport was cancelled by the Philippine government. His application was ultimately denied, however Dutch and European law protected him from deportation to the Philippines.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Since 1992, he had lived in the Netherlands as a recognized political refugee.

The CPP has stated for over 20 years that Sison was no longer involved in operational decisions and has served from Europe in an advisory role as chief political consultant of the National Democratic Front in peace negotiations with the Manila government.

2007 arrest [ edit ] The International Crime Investigation Team of the Dutch National Criminal Investigation Department arrested Jose Maria Sison in Utrecht on August 28, 2007. Sison was arrested for his alleged involvement from the Netherlands in three assassinations that took place in the Philippines: the murder of Romulo Kintanar in 2003, and the murders of Arturo Tabara and Stephen Ong in 2006. On the day of his arrest, Sison's apartment and the apartments of his co-workers were searched by the Dutch National Criminal Investigation Department.

[ 27 ] Some 100 left-wing activists held a demonstration for the release of Sison, marching towards the Dutch embassy in Manila on August 30, 2007. The demonstration was swiftly ended by police.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] There were no plans to hold the trial in the Philippines since there was no extradition request and the crimes Sison was accused of were committed in the Netherlands . Dutch lawyer Victor Koppe said that Sison would enter a plea of not guilty during his indictment. He could have received the maximum penalty of life imprisonment .

On September 1, 2007, National Democratic Front peace panel chair Luis Jalandoni confirmed that the Dutch government was "maltreating" Sison because the court detained him in solitary confinement for several weeks without access to media, newspapers, television, radio or visitors; it also denied him the right to bring prescription medicines to his cell. The place where Sison was held was the same one used by the late former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic who was held for war crimes and corruption. Meanwhile, protests were held in Indonesia , Hong Kong, Australia, the United States, and Canada. The Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) feared that Sison may be " extra-judicially " transferred to the United States. CPP spokesman Gregorio Rosal said that the U.S. may detain and subject Sison to extraordinary rendition in Guantanamo Bay or some secret facility. U.S. ambassador Kristie Ann Kenney formally announced that the U.S. will extend support to the Dutch government to prosecute Sison.

[ 30 ] In New York City, former United States Attorney General and left-wing human rights lawyer Ramsey Clark called for Sison's release and pledged assistance by joining the latter's legal defense team headed by Belgian lawyer Jan Fermon . Clark doubted Dutch authorities' validity and competency, since the murder charges originated in the Philippines and had already been dismissed by the country's Supreme Court.

[ 31 ] Committee DEFEND, an International group stated that the Dutch government tortured Sison at the National Penitentiary in Scheveningen . His wife, Julie De Lima, failed to see him in order to provide him with medicine and warm clothes on August 30, 2007.

[ 32 ] Meanwhile, Sison's counsel, Romeo Capulong, questioned the Dutch government's jurisdiction over the issue, alleging that the Supreme Court of the Philippines already dismissed the subject cases on July 2.

[ 33 ] On September 7, 2007, the Dutch court heard defense arguments for Sison, and stated that it would issue the resolution next week on whether to extend the detention . Supporters outside The Hague District Court chanted slogans while the wife, Julie De Lima stated that they complained to the International Committee of the Red Cross . Luis Jalandoni, chairman of the National Democratic Front , accused the government of Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende of being " a workhorse " for Philippines President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo and for the U.S. government.

[ 34 ] The National Lawyers Guild (NLG), a progressive bar association in New York then headed by Marjorie Cohn, denounced the arrest of Sison, saying "it exposes the hand of the Arroyo administration in yet another assault on the rights of the people to dissent and organize".

[ 35 ] Sison will remain in jail until Thursday, but was provided TV, radio and medication.

[ 36 ] On September 12, 2007, lawyers Edre Olalia and Rachel Pastores stated that Sison's lawyers will appeal the reported Dutch court's newly promulgated ruling extending Sison's detention for 90 days.

[ 37 ] The Dutch court did not extend the detention for 90 days but released him on September 13, 2007, after being held in solitary confinement for 17 days.

Release from detention [ edit ] Dutch public prosecutor 's office's Wim de Bruin stated that Sison was released from jail at 10:45 a.m. on September 13, 2007. The court ruled that there was insufficient evidence to detain him on murder charges, specifically, if Sison " had a Concious [sic] and close cooperation with those in the Philippines who carried out the deed ".

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] On September 27, 2007, Sison appeared before The Hague Court of Appeal panel of 3 judges on the public prosecutor 's appeal against the district court 's September 13 judgment of release.

On September 28, 2007, the Dutch Ambassador to the Philippines , Robert Brinks, announced that 3 Dutch judicial officials and Dutch prosecution lawyer Wim De Bruin will visit the Philippines " later this year " to review the evidence against Jose Maria Sison.

[ 40 ] The next day, Leung Kwok Hung , a Hong Kong politician and member of the April Fifth Action vowed to support Sison. Leung was in Europe at the Inter-Parliamentary Union assembly in Geneva, Switzerland . He sits in the Hong Kong legislature as a member of the Finance and House Committees, and of the Legislative Panels on Constitutional Affairs, Housing, Manpower, Transport, and Welfare Services.

[ 41 ] On October 3, 2007, the Dutch court dismissed the prosecution's appeal against the release Sison, confirming his freedom while the Dutch police continue to investigate: "the prosecution file lacks enough concrete clues that Sison can be directly linked to the assassinations which is needed to prosecute him as a perpetrator". However, the decision does not bar prosecution for murder.

[ 42 ] But the Dutch Public Prosecutor's Office (per spokesman Wim de Bruin) stated that it did not drop the charges against Sison yet, who remains a suspect. De Bruin said: "No, you have to separate the criminal investigation by the police from the investigation by the examining judge in The Hague. So the judge decided to finish the investigation but the police investigation will be continued and that means that Mr. Sison is still a suspect." [ 43 ] The Dutch court, the Dutch court on May 20, 2008, heard Sison's appeal against the Dutch Public Prosecutors Office's request to extend its investigation until December, since the investigators arrived in the Philippines in February and interviewed witnesses. At the trial, however, the new evidence showed that there were indeed attempts to kill him, in 1999 and 2000, while Kintanar's wife, Joy, directly accused Edwin Garcia in the murder of her husband.

[ 44 ] The Dutch court scheduled the promulgation on the verdict on June 10, 2008.

[ 45 ] The Dutch District Court of The Hague on June 5, 2008, decided in camera "that the Public Prosecution Service may continue the prosecution of Jose Maria Sison for involvement in, among other matters, a number of murders committed in the Philippines in 2003 and 2004; that while the prosecution's case file still held insufficient evidence, the investigation was ongoing and should be given time to unfold".

[ 46 ] In February 2010, the Dutch Public Prosecution Service finally terminated its investigation of Sison and dropped the criminal charges against him.

Personal life [ edit ] Sison met his wife, Julie de Lima, when both were students at UP Diliman . Attending the same study groups, they grew closer and married first in a civil wedding in September 1959 and then in a Catholic church wedding in January 1960. The couple had four children.

[ 47 ] His wife belonged to the prominent De Lima family of Iriga City, Camarines Sur and is the aunt of Leila de Lima , who served as Chair of the Commission on Human Rights during the presidency of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo , Secretary of the Philippine Department of Justice under the administration of President Benigno S. Aquino III ., [ 48 ] and Senator during the administration of President Rodrigo Duterte .

He was the chairperson of the International League of Peoples' Struggle , [ 49 ] and the Chief Political Consultant of the National Democratic Front of the Philippines.

Later life and death [ edit ] In 2017, President Rodrigo Duterte , claimed that Sison had colon cancer.

[ 50 ] Sison, while admitting he has been hospitalized at the Utrecht University Medical Center in March of that in year connection to his rheumatoid arthritis and Sweet syndrome symptoms, said that he has no serious illness including cancer.

[ 51 ] In early 2022, reports emerged that Sison had died; [ 52 ] Sison himself refuted his supposed death.

[ 53 ] Later that year, on December 16, the Communist Party of the Philippines, alongside its news organ Ang Bayan , announced the death of Sison after having been confined in a hospital in Utrecht , Netherlands , for two weeks. NDFP executive Luis Jalandoni disclosed that Sison died due to heart failure, after almost three weeks of hospital treatment, although he did not provide more details about Sison's death.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Controversies [ edit ] Former Senator Jovito Salonga accused Sison of orchestrating the 1971 Plaza Miranda bombing during the Liberal Party convention to force Marcos to suspend the writ of habeas corpus and sign Proclamation No. 1081, initiating the advent of Martial Law in the Philippines.

[ 58 ] This accusation comes from former CPP members such as Victor Corpuz and others.

[ 59 ] The Philippine National Police (PNP) filed a criminal case against Sison for the Plaza Miranda bombing, but the charges were dismissed for lack of evidence, with the dismissal order citing the complainant's filing criminal charges based on speculation.

[ 60 ] On July 4, 2008, Manila 's RTC Executive Judge Reynaldo Ros assumed jurisdiction over the 1,551-page cases of multiple murder lawsuits against Sison, Bayan Muna Representative Satur Ocampo , and National Democratic Front member Luis Jalandoni after the Supreme Court's Third Division ordered a change of venue from the Hilongos , Leyte RTC Branch 18 for safety reasons.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] During the time when these alleged killings supposedly took place, Sison and Ocampo had long been under maximum detention of the Marcos regime. Sison, Ocampo, and other political detainees were only freed in 1986 after the first EDSA uprising of the same year.

The European Union's second highest court ruled to delist Sison and the Stichting Al-Aqsa group from the EU terror list since the 27-nation bloc failed to respect their rights when blacklisted. The Luxembourg-based Court of Justice further reversed a decision by member governments to freeze the assets of Sison and the Netherlands-based Al-Aqsa Foundation, since the EU governments failed to inform them why the assets were frozen. Dekker said that EU lawyers in Brussels can lodge any appeal.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The EU was also ordered to shoulder all the litigation expenses during the five-year appeal of Sison against the Dutch government and the EU.

[ 63 ] The final judgment of the European Court of Justice to remove Sison from the EU terrorist blacklist on September 30, 2009, became final and binding on December 10, 2009, inasmuch as the EU did not make an appeal. The court's decisions and other documents pertaining to cases involving Sison in the Philippines are compiled under the section of Legal Cases in www.josemariasison.org and can be further verified in the archives of the pertinent courts.

Legacy [ edit ] Two biographies have been written about him: one by the German writer Dr. Rainer Werning: The Philippine Revolution: From the Leader's View Point (1989), and one by the Filipina activist Ninotchka Rosca , At Home in the World (2004). Two biographical films about Sison were produced: The Guerrilla Is a Poet (2013), directed by sisters Sari and Kiri Dalena , and Tibak (2016), written and directed by journalist Arlyn dela Cruz.

Since his death, national democratic organizations in Manila launched the Jose Maria Sison School, involving hundreds of youth, union members and activists in a re-examination of the Joma's teachings. Leftists from Berkeley to Rome followed suit.

[ 64 ] Many activists and scholars have continued Sison's legacy in different ways.  On February 15, 2025, key leaders of the national democratic movement launched The Jose Maria Sison Legacy Foundation (TJMSLF) in Utrecht, The Netherlands to preserve the legacy of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) founder.

[ 65 ] Maybelle Guerrero has called for revolutionaries to review Sison's work and to take up his unfinished tasks, such as his repeated call to revive the armed city partisan teams to address human rights violators in the urban areas.

[ 66 ] Works [ edit ] Selected writings 1968–1991 [ edit ] 2013.

1968-1972 Foundation for Resuming the Philippine Revolution. International Network for Philippine Studies and Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

2013.

1969-1974 Defeating Revisionism, Reformism & and Opportunism. International Network for Philippine Studies and Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

2013.

1972-1977 Building Strength through Struggle. International Network for Philippine Studies and Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

2013.

1977-1986 Detention and Defiance against Dictatorship. International Network for Philippine Studies and Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

2015.

1986-1991 Continuing the Struggle for National & Social Liberation. International Network for Philippine Studies and Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

Selected writings 1991–2009 [ edit ] 2009.

1991-1994 For Justice, Socialism and Peace. Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

2009.

1995-2001 For Democracy and Socialism Against Imperialist Globalization. Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

2009.

2001-2006 Crisis of Imperialism and People's Resistance. Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

2009.

2006-2009 People's Struggle Against Imperialist Plunder and Terror. Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

Peoples' struggles against oppression and exploitation: selected writings 2009–2015 [ edit ] 2015.

2009-2010 Crisis Generates Resistance. International Network for Philippine Studies 2016.

2010-2011 Building People's Power. International Network for Philippine Studies 2017.

2012 Combat Neoliberal Globalization. International Network for Philippine Studies [ 67 ] 2018.

2013 Struggle against Imperialist Plunder and Wars. International Network for Philippine Studies 2018.

2014-2015 Strengthen the People's Struggle against Imperialism and Reaction. International Network for Philippine Studies Selected writings 2016–2021 [ edit ] 2018.

2016 People's Resistance to Greed and Terror. International Network for Philippine Studies 2019.

2017 Combat Tyranny and Fascism. International Network for Philippine Studies 2019.

January–July 2018 Struggle against Terrorism and Tyranny Volume I. International Network for Philippine Studies 2019.

August–December 2018 Struggle against Terrorism and Tyranny Volume II. International Network for Philippine Studies 2021.

2019 Resist Neoliberalism, Fascism, and Wars of Aggression. International Network for Philippine Studies Other works [ edit ] 2020. Basic Principles of Marxism–Leninism: A Primer. Reprint. Paris, Foreign Languages Press [ 68 ] 2019.

Reflections on Revolution and Prospects.

International Network for Philippine Studies 2017. Specific Characteristics of our People's War. Reprint. Paris, Foreign Languages Press [ 69 ] 2003. US Terrorism and War in the Philippines. Netherlands, Papieren Tijger 1998. Philippine Economy and Politics. Co-authored by Julieta de Lima. Philippines, Aklat ng Bayan, Inc.

1989.

The Philippine Revolution : The Leader's View.

With Rainer Werning. New York : Crane Russak.

1984.

Prison and Beyond: Selected Poems, 1958–1983.

Quezon City: Free Jose Maria Sison Committee.

1971.

Philippine Society and Revolution .

As Amado Guerrero. Manila: Pulang Tala.

1967. Struggle for National Democracy. Quezon City, Progressive Publications References [ edit ] ^ "Communist Party of the Philippines–New People's Army" .

Mapping Militants . Center for International Security and Cooperation . Retrieved November 18, 2021 .

^ "Ang Bayan Special Issue, December 26, 2022 | Jose Maria Sison, 83" .

Philippine Revolution Web Central . December 26, 2022.

^ a b IHT, EU court overturns decision to freeze assets of exiled Philippine rebel, Palestinian group , nytimes.com .

^ a b JAVNO, EU Court Overturns Two EU Terrorist Listings Archived September 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , dalje.com .

^ "Groups urges Dutch gov't anew to stop coddling terrorist Joma" .

www.pna.gov.ph . Retrieved August 28, 2022 .

^ "Hand over Joma Sison to PH, groups tell Dutch gov't" .

www.pna.gov.ph . Retrieved August 28, 2022 .

^ Mateo, Janvic.

"Twitter suspends Joma, CPP-linked accounts" .

Philstar.com . Retrieved August 28, 2022 .

^ "PH seeks terrorist tag for Joma Sison, 648 others" .

RAPPLER . March 9, 2018 . Retrieved August 28, 2022 .

^ Genealogist, Filipino.

"10 Facts About Jose Maria "JOMA" Sison's Genealogy" . Retrieved September 5, 2023 .

^ a b Abinales, Patricio (1992).

"Jose Maria Sison and the Philippine Revolution: A Critique of an Interface" .

Kasarinlan .

8 (1) . Retrieved September 15, 2024 .

^ Scalice, Joseph (2021).

" "We are Siding with Filipino Capitalists": Nationalism and the Political Maturation of Jose Ma. Sison, 1959–61" .

Sojourn: Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia .

36 (1): 1– 39.

doi : 10.1355/sj36-1a .

ISSN 0217-9520 .

JSTOR 26996172 . Retrieved September 15, 2024 .

^ "Jose Maria Sison" .

Angkang Pilipino . December 16, 2022 . Retrieved September 5, 2023 .

^ "Kinship and encounters with FVR" .

Jose Maria Sison . Retrieved May 1, 2016 .

^ Guidote, Caridad. The Intellectuals and the Problems of Development in the Philippines. 1973.

^ Amado Guerrero (1970).

Philippine Society and Revolution .

Revolutionary School of Mao Tsetung Thought.

^ P. N. Abinales.

"Jose Maria Sison and the Philippine Revolution: A Critique of an Interface" . Archived from the original on April 14, 2010.

^ "The Huks And The New People's Army: Comparing Two Postwar Filipino Insurgencies" .

www.globalsecurity.org . Retrieved September 5, 2023 .

^ University, © Stanford; Stanford; California 94305.

"MMP: Communist Party of the Philippines - New People's Army" .

cisac.fsi.stanford.edu . Retrieved September 5, 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "The World", Los Angeles Times , November 17, 1977, p.I-2 ^ Sison, Jose Maria (2020).

Basic Principles of Marxism-Leninism: a Primer (PDF) (6th ed.). Foreign Languages Press. p. 6.

^ Sison, Jose Maria (2020).

Basic Principles of Marxism-Leninism: a Primer (PDF) (6th ed.). Foreign Languages Press. p. 7.

^ Mydans, S. (December 19, 2022), "Jose Maria Sison, Philippine Communist Party Founder, Dies at 83" , New York Times , retrieved December 19, 2022 ^ Cseas Departmental (March 5, 2021).

Three Grenades in August: Fifty Years since the Bombing of Plaza Miranda in the Philippines .  Event occurs at 26:01 . Retrieved March 7, 2023 .

^ "Afgewezen Filippijnse vluchteling wacht in Manila 'warm onthaal' " [Rejected Filipino refugee awaits 'warm welcome' in Manila].

Trouw (in Dutch). April 2, 1993. Archived from the original on September 6, 2023 . Retrieved September 6, 2023 .

^ Verbeek (February 21, 1995).

"Raad van State afd. bestuursrechtspraak: Hernieuwde afwijzing, na eerdere vernietiging door de Afdeling rechtspraak, van verzoek toelating als vluchteling en verlening verblijfsvergunning aan J.M. Sison, voorzitter van de Communistische Partij van de Filipijnen" [Council of State, Administrative Jurisdiction Division: Rejection, after previous annulment by the Judiciary Division, of application for admission as a refugee and grant of residence permit to J.M. Sison, president of the Communist Party of the Philippines.].

Nederlands Juristenblad (in Dutch).

70 (13): 160– 161 . Retrieved September 6, 2023 .

^ "Judgment Of The Court Of First Instance (Seventh Chamber) in Case T-341/07" .

eur-lex.europa.eu . Retrieved September 6, 2023 .

It is also misleading for the applicant to claim that he has been recognised as a refugee by the Raad van State and the Rechtbank. In fact, the applicant has never been granted refugee status or a residence permit in the Netherlands, as was confirmed by the Rechtbank.

^ "Philippine Communist Leader Apprehended to Face a Murder Charge" (Press release). Public Prosecution Service (Openbaar Ministerie). August 28, 2007. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012 . Retrieved August 28, 2007 .

^ "Police clash with activists protesting arrest of Philippine communist leader" .

International Herald Tribune . The Associated Press. August 30, 2007 . Retrieved August 30, 2007 .

^ "Nederlandse ambassade belaagd" .

NOS News (in Dutch).

Nederlandse Omroep Stichting . August 30, 2007. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007 . Retrieved August 30, 2007 .

^ "No medicine, media for Joma; NDF chair scores Dutch gov't" .

GMA News Online . September 2007 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ Inquirer.net, Ex-US attorney general calls for Joma release Archived September 3, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Abs-Cbn Interactive, Int'l group says Dutch govt torturing Joma Archived February 9, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Joma's lawyers to zero in on jurisdiction issue" .

GMA News Online . September 3, 2007 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ IHT, Dutch court hears arguments for release of Philippines communist leader accused of murder ^ Inquirer.net, U.S. lawyers denounce Sison arrest, detention Archived October 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Inquirer.net, Sison to remain in jail until Thursday next week—Bayan Archived September 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Dutch court orders Joma detained another 90 days" .

GMA News Online . September 12, 2007 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ Abs-Cbn Interactive, Dutch govt frees Joma [ permanent dead link ] ^ "Live-PR.com" . Archived from the original on February 12, 2009 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ Manila Bulletin, Dutch judiciary officials to check evidence vs Joma [ permanent dead link ] ^ "CPP: Hong Kong lawmaker to drum up support for Joma" .

GMA News Online . Archived from the original on May 22, 2011 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ Afp.google.com, Dutch court upholds order to release Philippine communist leader Archived October 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Abs-cbn Interactive, Dutch prosecutor not dropping charges vs Joma [ permanent dead link ] ^ Abs-Cbn Interactive, Sison claims govt agents tried to kill him [ permanent dead link ] ^ "Communist leader Sison asks Dutch court to drop case - INQUIRER.net, Philippine News for Filipinos" . Archived from the original on December 26, 2014 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ abs-cbnnews.com, Dutch court allows prosecution anew of Joma Sison [ permanent dead link ] ^ "Jose Maria Sison in the dead end" . Archived from the original on January 19, 2018 . Retrieved May 1, 2016 .

^ ABS-CBN News (July 30, 2009).

"De Lima: So what if I'm Joma's kin?" . Retrieved May 1, 2016 .

^ "Office of the Chairperson" . ILPS. Archived from the original on March 22, 2015 . Retrieved November 4, 2014 .

^ GMA News (July 24, 2017).

"Joma Sison has colon cancer" . Retrieved July 24, 2017 .

^ Dizon, Nikko (July 24, 2017).

"Joma Sison on colon cancer: It's just in Duterte's mind" .

Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved February 8, 2022 .

^ Tablang Badoy, Lorraine Marie (February 12, 2022).

"NTF-ELCAC Statement in Response to CPP–NPA–NDF's Denial of Joma Sison's Death" .

NTF-ELCAC .

^ "Joma denies rumors of death" .

The Philippine Star . February 9, 2022 . Retrieved February 9, 2022 .

^ "Communist Party of the Philippines website" .

Philippine Revolution Web Info . Retrieved December 17, 2022 .

^ "CPP founder Joma Sison dies at 83" .

CNN Philippines . December 17, 2022. Archived from the original on December 17, 2022 . Retrieved December 17, 2022 .

^ Gregorio, Xave (December 17, 2022).

"CPP founder Joma Sison dies, 83" .

The Philippine Star . Retrieved December 17, 2022 .

^ Jr, Delfin T. Mallari (December 20, 2022).

"Joma Sison died of heart failure, says NDFP exec" .

INQUIRER.net . Retrieved December 20, 2022 .

^ "Bulatlat.com" .

www.bulatlat.com . Retrieved September 5, 2023 .

^ "Unmasking the sinister mind behind the 1971 Plaza Miranda bombing" .

Philippine News Agency .

^ Inquirer, Philippine Daily (September 27, 2012).

"Admit role in Quiapo bombing, CPP dared" .

INQUIRER.net . Retrieved September 5, 2023 .

^ "Purging case vs Sison, Jalandoni, Ocampo moved to Manila - INQUIRER.net, Philippine News for Filipinos" . Archived from the original on December 26, 2014 . Retrieved December 26, 2014 .

^ abs-cbnnews, Manila court set to try multiple murder case vs Joma, Satur [ permanent dead link ] ^ ABS-CBN Interactive, JAVNO, EU told to pay for Sison's 5-yr legal fees Archived July 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ JOSE MARIA SISON'S UNFINISHED TASKS; Uphold the Third Rectification of the Communist Party of the Philippines!

https://www.scribd.com/document/851235488/Jose-Maria-Sison-s-Unfinished-Tasks ^ Kodao Productions, "Foundation to preserve Joma Sison legacy launches." https://kodao.org/foundation-to-preserve-joma-sison-legacy-launches/ ^ Jose Maria Sison's Unfinished Tasks; Uphold the Third Rectification of the Communist Party of the Philippines!

https://www.scribd.com/document/851235488/Jose-Maria-Sison-s-Unfinished-Tasks ^ "Combat Neoliberal Globalization" . July 26, 2017.

^ "Basic Principles of Marxism-Leninism: A Primer - Jose Maria Sison" .

^ "Specific Characteristics of our People's War - Jose Maria Sison" .

Further reading [ edit ] Jones, G. R. (1989).

Red Revolution: Inside The Philippine Guerrilla Movement . Westview Press.

ISBN 978-0-8133-0644-5 .

Rosca, Ninotchka (2004).

Jose Maria Sison: At Home in the World . Open Hand Publishing.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Jose Maria Sison .

Josemariasison.org Works by or about Jose Maria Sison at the Internet Archive Works by Jose Maria Sison at Marxists.org The Arrest of Joma Sison (dossier of the Philippine Daily Inquirer ) A talk from Jan Fermon, lawyer for Jose Maria Sison on YouTube comments from Jan Fermon and others on UK/EU Terror Laws on YouTube v t e Martial law under Ferdinand Marcos and People Power Revolution Batas Militar sa Pilipinas Background Martial law in the Philippines 1965 elections Conjugal dictatorship Philippines–United States relations American imperialism Cold War Vietnam War Communist insurgency Moro conflict Sabah claim Jabidah massacre Manili massacre 1969 elections 1969 balance of payments crisis First Quarter Storm Agrarian reform Diliman Commune Plaza Miranda bombing Filipino nationalism Human rights in the Philippines Events 1972 Enrile ambush Proclamation No. 1081 1973 Constitution 1974 Sacred Heart Novitiate raid Construction of "edifice complex" projects 1978 elections Interim Batasang Pambansa Beatification of Lorenzo Ruiz 1981 elections Assassination of Ninoy Aquino Negros famine Philippine economic history during the Marcos dictatorship Philippine military history during the Marcos dictatorship Snap elections Timeline of the People Power Revolution Human rights abuses Human rights abuses Torture methods Political detainees Palimbang massacre Tictapul massacre Murder of Archimedes Trajano Murder of Macli-ing Dulag Daet massacre Bacong Bridge massacre Murder of Juan "Johnny" Escandor Murder of Alex Orcullo Escalante massacre Beew massacre Kleptocracy Unexplained wealth of the Marcos family Marcos mansions Marcos jewels Overseas landholdings of the Marcos family Japanese Official Development Assistance scandal Coco Levy Fund scam Golden Buddha theft Bataan Nuclear Power Plant People Regime Ferdinand Marcos Imelda Marcos Cronies and Relatives Rolex 12 ( Eduardo "Danding" Cojuangco Jr.

Juan Ponce Enrile Romeo Espino Fidel Ramos Fabian Ver ) Macario Asistio Jr.

Roberto Benedicto José Yao Campos Manuel Elizalde Jr.

Antonio Floirendo Sr.

Ferdinand "Bongbong" Marcos Jr.

María Imelda "Imee" Marcos Roberto Ongpin Benjamin "Kokoy" Romualdez Ignacio Santiago Sr.

Ricardo Silverio Florentino Sanico Solon Lucio Tan Arturo Tolentino Nicanor Yñiguez Cabinet Technocrats Cesar Virata Onofre Corpuz Armand Fabella Jaime C. Laya Placido Mapa Jr.

Carlos P. Romulo Mainstream opposition Leaders Agapito "Butz" Aquino Benigno "Ninoy" Aquino Jr.

Corazon C. "Cory" Aquino José W. "Ka Pepe" Diokno Salvador H. "Doy" Laurel Gerardo M. "Gerry" Roxas Jovito R. "Ka Jovy" Salonga Cardinal Jaime Sin Lorenzo M. "Ka Tanny" Tañada Sr.

Business sector opposition Jose S. Concepcion Jr.

Domingo M. Guevara, Sr.

Alejandro A. "Ka Ding" Lichauco Eugenio "Geny" Lopez Jr.

Jaime Ongpin Alfonso Yuchengco Quintin Yuyitung Rizal Yuyitung Political sector opposition Jacobo Amatong Ceferino "Joker" Arroyo Jejomar Binay Cesar Climaco Jose "Peping" Cojuangco Jr.

Margarita "Tingting" Cojuangco Roberto Concepcion Hilario Davide Jr.

Marcelo Fernan Neptali Gonzales Raul M. Gonzalez Teofisto Guingona Jr.

Ribomapil "Dodong" Holganza Sr.

Evelio Javier Vicente Jayme Eva Estrada Kalaw José B. Lingad Diosdado Macapagal Ernesto Maceda Raul Manglapus Primitivo Mijares Ramon Mitra Jr.

Sergio "Serge" Osmeña III Ambrosio Padilla Cecilia Muñoz-Palma Vicente Paterno Aquilino "Nene" Pimentel Jr.

Eduardo Quintero Soledad Roa Duterte Francisco "Soc" Rodrigo Jose Benedicto Luis "J.B.L." Reyes Rene Saguisag Abraham Sarmiento Sr.

Wigberto Tañada Claudio Teehankee Luis Villafuerte Haydee Yorac Calixto Zaldivar Religious sector opposition Zacarias Agatep Teodoro Bacani Jr.

Mariani Dimaranan Joe Dizon Tullio Favali Inocencio Ipong Isabelo Magalit Mary John Mananzan Violeta Marcos Pacifico Ortiz Magnifico Osorio Miguel Purugganan James Reuter Rudy Romano Mary Christine Tan Carlos Tayag Ricardo Vidal The Magnificent Seven ( Francisco Claver Federico Escaler Antonio Fortich Julio Xavier Labayen Orlando Quevedo Felix Perez Jesus Varela ) Academic and cultural sector opposition Academics and cultural workers Freddie Aguilar APO Hiking Society ( Danny Javier Boboy Garrovillo Jim Paredes ) Lualhati Bautista Lino Brocka Ishmael Bernal Noel Cabangon Benedicto Cabrera Behn Cervantes Renato Constantino Carmen I. "Ka Nena" Diokno Gilda Cordero Fernando Butch Dalisay The Jerks Nick Joaquin Emmanuel "Eman" Lacaba Inang Laya Ricky Lee Celeste Legaspi Salvador P. Lopez Bienvenido Lumbera Leah Navarro Francisco Nemenzo Jr.

Willie Nepomuceno Bibeth Orteza Gaston Z. "Gasty" Ortigas Nemesio Prudente Kidlat Tahimik Student activists Lean Alejandro Edgar Ang Sinco Manuel Bautista Neri Colmenares Liliosa Hilao Antonio Hilario Bonifacio Ilagan Edgar Jopson Joel Lamangan Carol Pagaduan Armando Palabay Tish Pascual-Ladlad Nestor Principe Susan Quimpo Abraham Sarmiento Jr.

Antonio Tagamolila Archimedes Trajano Southern Tagalog 10 ( Cristina Catalla Gerardo Faustino Rizalina Ilagan Jessica Sales ) Left-wing opposition Fidel Agcaoili Lean Alejandro Conrado Balweg Lorena Barros Walden Bello Crispin Beltran Bernabe Buscayno Victor Corpus Maita Gomez Luis Jalandoni Emmanuel "Eman" Lacaba Filemon Lagman Satur Ocampo Felixberto Olalia Sr.

Rolando Olalia Jose Maria Sison Nilo Tayag Crispin Tagamolila Benito Tiamzon Wilma Tiamzon Antonio Zumel Opposition in the Armed Forces Resistance during the Marcos administration years Commodore Ramon A. Alcaraz Col.

Bonifacio Gillego Capt.

Rogelio Morales , PN Capt.

Danilo Vizmanos , PN Brig. Gen.

Marcos G. Soliman Reform the Armed Forces Movement Juan Ponce Enrile Col.

Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan Col. Eduardo "Red" Kapunan Jr.

BGen.

Jose T. Almonte Col.

Victor Batac Col.

Hector Tarrazona Col.

Billy Bibit Others who withdrew support during the People Power revolution Lt. Gen.

Fidel V. Ramos Commodore Tagumpay Jardiniano Col. Charles Hotchkiss Col. Antonio Sotelo Col.

Rodolfo Biazon Lt.

Benjamin Magalong Journalists Pro-Marcos Jose "Joe" Guevarra Opposition writers Eugenia Apostol David Bueno Joe Burgos Amando Doronila Ma Ceres Doyo Inday Espina-Varona Chit Estella Betty Go-Belmonte Letty Jimenez Magsanoc Jose "Pete" Lacaba Teodoro Locsin Sr.

Armando Malay Antonio "Tony" Nieva Alex Orcullo Napoleon G. Rama Joaquin "Chino" Roces Maximo Soliven Jose Mari Velez American interested parties Stephen W. Bosworth Henry A. Byroade Philip Habib George Hamilton Paul Laxalt Richard Lugar Paul Manafort Ronald Reagan Political pressure groups Political coalitions Alliance of Makati Associations Anti-Bases Coalition August Twenty One Movement Bagong Alyansang Makabayan Concerned Women of the Philippines Free Legal Assistance Group Gabriela Women's Party Justice for Aquino, Justice for All Kilusan sa Kapangyarihan at Karapatan ng Bayan Movement of Attorneys for Brotherhood, Integrity and Nationalism, Inc.

Movement for a Free Philippines Movement of Concerned Citizens for Civil Liberties National Movement for Free Elections Task Force Detainees of the Philippines Political parties Liberal Party Partido Demokratiko Pilipino – Lakas ng Bayan United Nationalist Democratic Organization Locations Camp Aguinaldo Camp Crame Clark Air Base Club Filipino Epifanio de los Santos Avenue (EDSA) Fort Bonifacio Fort Magsaysay Hawaii Malacañang Palace Ortigas Center Villamor Air Base Aftermath Events Nepotism Operation Big Bird Mendiola massacre 1987 elections Anti-Aquino coup attempts UP-DND accord Second Great Rectification Movement Burial of Ferdinand Marcos Institutions Aquino Presidency Constitution of the Philippines Commission on Human Rights Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program Human Rights Violations Victims' Memorial Commission Philippine Constitutional Commission of 1986 Philippine National Police Presidential Commission on Good Government Media Songs " Bagong Pagsilang " " Bayan Ko " " Handog ng Pilipino sa Mundo " " Magkaisa " " Saranggola ni Pepe " " Tatsulok " " Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree " Political Films during the dictatorship Iginuhit ng Tadhana Sakada Literature The Conjugal Dictatorship of Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos Dekada '70 Some Are Smarter Than Others Subversive Lives: A Family Memoir of the Marcos Years Waltzing with a Dictator Slogans Isang Bansa, Isang Diwa Sa ikauunlad ng bayan, disiplina ang kailangan Tama na! Sobra na! Palitan na!

Never again Gestures V sign Laban sign Raised fist Legacy and historiography Monuments and memorials Bantayog ng mga Bayani EDSA Shrine People Power Monument individuals Films Ako si Ninoy Barber's Tales Batas Militar Citizen Jake A Dangerous Life Dekada '70 Eskapo Evolution of a Filipino Family Forbidden Memory From What Is Before Imelda Katips The Kingmaker The Last Journey of Ninoy Liway Loyalista: The Untold Story of Imelda Papin Maid in Malacañang Martyr or Murderer ML Oras de Peligro Pisay A Rustling of Leaves: Inside the Philippine Revolution Sa Dulo ng Baril Season of the Devil Why Is Yellow the Middle of the Rainbow?

Other media Here Lies Love musical Maalaala Mo Kaya : The Ninoy and Cory Aquino Story (" Kalapati " " Makinilya ") Voltes V Disinformation and distortionism Ferdinand Marcos's cult of personality Historical distortion regarding Ferdinand Marcos v t e National Democratic Front of the Philippines Pambansa Demokratikong Prente ng Pilipinas Organizations Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Kabataang Makabayan Makabayang Kilusan ng Bagong Kababaihan Christians for National Liberation Revolutionary Council of Trade Unions Pambansang Katipunan ng Magbubukid Katipunan ng Gurong Makabayan Makabayang Samahan Pangkalusugan Liga ng Agham para sa Bayan Lupon ng Manananggol para sa Bayan Artista at Manunulat para sa Sambayanan Makabayang Kawaning Pilipino Revolutionary Organization of Overseas Filipinos and their Families Moro Resistance and Liberation Organization Cordillera People's Democratic Front Revolutionary Organization of Lumads Katipunan ng mga Samahang Manggagawa People Jose Maria Sison Fidel Agcaoili Luis Jalandoni Antonio Zumel Julieta de Lima Coni Ledesma v t e Communism in the Philippines Events Communist armed conflicts Hukbalahap New People's Army First Great Rectification Movement Second Great Rectification Movement Organizations Communist groups Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930 Socialist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army National Democratic Front Hukbalahap Rebolusyonaryong Partido ng Manggagawà ng Pilipinas Revolutionary Proletarian Army Alex Boncayao Brigade Marxist–Leninist Party of the Philippines Rebolusyonaryong Hukbong Bayan Cordillera People's Liberation Army Labor unions Unión Obrera Democrática Filipina Unión de Impresores de Filipinas Congreso Obrero de Filipinas Collective Labor Movement Katipunan ng mga Anak-Pawis sa Pilipinas Congress of Labor Organizations Peasant groups Aguman ding Maldang Talapagobra Kalipunang Pambansa ng mga Magbubukid sa Pilipinas Pambansang Kaisahan ng mga Magbubukid Political parties Partido Obrero de Filipinas Democratic Alliance Mass organizations Kabataang Makabayan Malayang Pagkakaisa ng Kabataang Pilipino League of Young Communists of the Philippines Samahang Demokratiko ng Kabataan People Early thinkers and labor leaders Isabelo de los Reyes Hermenegildo Cruz Lope K. Santos Dominador Gómez Pascual H. Poblete PKP members Crisanto Evangelista Domingo Ponce Cirilo Bognot Mariano Balgos Guillermo Capadocia Antonio Ora Vicente Lava José Lava Jesus Lava Primitivo Arrogante Pedro Castro Jorge Frianeza Pedro Abad Santos Peasant leaders Juan Feleo Casto Alejandrino Jacinto Manahan Jaime Tadeo Mateo del Castillo Hukbalahap Luis Taruc Peregrino Taruc Silvestre Liwanag Agaton Bulaong Bernardo Poblete Felipa Culala Communist Party of the Philippines Jose Maria Sison Fidel Agcaoili Nilo Tayag Bernabe Buscayno Antonio Zumel Benito Tiamzon Wilma Tiamzon Gregorio Rosal Filemon Lagman Emmanuel Lacaba Edgar Jopson Conrado Balweg Luis Jalandoni Related topics Anarchism in the Philippines Domino theory Labor history in the Philippines Peasant movement in the Philippines Philippine resistance against Japan Student activism in the Philippines (1965–1972) Anti-Subversion Act of 1957 MV Karagatan incident UP–DND accord National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict (NTF-ELCAC) Attacks and incidents Rano massacre 2021 Masbate City blast 2022 Samar boat explosion Communism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jose_Maria_Sison&oldid=1304131076 " Categories : 1939 births 2022 deaths 20th-century Filipino poets 20th-century Filipino male writers Anti-Americanism Anti-revisionists Ateneo de Manila University alumni Colegio de San Juan de Letran alumni Communist Party of the Philippines politicians Communist poets Filipino anti-imperialists Filipino communists Filipino exiles Filipino expatriates in the Netherlands Filipino people of Kapampangan descent Filipino people of Spanish descent Filipino people of Mexican descent Filipino political party founders Filipino revolutionaries Anti-capitalists Ilocano people Ilocano-language writers Individuals designated as terrorists by the United States government Maoist theorists People convicted on terrorism charges People from Ilocos Sur S.E.A. Write Award winners University of the Philippines alumni Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1:Vancouver names with accept markup CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2022 Use Philippine English from December 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in Philippine English Pages with Tagalog IPA Articles needing pronunciation Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 05:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jose Maria Sison 24 languages Add topic

