Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Toggle Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels subsection 1.1 Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League 1.1.1 Political programme of demands which threaten the bourgeois consensus 1.1.2 In context 1.2 Relation to Trotskyist theory 2 Leon Trotsky 3 Theory since Trotsky Toggle Theory since Trotsky subsection 3.1 Trotskyists 3.2 Tony Cliff's deflected permanent revolution 3.3 Saumyendranath Tagore 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Permanent revolution 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in Marxist theory Not to be confused with Continuous revolution theory .

This article is about the theoretical term. For other uses, see Permanent Revolution .

Part of a series on Trotskyism Concepts Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinism Bureaucratic collectivism Critique of political economy Cross-class alliance Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state Democratic centralism Decentralized economic planning Entryism Leninism Permanent revolution Political revolution Proletarian internationalism Social revolution Soviet democracy State capitalism Substitutionism Transitional demand Uneven and combined development Union democracy United front Vanguard party World communism World revolution Variants Orthodox Trotskyism Third camp Posadism Pabloism People Trotsky Abern Ali Antonov-Ovseenko Bensaïd Blanco Callinicos Cannon Deutscher Dowson Draper Duxiu Cliff Frank Grant Hallas Hansen Healy James Khan Lambert Maitan Mandel Moreno North Novack Pablo Posadas Preobrazhensky Rakovsky Sedov Shachtman Smirnov Tạ Thu Thâu Taaffe Woods Works 1905 (1908) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1924) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925) History of the Russian Revolution (1930) The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-40) The Revolution Betrayed (1936) Their Morals and Ours (1938) Transitional Program (1938) In Defence of Marxism (1942) Thesis of Pulacayo (1946) The Stalinist Legacy (1984) The Dilemmas of Lenin (2017) History Russian Revolution October Revolution Joseph Stalin's rise to power The Declaration of 46 Left Opposition Lenin's Testament Bloc of Soviet Oppositions French Turn Minneapolis general strike of 1934 Great Purge Moscow trials Proletarian Military Policy New York Intellectuals May 68 1968–1969 Japanese university protests 1970s Hong Kong student protests Militant in Liverpool Parties Active Internationalist Workers' Left (Greece) Lanka Sama Samaja Party Lutte Ouvrière People Before Profit Socialist Action (Hong Kong) Socialist Alternative (Australia) Socialist Alternative (U.S.) Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party (England and Wales) Socialist Workers Party (UK) Solidarity The Struggle Pakistan Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition Workers' Cause Party Workers' Left Front Workers Revolutionary Party (UK) Defunct Bolshevik–Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma Communist League of America International Marxist Group International Socialist Organization League for Socialist Action (Canada) Militant tendency Revolutionary Communist Party (UK, 1944) Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992) Socialist Workers Party (U.S.) Young Socialist Alliance Workers Party of the United States Internationals Current Committee for a Workers' International (refounded) Fourth International (post-reunification) International Committee of the Fourth International International Communist League International Revolutionary Left International Socialist Alternative International Socialist Tendency International Workers' League Internationalist Communist Union League for the Fourth International Revolutionary Communist International Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International Historical Committee for a Workers' International (1974–2019) Fourth International Fourth International–Posadist Permanent Revolution Revolutionary Workers Ferment By country Argentina Australia China Denmark France Greece Ireland Japan Pakistan Russia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Vietnam Related topics Betrayal thesis Campism Chavismo Democracy in Marxism Fifth International Johnson–Forest Tendency Leon Trotsky bibliography Maoism Marxism–Leninism Orthodox Marxism Shachtmanism Socialist economics Socialist Equality Party Socialist Worker Stalinism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Revolution Characteristics Bourgeois Colour Communist Counter-revolutionary Democratic Nonviolent Passive Permanent Proletarian From above Wave Social Methods Boycott Civil disorder Civil war Class struggle Contentious politics Coup d'état Demonstration Human chain Direct action Guerrilla warfare Insurgency Mass mobilization Mutiny Protest Rebellion Resistance Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Riot Samizdat Strike action Tax resistance Terror Examples English Atlantic American Brabant Liège French Haitian Spanish American Serbian Greek 1820s 1830 July Belgian Texas 1848 Italian states February German Hungarian Eureka Bulgarian unification Philippine Iranian First Second Young Turk Mexican Chinese Xinhai Communist Cultural 1917–1923 Russian German Siamese Spanish August Guatemalan Hungarian (1956) Cuban Rwandan Nicaraguan Argentine Carnation Saur People Power 1989 Yogurt Velvet Romanian Singing Bolivarian Bulldozer Rose Orange Tulip Kyrgyz Arab Spring Tunisian Egyptian Yemeni Euromaidan Second Arab Spring Sudanese Politics portal v t e Permanent revolution is the strategy of a revolutionary class pursuing its own interests independently and without compromise or alliance with opposing sections of society . As a term within Marxist theory , it was first coined by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels as early as 1850. Since then different theorists, most notably Leon Trotsky (1879–1940), have used the phrase to refer to different concepts.

Trotsky's permanent revolution is an explanation of how socialist revolutions could occur in societies that have not achieved an advanced capitalist mode of production . Trotsky's theory also argues that the bourgeoisie in late-developing capitalist countries are incapable of developing the productive forces in such a manner as to achieve the sort of advanced capitalism which will fully develop an industrial proletariat ; and that the proletariat can and must therefore seize social, economic and political power, leading an alliance with the peasantry . Trotsky also opposed Joseph Stalin 's principle of socialism in one country and stated that socialist revolutions needed to happen across the world in order to combat the global capitalist hegemony . According to Russian historian Vadim Rogovin (1937–1998), the success of Stalin's theoretical position had a significant and negative impact on the entire course of the international revolutionary process.

[ 1 ] Marx's view of "permanent" revolution sees revolutionary activity as continuously ongoing until the revolutionary forces achieve a defined goal (such as socialism or communism ).

[ 2 ] This contrasts with the permanent (that is, ongoing forever ) revolutionary activity envisaged in Maoist Continuous Revolution Theory .

[ citation needed ] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels [ edit ] This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Marx first used the term in the phrase "by substituting permanent war for permanent revolution" in the following passage from The Holy Family (1844) in which he wrote that " Napoleon represented the last battle of revolutionary terror against the bourgeois society ... He perfected the terror by substituting permanent war for permanent revolution. " [ 3 ] Marx said that Napoleon prevented the bourgeois revolution in France from becoming fulfilled; that is, he prevented bourgeois political forces from achieving a total expression of their interests. According to Marx, he did this by suppressing the "liberalism of bourgeois society" and did it because he saw "the state as an end in itself", a value which supported his "political aim of conquest". Thus, he substituted "permanent war for permanent revolution". However, the final two sentences show that the bourgeoisie did not give up hope, but continued to pursue their interests. For Marx, permanent revolution involves a revolutionary class (in this case, the bourgeoisie) continuing to push for and achieve its interests despite the political dominance of actors with opposing interests.

By 1849, Marx and Engels were able to quote the use of the phrase by other writers (Eugen Alexis Schwanbeck, a journalist on the Kölnische Zeitung [Cologne Newspaper]; [ 4 ] and Henri Druey ), [ 5 ] suggesting that it had achieved some recognition in intellectual circles.

Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League [ edit ] Marx's most famous use of the phrase permanent revolution is his March 1850 Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League .

[ 6 ] His audience is the proletariat in Germany, faced with the prospect that "the petty-bourgeois democrats will for the moment acquire a predominant influence", i.e. temporary political power. He enjoins them as such: While the democratic petty bourgeois want to bring the revolution to an end as quickly as possible, achieving at most the aims already mentioned, it is our interest and our task to make the revolution permanent until all the more or less propertied classes have been driven from their ruling positions, until the proletariat has conquered state power and until the association of the proletarians has progressed sufficiently far – not only in one country but in all the leading countries of the world – that competition between the proletarians of these countries ceases and at least the decisive forces of production are concentrated in the hands of the workers.

[ 6 ] In the remainder of the text, Marx outlines his proposal that the proletariat "make the revolution permanent". In essence, it consists of the working class maintaining a militant and independent approach to politics both before, during and after the struggle which will bring the petty-bourgeois democrats to power.

Political programme of demands which threaten the bourgeois consensus [ edit ] In an article two years earlier, Marx had referred to "a programme of permanent revolution, of progressive taxes and death duties, and of organisation of labour".

[ 7 ] This confirms the impression that Marx's theory of permanent revolution is not about revolution per se , but rather more about the attitude that a revolutionary class should adopt in the period of their political subjection, including the programme of political demands they should propose. This aspect is raised in the Address . As well as overtures for organisational alliance with the petty bourgeoisie , Marx is concerned about attempts to "bribe the workers with a more or less disguised form of alms and to break their revolutionary strength by temporarily rendering their situation tolerable".

[ 6 ] Therefore, the workers' party must use their autonomous organisation to push a political programme which threatens the bourgeois status quo along the following lines: 1. They can force the democrats to make inroads into as many areas of the existing social order as possible, so as to disturb its regular functioning and so that the petty-bourgeois democrats compromise themselves; furthermore, the workers can force the concentration of as many productive forces as possible – means of transport, factories, railways, etc. – in the hands of the state.

2. They must drive the proposals of the democrats to their logical extreme (the democrats will in any case act in a reformist and not a revolutionary manner) and transform these proposals into direct attacks on private property. If, for instance, the petty bourgeoisie propose the purchase of the railways and factories, the workers must demand that these railways and factories simply be confiscated by the state without compensation as the property of reactionaries. [...] The demands of the workers will thus have to be adjusted according to the measures and concessions of the democrats.

[ 6 ] In this passage, we can see that Marx believes the proletariat should refuse to moderate its demands to the petty-bourgeois consensus and advocate extensive nationalisation. Furthermore, the demand of the workers should always seek to push the bourgeois further than they are prepared to go, without the revolution threatening them as well.

In context [ edit ] Marx concludes his Address by summarising the themes elucidated above: Although the German workers cannot come to power and achieve the realization of their class interests without passing through a protracted revolutionary development, this time they can at least be certain that the first act of the approaching revolutionary drama will coincide with the direct victory of their own class in France and will thereby be accelerated. But they themselves must contribute most to their final victory, by informing themselves of their own class interests, by taking up their independent political position as soon as possible, by not allowing themselves to be misled by the hypocritical phrases of the democratic petty bourgeoisie into doubting for one minute the necessity of an independently organized party of the proletariat. Their battle-cry must be: The Permanent Revolution.

[ 6 ] Since Marxism emphasises the contingency of political developments on material historical circumstances (as against idealism ), it is worthwhile to have some idea of how Marx saw the context in which he advocated permanent revolution. It seems that he believed that "the first act of the approaching revolutionary drama [in Germany] will coincide with the direct victory of their own class in France and will thereby be accelerated". That is, the petty-bourgeois are expected to come to power in Germany at the same time as the direct victory of the proletariat in France. Furthermore, Marx seems to believe that the former and hence of both is "imminent" (cf. the third paragraph of the Address ).

[ 6 ] Therefore, Marx clearly believes that Europe is entering a time and is at a level of development of the productive forces in which the proletariat have the social revolution within their reach. Although circumstances did not develop as anticipated, this observation proved accurate at the dawn of the 20th century leading into the First World War and the Russian Revolution .

Relation to Trotskyist theory [ edit ] Marx and Engels advocated permanent revolution as the proletarian strategy of maintaining organisational independence along class lines and a consistently militant series of political demands and tactics. However, at no stage does Marx make the central claim with which Trotsky's conception of permanent revolution is concerned, i.e. that it is possible for a country to pass directly from the dominance of the semi-feudal aristocrats, who held political power in Russia in the early part of the 19th century, to the dominance of the working class, without an interceding period of dominance by the bourgeoisie. On the contrary, Marx's statements in his March 1850 Address explicitly contradict such a view, assuming a "period of petty-bourgeois predominance over the classes which have been overthrown and over the proletariat".

[ 6 ] In his History of the Russian Revolution , Trotsky argues that this was shortened to the period between February and October 1917.

Marx and Engels do not claim that socialism is impossible in one country, but they do say "Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties by this only: 1. In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they point out and bring to the front the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality. 2. In the various stages of development which the struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole." and acknowledge that Communists are "the most resolute section of the working class parties... [and seek] conquest of political power by the proletariat." Despite this, communism will likely not exist immediately after a revolution: "in all probability, the proletarian revolution will transform existing society gradually and will be able to abolish private property only when the means of production are available in sufficient quantity" (Engels' The Principles of Communism , Sections 17 and 19).

[ 8 ] The Communist Manifesto alludes to Marx's view that the dominance of the bourgeoisie is a necessary prelude to that of the proletariat, arguing that "the bourgeoisie therefore produces [...] its own grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable".

[ 9 ] In this sense, Trotsky's version of the theory represents both a development and to some observers a contradiction of the expressed opinions of Marx and Engels.

It must be borne in mind that for Marx the dominance of the bourgeoisie as a prerequisite for subsequent proletarian rule holds on a world scale as The Communist Manifesto makes clear that despite : "Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle" (loc. cit.). Trotsky's theory took it for granted (as did Vladimir Lenin in The State and Revolution ) that the domination of the world by the bourgeoisie was complete and irreversible after the emergence of imperialism in the late 19th century. The uncertain relationship between international and national parameters in relation to class power underlies many of the disputes concerning the theory of the permanent revolution.

In the preface to the 1882 Russian edition of The Communist Manifesto , Marx and Engels explicitly raised the issues Trotsky would later develop: "Now the question is: can the Russian obshchina , though greatly undermined, yet a form of primeval common ownership of land, pass directly to the higher form of Communist common ownership? Or, on the contrary, must it first pass through the same process of dissolution such as constitutes the historical evolution of the West? The only answer to that possible today is this: If the Russian Revolution becomes the signal for a proletarian revolution in the West, so that both complement each other, the present Russian common ownership of land may serve as the starting point for a communist development".

[ 10 ] Leon Trotsky [ edit ] See also: The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects Leon Trotsky 's conception of permanent revolution is based on his understanding—drawing on the work of fellow Russian Alexander Parvus —that a Marxist analysis of events begins with the international level of development, both economic and social. National peculiarities are only an expression of the contradictions in the world system. According to this perspective, the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution could not be achieved by the bourgeoisie itself in a reactionary period of world capitalism; Trotsky cites Russia as an example of this.

[ 11 ] This conception was first developed in the essays later collected in his book 1905 and in his essay Results and Prospects and later developed in his 1929 book The Permanent Revolution .

The basic idea of Trotsky's theory [ 12 ] is that in Russia the bourgeoisie would not carry out a thorough revolution which would institute political democracy and solve the land question. These measures were assumed to be essential to develop Russia economically. Therefore, it was argued the future revolution must be led by the proletariat, who would not only carry through the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, but would also commence a struggle to surpass the bourgeois-democratic revolution itself.

How far the proletariat would be able to continue would depend upon the further course of events and not upon the designation of the revolution as bourgeois-democratic. In this sense, the revolution would be made permanent. Trotsky believed that a new workers' state would not be able to hold out against the pressures of a hostile capitalist world unless socialist revolutions quickly took hold in other countries as well. This notion later became a point of contention with the Stalinist faction within the Bolshevik Party , which held that socialism in one country could be built in the Soviet Union .

Trotsky's theory was developed in opposition to the social-democratic theory that undeveloped countries must pass through two distinct revolutions. First, the bourgeois-democratic revolution which socialists would assist and at a later stage the socialist revolution with an evolutionary period of capitalist development separating those stages. This is often referred to as the theory of stages, the two-stage theory or stagism.

Vladimir Lenin and the Bolsheviks initially held to an intermediate theory. Lenin's earlier theory shared Trotsky's premise that the bourgeoisie would not complete a bourgeois revolution. Lenin thought that a democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants could complete the tasks of the bourgeoisie.

[ 13 ] By 1917, Lenin was arguing not only that the Russian bourgeoisie would not be able to carry through the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution and therefore the proletariat had to take state power, but also that it should take economic power via a soviet (workers' council). This position was put forward to the Bolsheviks on his return to Russia in his " April Theses ". The first reaction of the majority of Bolsheviks was one of rejection. Initially, only Alexandra Kollontai rallied to Lenin's position within the Bolshevik Party.

After the October Revolution , the Bolsheviks, now including Trotsky, did not discuss the theory of permanent revolution as such. However, its basic theses can be found in such popular outlines of communist theory as The ABC of Communism which sought to explain the program of the Bolshevik Party by Yevgeni Preobrazhensky and Nikolai Bukharin . According to Russian historian, Vadim Rogovin , the leadership of the German Communist Party had requested that Moscow send Leon Trotsky to Germany to direct the 1923 insurrection . However, this proposal was rejected by the Politburo which was controlled by Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev who decided to send a commission of lower-ranking Russian Communist Party members.

[ 14 ] Later on after Lenin's death in the 1920s, the theory did assume importance in the internal debates within the Bolshevik Party and was a bone of contention within the opposition to Joseph Stalin . In essence, a section of the Bolshevik Party leadership, whose views were voiced at the theoretical level by Bukharin, argued that socialism could be built in a single country, even an underdeveloped one like Russia. Bukharin argued that Russia's pre-existing economic base was sufficient for the task at hand, provided the Soviet Union could be militarily defended.

The question of the Northern Expedition and the subjection of the Chinese Communist Party to control by the Kuomintang at the behest of the Bolshevik Party was a topic of argument within the opposition to Stalin in the party.

[ 15 ] Figures such as Karl Radek argued that a stagist strategy was correct for China. (These writings were lost in the 1930s; if copies exist in the Soviet archives, they have not been located since the dissolution of the Soviet Union .) By contrast, Trotsky generalised his theory of permanent revolution, which had only been previously applied to Russia. He argued that the proletariat needed to take power in a process of uninterrupted and permanent revolution in order to not only carry out the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, but also to implement socialism.

His position was put forward in his essay entitled The Permanent Revolution which can be found today in a single book together with Results and Prospects . In this essay, Trotsky generalised his theory of permanent revolution and grounded it in the idea of uneven and combined development . In contrast to the conceptions inherent within stagist theory, the theory of uneven and combined development states that all class-based societies, including capitalist nations, develop unevenly and that some parts of these societies will develop more swiftly than others. Trotsky argued that this development is combined, and that each part of the world economy is increasingly bound together with all other parts. The conception of uneven and combined development also recognises that some areas may regress economically and socially as a result of their integration into a world economy.

According to political scientist Baruch Knei-Paz, Trotsky's theory of "permanent revolution" was grossly misrepresented by Stalin as defeatist and adventurist during the succession struggle when in fact Trotsky encouraged revolutions in Europe but was not at any time proposing "reckless confrontations" with the capitalist world.

[ 16 ] Theory since Trotsky [ edit ] Trotskyists [ edit ] Since the assassination of Leon Trotsky in 1940, the theory of permanent revolution has been maintained by the various Trotskyist groups which have developed since then. However, the theory has been extended only modestly, if at all. While their conclusions differ, works by mainstream Trotskyist theoreticians such as Robert Chester, Joseph Hansen , Michael Löwy , and Livio Maitan related it to post-war political developments in Algeria , Cuba , and elsewhere.

Tony Cliff's deflected permanent revolution [ edit ] An attempt to elaborate an exception to the theory was made by Tony Cliff of the Socialist Workers Party . In a 1963 essay, [ 17 ] Cliff develops the idea that where the proletariat is unable to take power, a section of the intelligentsia may be able to carry out a bourgeois revolution. He further argues that the use of Marxist concepts by such elements (most notably in Cuba and China , but also for example by regimes espousing Arab socialism or similar philosophies) is not genuine, but is the use of Marxism as an ideology of power. This reflects his view that these countries are state capitalist societies rather than deformed workers states .

Cliff's views have been criticised by more orthodox Trotskyists as an abandonment of Trotsky's theory in all but name in favour of the stagist theory, countering that Cliff was more cautious than Trotsky about the potential of the working class in underdeveloped countries to seize power. Cliff saw such revolutions as a detour or deflection on the road to socialist revolution rather than a necessary preliminary to it.

Saumyendranath Tagore [ edit ] Saumyendranath Tagore , the founder of the Revolutionary Communist Party of India and an international communist leader, argued that "the theory of Permanent Revolution has two aspects, one relating to the revolution of a particular country, the immediate passing over from the bourgeois democratic phase of the revolution to the socialist revolution. The second aspect [...] is related to the international tasks of the revolution [...] which makes it imperative for the first victorious revolution to operate as the yeast of revolution in the world arena. [...] Trotsky became the target of Stalin's vengeance only so far as he drew the attention of the communists throughout the world to the betrayal of world revolution (Permanent Revolution) by Stalin". Tagore also argued that the theory of permanent revolution has nothing to do with Trotskyism, but it is pure Marxism and Leninism . As an example, he points out that the term permanent revolution itself was coined by Marx and Engels back in 1850 in their Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League .

[ 18 ] According to Tagore, Lenin was just as much a champion of the permanent revolution as Trotsky was and with a "much more sure grasp of revolutionary reality". However, he argues that Trotsky "certainly had done a great service to revolutionary communism by drawing out attention over and over again to the theory of permanent revolution since Lenin died in 1924 and the sinister anti-revolutionary reign of Stalin started". In the face of what Tagore termed "the next diabolical machineries of vilification and terror of Stalinocracy", Trotsky kept "the banner of revolutionary communism flying in the best traditions of Marx and Lenin. Therein lies Trotsky's invaluable service in the theory of Permanent Revolution. So far as the Theory itself is concerned, it is pure and simple revolutionary Marxism".

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] World revolution Communist revolution Socialism in one country Perpetual war References [ edit ] ^ Rogovin, Vadim Zakharovich (2021) [1992].

Was There an Alternative? Trotskyism: a Look Back Through the Years . Mehring Books. p. 367.

ISBN 978-1-893638-97-6 .

^ Marx, Karl (March 1850).

"Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League" .

[...] it is our interest and our task to make the revolution permanent until all the more or less propertied classes have been driven from their ruling positions, until the proletariat has conquered state power and until the association of the proletarians has progressed sufficiently far – not only in one country but in all the leading countries of the world – that competition between the proletarians of these countries ceases and at least the decisive forces of production are concentrated in the hands of the workers.

^ Engels, Friedrich (1956) [1845].

"Critical Battle Against the French Revolution (Ch. VI, part 3, § c)" .

The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism: Against Bruno Bauer and Company . Translated by Richard Dixon.

^ Marx, Karl (11 February 1849).

"The Division of Labour in the Kölnische Zeitung " .

Neue Rheinische Zeitung (2nd ed.).

^ Engels, Friedrich (15 March 1849).

"The Model Republic" .

Neue Rheinische Zeitung .

^ a b c d e f g Marx, Karl (March 1850).

"Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League" .

^ Engels, Friedrich (1848), "The French Working Class and the Presidential Elections" , Gesamtausgabe ^ Engels, Friedrich (1847).

"Principles of Communism" .

^ Marx, Karl; Engels, Friedrich (1848).

"The Communist Manifesto" .

^ Marx, Karl; Engels, Friedrich (1882), "Preface" , The Communist Manifesto ^ Van Auken, Bill (27 September 2005).

"Socialism in one country or permanent revolution" .

World Socialist Web Site . International Committee of the Fourth International . Retrieved 3 June 2013 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1931), "2. The Permanent Revolution is Not a 'Leap' by the Proletariat, but the Reconstruction of the Nation under the Leadership of the Proletariat" , The Permanent Revolution ^ Trotsky, Leon (21 October 2008).

"Three conceptions of the Russian Revolution" .

World Socialist Web Site . International Committee of the Fourth International . Retrieved 3 June 2013 .

^ Rogovin, Vadim Zakharovich (2021).

Was There an Alternative? Trotskyism: a Look Back Through the Years . Mehring Books. p. 272.

ISBN 978-1-893638-97-6 .

^ Whitehouse, David (July–August 2006), "The fading relevance of permanent revolution" , International Socialist Review , no. 48, archived from the original on 2017-12-14 , retrieved 2007-10-31 ^ Knei-Paz, Baruch (1978).

The Social and Political Thought of Leon Trotsky . Clarendon Press. p. 343.

ISBN 978-0-19-827234-2 .

^ Cliff, Tony (Spring 1963).

"Deflected Permanent Revolution" .

International Socialism . 1st.

^ Tagore, Saumyendranath (1944).

Permanent Revolution . Calcutta: Samar Bose . Retrieved 1 August 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Alexander, Robert J. (13 February 2005) [1991].

"International Trotskyism-India" .

International Trotskyism 1929–1985: A Documented Analysis of the Movement . Durham: Duke University Press . Retrieved 1 August 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Permanent revolution Permanent revolution . Marxists Internet Archive Encyclopedia entry on permanent revolution.

What is the theory of the Permanent Revolution?

. Unsigned article on Trotsky.net website.

Trotsky's In Defence of October . It explains the permanent revolution.

The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects by Leon Trotsky (1931) . Online book.

The Fading Relevance of Permanent Revolution Archived 2017-12-14 at the Wayback Machine . International Socialist Review.

The Necessity of Permanent Revolution Archived 2017-10-19 at the Wayback Machine . An International Socialist Review editor's rebuttal of the above.

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Revolutionary socialism Concepts Class conflict Communist revolution Communization Foco Impossibilism People's war Permanent revolution Platformism Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Revolutionary base area Revolutionary terror Situationist prank Social revolution United front Vanguardism World revolution Tendencies Blanquism De Leonism Insurrectionary anarchism Mao-spontex Syndicalism Groups The Invisible Committee Situationist International People Mikhail Bakunin Louis Auguste Blanqui Daniel De Leon Régis Debray Friedrich Engels Che Guevara Abimael Guzmán Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Vladimir Lenin Karl Liebknecht Rosa Luxemburg Mao Zedong Karl Marx Thomas Sankara Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Related topics Anarchist communism Anarcho-pacifism Collectivist anarchism General strike Popular front Radical feminism Reformism Refusal of work Socialism portal v t e Leon Trotsky Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Works Leon Trotsky bibliography Our Political Tasks (1904) Our Revolution (1906) 1905 (1908) The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects (1919) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Problems of Everyday Life (1924-1939) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1925) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925-1940) My Life (1930) The Permanent Revolution (1930) History of the Russian Revolution (1932) The Revolution Betrayed (1937) The Stalin School of Falsification (1937) Their Morals and Ours: The class foundations of moral practice (1938) The Transitional Program (1938) Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and His Influence (1938–1940) Writings of Leon Trotsky The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-1940) In Defence of Marxism (book) (1942) Life First exile of Trotsky Saint Petersburg Soviet Russian Revolution of 1905 1917 Russian Revolution Trade union debate Kronstadt rebellion Fourth International Assassination of Leon Trotsky Related Anti-Stalinist Left Left Opposition Bulletin of the Opposition American Committee for the Defense of Leon Trotsky List of Trotskyist internationals Permanent revolution Trotskyism International Left Opposition Miscellaneous Trotsky's train Lenin's Testament The Blue House Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky Leon Trotsky House Museum The Ballad of Trotsky Family Lev Kamenev (brother-in-law) Olga Kameneva (sister) Lev Sedov (son) Sergei Sedov (son) Natalia Sedova (second wife) Aleksandra Sokolovskaya (first wife) Zinaida Volkova (daughter) Biographies Leon Trotsky: A Revolutionary's Life by Joshua Rubenstein (2011).

The Prophet: The Life of Leon Trotsky by Isaac Deutscher (1954–1963).

The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 1879–1921 by Isaac Deutscher (1954).

The Prophet Unarmed: Trotsky, 1921–1929 by Isaac Deutscher (1959).

The Prophet Outcast: Trotsky, 1929–1940 by Isaac Deutscher (1963).

Trotsky: A Biography by Robert Service (2009).

Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7qj44
Cached time: 20250817082221
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.587 seconds
Real time usage: 0.782 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2727/1000000
Revision size: 31419/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 151519/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3117/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 120610/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.372/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10165140/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  623.431      1 -total
 27.69%  172.601      1 Template:Reflist
 18.57%  115.772      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.33%  114.306      1 Template:Trotskyism
 15.15%   94.466      6 Template:Cite_book
 12.61%   78.625      1 Template:Wikisource
 12.24%   76.301      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 11.82%   73.698      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
 11.61%   72.362      1 Template:Sister_project
 11.40%   71.088      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:46399047:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817082221 and revision id 1305519591. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Permanent_revolution&oldid=1305519591 " Categories : 1850s neologisms Marxist terminology Revolution terminology Revolutions by type Trotskyism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles lacking reliable references from June 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Wikisource templates with missing id Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 14:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Permanent revolution 33 languages Add topic

