Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Animal rights 3 Selected publications Toggle Selected publications subsection 3.1 Books 3.2 Articles 4 See also 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Christine Korsgaard 17 languages العربية Asturianu Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher in Left-Kantian tradition Christine Marion Korsgaard Korsgaard in 2010 Born April 9, 1952 ( 1952-04-09 ) (age 73) Chicago , Illinois , United States Academic background Alma mater Harvard University University of Illinois Thesis The Standpoint of Practical Reason (1981) Doctoral advisor John Rawls , Martha Nussbaum Other advisors Hilary Putnam , Amélie Rorty Influences Immanuel Kant , John Rawls , Anscombe , Aristotle Academic work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School or tradition Analytic Main interests Moral philosophy · Kantianism Influenced Austin Dacey , Derek Parfit , Sharon Street Christine Marion Korsgaard , FBA ( / ˈ k ɔːr z ɡ ɑː r d / ; born April 9, 1952) is an American philosopher who is the Arthur Kingsley Porter Professor of Philosophy Emerita at Harvard University . Her main scholarly interests are in moral philosophy and its history; the relation of issues in moral philosophy to issues in metaphysics , the philosophy of mind , and the theory of personal identity ; the theory of personal relationships ; and in normativity in general.

Education and career [ edit ] Korsgaard first attended Eastern Illinois University for two years and transferred to receive a B.A.

from the University of Illinois and a Ph.D from Harvard, where she was a student of John Rawls . She was awarded an honorary LHD Doctor of Humane Letters from the University of Illinois in 2004.

[ 1 ] She is a 1970 alumna of Homewood-Flossmoor High School in Flossmoor, Ill.

Korsgaard in 2019 She has taught at Yale , the University of California at Santa Barbara , and the University of Chicago ; since 1991 she has been a professor at Harvard University, where she was Arthur Kingsley Porter Professor of Philosophy, and is now emerita.

[ 2 ] In 1996, Korsgaard published a book entitled The Sources of Normativity , which was the revised version of her Tanner Lectures on Human Values , and also a collection of her past papers on Kant 's moral philosophy and Kantian approaches to contemporary moral philosophy: Creating the Kingdom of Ends . In 2002, she was the first woman to give the John Locke Lectures at the University of Oxford , [ 3 ] which turned into her 2009 book Self-Constitution: Agency, Identity, and Integrity .

She was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences in 2001 [ 4 ] and a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy in 2015.

[ 5 ] She served as President of the Eastern Division of the American Philosophical Association in 2008–2009, and held a Mellon Distinguished Achievement Award from 2006–2009.

[ 6 ] Animal rights [ edit ] Korsgaard is an advocate of animal rights . She was a vegetarian for over 40 years and is now a vegan .

[ 7 ] In 2018, Korsgaard authored Fellow Creatures: Our Obligations to Other Animals which argues that Kantian ethics supports animal rights.

[ 8 ] She has also given several lectures about animal rights, including the 2014 Uehiro Lectures on The Moral and Legal Standing of Animals.

[ 9 ] In these lectures, Korsgaard argues that importance is tethered to a creature who finds it important. While according to this view there is no "free-floating" untethered importance, there is absolute importance, which occurs when something is important to all beings. Therefore, to Korsgaard, the statement that animals are universally less important than humans is not incorrect, but incoherent. She distinguishes between the evaluative or functional good , where something is good because it is able to perform its function well, and the final good, where an end or a life is good. Final goods are what make things important, and a thing possesses the final good if things can be good or bad for that thing. She also distinguishes between ordinary objects such as knives, for which being sharpened is good in the sense that it helps the knife achieve its function of cutting well, organisms, which have a function to tend to their and their species' own well-functioning, and animals, a particular kind of organism which represent the world to themselves and act using this representation for the function of self-maintenance. This representation enables the animal to have self-maintenance not only as a functional good, but also as a final good. Therefore, final goods need not come from people , but from any animal. Korsgaard defines people as "normative self-governed beings" and says that the rational capacity to evaluate oneself and reflect on one's motives makes people different from animals. This means that while non-person animals are not responsible for their actions and do not have duties to other animals, people are and do. Further, she distinguishes between two different kinds of ends-in-of-themselves: Something is an end-in-of-itself in the active sense if it is capable of legislating ends that one must respect.

Something is an end-in-of-itself in the passive sense if things that are good for it are good absolutely.

Clearly the active sense implies the passive sense, but Korsgaard departs from Kant in claiming that the converse fails. In fact, the choice to set a value on an end is made merely because one desires the end, because it is good with respect to the being making the choice; in other words, because it is a being with the final good. Therefore, when universalized using the formula of universal law , the being is committed to valuing the ends of all beings with the final good (animals). In other words, all animals are passive ends-in-of-themselves, but non-person are not active ends-in-of-themselves.

Selected publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] (2018) Fellow Creatures : Our obligations to other animals , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0198753858 .

(2009) Self-Constitution : Agency, Identity, and Integrity , Oxford University Press.

(2008) The Constitution of Agency , Oxford University Press.

(1996a) The Sources of Normativity , New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-55059-9 .

(1996b) Creating the Kingdom of Ends , New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-49644-6 .

Articles [ edit ] (1986) "Skepticism about Practical Reason," The Journal of Philosophy 83 (1): 5-25.  (Reprinted in as ch.11 in Korsgaard (1996b), pp. 311–334.) (1997) "The Normativity of Instrumental Reason," ch. 8 in Garrett Cullity & Berys Gaut (eds.) Ethics and Practical Reason , Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 215–54.  (Reprinted with Afterword in Korsgaard (2008), pp. 27–69.) See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers List of animal rights advocates Notes [ edit ] ^ "Honors and Awards | Commencement at Illinois" . Archived from the original on 2019-01-05 . Retrieved 2015-06-04 .

^ "Faculty" .

^ "Past Lectures - Faculty of Philosophy" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-20 . Retrieved 2014-12-19 .

^ "Harvard Gazette: American Academy of Arts and Sciences announces fellows" .

news.harvard.edu . Archived from the original on 2002-01-09.

^ "British Academy | Elections to the Fellowship - British Academy" . Archived from the original on 2015-07-21 . Retrieved 2015-07-19 .

^ "Index" .

www.people.fas.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2018-05-16 .

^ "Book presents the case that animals are just as important as people" .

Phys.org . Retrieved October 8, 2020.

^ Nobis, Nathan (2019).

"Review: Fellow Creatures: Our Obligations to Other Animals" .

The Philosophers' Magazine .

87 : 113– 114.

doi : 10.5840/tpm201987100 .

S2CID 213858580 .

^ Korsgaard, Christine (2014).

2014 Uehiro Lectures: The Moral and Legal Standing of Animals (Speech). Oxford University.

External links [ edit ] Christine Korsgaard publications indexed by Google Scholar Korsgaard's Web Page - at Harvard University.

Interview with 3AM Magazine v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christine_Korsgaard&oldid=1301644569 " Categories : Living people 1952 births 21st-century American women American animal rights scholars American women philosophers Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty Harvard University alumni Homewood-Flossmoor High School alumni Kantian philosophers 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers American people of Danish descent American ethicists American philosophers of mind University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign alumni Corresponding fellows of the British Academy Presidents of the American Philosophical Association Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox academic with unknown parameters Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 00:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christine Korsgaard 17 languages Add topic

