Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Benefits Toggle Benefits subsection 2.1 Energy savings 2.2 Water savings 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Water recycling shower Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Showers that use a basin and a pump to re-use the showering water Water recycling showers (also known as recycle showers , circulation showers or re-circulation showers ) are showers that use a basin and a pump to re-use the water during a shower session. The technology is used to reduce the use of drinking water and primary energy consumption for water heating . By lowering the (household) hot water demand, water recycling showers also allow for smaller heating appliances, like boilers , solar water heating systems and other HVAC solutions.

History [ edit ] The first recycling shower, operated by a hand pump , was patented in England in 1767 by the stove maker William Feetham.

[ 1 ] This recycling shower used the pump to push the water into a basin above the user's head. To receive the water, the user pulled a chain to release the water from the basin. Like this, the invention would recycle the same dirty water during the entire session. It also gradually lost temperature.

It was not until 200 years later, in 1979, that Billy G. Bloys invented a motorized version of the same concept, discarding the hand pump.

[ 2 ] Using no filtration or a means of re-heating the water, the contraption likened the original invention by Feetham but did not improve on it beyond the electronic pump and some fixtures. It was never commercialized. In 1988, Francis R. Keeler patented a similar but smaller and more mobile version of the recycling shower for usage in motor homes, boats and airplanes.

[ 3 ] In 2011, Nick Christy of Australia won the Postcode Lottery Green Challenge, an annual competition for sustainable ideas [ 4 ] for his version of the water recycling shower. The shower aimed to collect, filter, pasteurize and then dilute the water with fresh tap water to cool it again to the set temperature. Citing cultural problems and lack of traction in his native Australia, Christy aimed for the UK market.

[ 5 ] They are yet to collect certification standards.

In 2013, the Swedish company Orbital Systems introduces their first shower, the launching company being a spinoff from a NASA internship.

[ 6 ] It comprises a closed-loop system where the water is purified using a replaceable filter. These filter out particulate matter and microbes from drain water before sending the water back through the head.

[ 7 ] After the capsules have been depleted, they have to be replaced at cost.

Orbital Systems has had several high-profile investors, including Skype and Kazaa co-founder Niklas Zennström and Karl-Johan Persson , CEO of the fashion company H&M .

[ 8 ] In 2015, the Dutch company Hamwells introduced the e-Shower at the TechCrunch Disrupt conference in London.

[ 9 ] Citing hygiene issues in earlier solutions, Hamwells opted for a solution with a semi-closed loop where the water is used several times instead of the entire session.

[ 10 ] External hot water is used to maintain temperature, with incoming hot water replacing the used water within the loop. In addition to replacement, water within the loop is filtered and purified with UV light .

[ 11 ] For users unable or unwilling to use the recycling mode, the e-Shower offers a classic shower where all the water is drained.

[ 12 ] Being a computer , the e-Shower is able to self-clean, regulate shower times between users and offer the user music streaming and remote control through mobile apps.

[ 13 ] Benefits [ edit ] Water recycling showers have been explored by people who wish to conserve water and the energy needed to heat the water, for both environmental and economic reasons.

Energy savings [ edit ] According to the U.S. Department of Energy , water heating is typically the second-largest energy expense in homes (after space heating).

[ 14 ] Mostly destined for the shower, it accounts for roughly 17% of total household energy consumption.

[ 15 ] Energy efficiency was the main driver behind the federal regulation, mandating the top flow of a shower head to be restricted to 2.5 gallons per minute.

[ 16 ] Manufacturers of recycling showers typically claim a 70% to 90% reduction in shower energy consumption.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Water savings [ edit ] Nearly 1.2  trillion gallons of water is used in the United States annually just for showering.

[ 21 ] This is enough to supply the water needs of New York and New Jersey for a  year.

[ 21 ] Manufacturers of recycling showers typically claim an 80% to 90% reduction in shower water consumption.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Also, before the shower reaches the set temperature, users leave the tap running. Typically 20 percent of every shower session is essentially lost this way.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Water heat recycling – Use of a heat exchanger to recover energy and reuse heat from drain water References [ edit ] ^ "A 19th Century Regency Era Shower" .

Jane Austen's World . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Bloys, Billy (5 September 1979).

"Water conservation shower" .

Google Patents . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Keeler, Francis.

"Water-recycling shower" .

Google Patents . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "Green Challenge" .

Postcode Lottery Green Challenge . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Dow, Catherine (30 May 2014).

"Shower that recycles water eyes UK with target saving of a billion litres" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Blendis, Stefanie (11 November 2013).

"Futuristic water-recycling shower cuts bills by over $1,000" .

CNN . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Kanellos, Michael (12 October 2015).

"The Tesla Of Showers" .

Forbes . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "Swedish water-saving company Orbital Systems gets EU backing" .

Reuters . 2018-11-26 . Retrieved 2019-05-21 .

^ Biggs, John (7 December 2015).

"Hamwells e-Shower Connects Your Shower To The Internet Of Things (And Bathing)" .

TechCrunch . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Cooper, Daniel (7 December 2015).

"The shower of the future will save the planet, but at a high price" .

Engadget . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Kraft, Amy (7 December 2017).

"Do you need a "smart" shower?" .

CBS News . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "20 of the world's hottest start-ups of 2015" .

CNBC . 19 November 2015 . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ McGrath, Jenny (3 October 2016).

"This $3,000 shower recycles water, achieving a 90-percent reduction in amount used" .

Digital Trends . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "Tips on Saving Money & Energy at Home" (PDF) .

US Department of Energy . September 2014 . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "#AskEnergySaver: Home Water Heating" .

U.S. Department of Energy . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "Appliance and Equipment Standards Rulemakings and Notices" .

U.S. Department of Energy . 1992 . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ a b "Hamwells" .

Hamwells e-Shower . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ a b "Cintep" .

Cintep . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ a b "Orbital Systems" .

Orbital Systems . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ a b "Shower Loop" .

Shower Loop . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ a b "WaterSense Labeled Showerheads" .

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . Archived from the original on April 2, 2010 . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Mooney, Chris (4 March 2017).

"Your shower is wasting huge amounts of energy and water. Here's what you can do about it" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

v t e Plumbing Fundamental concepts Air gap (plumbing) Backflow Compatibility (chemical) Corrosion Drain (plumbing) Drinking water Fuel gas Friction loss Grade (slope) Greywater Heat trap Hydrostatic loop Leak Neutral axis Onsite sewage facility Pressure Sanitary sewer Sewer gas Sewage Sewerage Siphon Storm sewer Stormwater Surface tension Tap water Thermal expansion Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Trap (plumbing) Venturi effect Wastewater Water hammer Water supply network Water table Well Technology Brazing British Standard Pipe (BSP) Cast iron pipe Chemical drain cleaners Compression fitting Copper tubing Crimp (joining) Drain-waste-vent system Ductile iron pipe Flare fitting Garden Hose Thread (GHT) Gasket Hydronics Leak detection National pipe thread (NPT) Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) O-ring Oakum Pipe (fluid conveyance) Pipe dope Pipe support Plastic pipework Push-to-pull compression fittings Putty Sealant Sewage pumping Soldering Solvent welding Swaging Thread seal tape Threaded pipe Tube bending Water heat recycling Components Atmospheric vacuum breaker Automatic bleeding valve Automatic faucet Backflow prevention device Ball valve Bleed screw Booster pump Butterfly valve Check valve Chemigation valve Chopper pump Circulator pump Cistern Closet flange Concentric reducer Condensate pump Coupling (piping) Diaphragm valve Dielectric union Double check valve Eccentric reducer Expansion tank Faucet aerator Float switch Float valve Floor drain Flow limiter Flushing trough Flushometer Gate valve Globe valve Grease trap Grinder pump Hose coupling Manifold Needle valve Nipple (plumbing) Pinch valve Piping and plumbing fitting Plug (sanitation) Pressure regulator Pressure vacuum breaker Pressure-balanced valve Pump Radiator (heating) Reduced pressure zone device Reducer Relief valve Riser clamp Rooftop water tower Safety valve sewage pumping Street elbow Submersible pump Tap (valve) Thermostatic mixing valve Trench drain Vacuum breaker Vacuum ejector Valve Water tank Zone valve Plumbing fixtures Accessible bathtub Bathtub Bidet Dehumidifier Dishwasher Drinking fountain Electric water boiler Evaporative cooler Flush toilet Garbage disposal unit Hot water storage tank Humidifier Icemaker Instant hot water dispenser Laundry tub Shower water recycling shower Sink Storage water heater Sump pump Tankless water heating Urinal Washing machine Washlet Water dispenser Water filter Water heating Water softening Specialized tools Basin wrench Blowtorch Borescope Core drill Drain cleaner Driving cap Flare-nut wrench Pipecutter Pipe wrench Plumber's snake Plumber wrench Plunger Strap wrench Tap and die Measurement and control Control valve Flow sensor Pressure sensor Water detector Water metering Professions, trades, and services Hydronic balancing Hydrostatic testing Leak detection Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Pipe marking Pipefitter Pipelayer Plumber Industry organizations and standards International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) NSF International Plumbing & Drainage Institute (PDI) Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) World Plumbing Council (WPC) Health and safety Plumbing code Scalding Waterborne disease See also Fire sprinkler system Piping Template:HVAC Template:Public health Template:Sewerage Template:Human waste elimination Template:Wastewater v t e Recycling Materials Aluminium Asphalt Concrete Copper Cotton Energy Glass Gypsum Paper Plastic Refrigerant Scrap Timber Cooking oil Water Products Appliances Automotive oil Batteries Bottles PET bottles Computers Drugs Fluorescent lamps Lumber Mobile phones Paint Ships Textiles Tires Vehicles Apparatus Bins Blue bags Blue boxes Codes Collection Materials recovery facility Waste sorting Countries Rate by country Australia Brazil Canada Ireland Israel Japan Malaysia Mongolia The Netherlands Switzerland Taiwan United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States Concepts Circular economy Dematerialization Downcycling Durable good Eco-industrial park Ecological design Extended producer responsibility Green economy Industrial ecology Industrial metabolism Interchangeable parts Land recycling Material flow analysis Precycling Product stewardship Recycling (ecological) Refill (campaign) Repairability Resource recovery Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Reuse of human excreta Repurposing Reuse Right to repair Symbol ( Green Dot ) Upcycling Urban lumberjacking Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste picking Wishcycling Zero waste See also Bottle cutting Cogeneration Composting Container-deposit legislation Dumpster diving Ethical consumerism Freeganism Pallet crafts Reverse vending machine Simple living Waste Waste-to-energy Waste collection Waste management law Waste management Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Environment portal Category by country by material by product organizations Index Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Water_recycling_shower&oldid=1299013793 " Categories : Water conservation tools Bathing Hygiene Plumbing Recycling Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 02:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Water recycling shower Add languages Add topic

