Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Benefits Toggle Benefits subsection 2.1 Flexibility 2.2 Accessibility 2.3 Low profile 2.4 Safety 2.5 Comfort 2.6 Redundancy of gas 2.7 Convenience 3 Problems 4 Sidemount for the recreational diver 5 History Toggle History subsection 5.1 The 1960s – UK sump diving 5.2 The 1970s – Florida 5.3 The 1990s – release of first commercial rig 5.4 The 2000s – cave diving popularity and sidemount evolution 6 Distinctive schools of design Toggle Distinctive schools of design subsection 6.1 British / Mexico Cave 6.2 American / Florida Cave 7 Configurations Toggle Configurations subsection 7.1 Carrying capacity 7.2 Backplate and wing harness adaptation 7.3 Specialized and hybrid harnesses 7.4 Minimalist webbing harness 7.4.1 Belt style 'Sump' harness 8 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 8.1 Harness 8.2 Cylinders 8.3 Rebreather sets 8.4 Bungees 8.5 Sidemount Buoyancy Bladders 8.6 Sidemount Accessories 9 Training Toggle Training subsection 9.1 Level 1 9.2 Level 2 9.3 Level 3 10 Procedures Toggle Procedures subsection 10.1 Gas management 10.1.1 Rule of thirds and gas reserves 10.2 Skills 10.3 Compatibility in mixed configuration team diving 11 References 12 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sidemount diving 4 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Diving using equipment configuration where scuba sets are clipped to the diver's sides For the grappling position, see Sidecontrol .

For sidemounted rebreathers, see below and also Diving rebreather#Side-mounted rebreathers .

Sidemount diver pushing a cylinder in front Sidemount is a scuba diving equipment configuration which has scuba sets mounted alongside the diver, below the shoulders and along the hips, instead of on the back of the diver. It originated as a configuration for advanced cave diving , as it facilitates penetration of tight sections of cave, allows easy access to cylinder valves, provides easy and reliable gas redundancy, and tanks can be easily removed when necessary. These benefits for operating in confined spaces were also recognized by divers who conducted technical wreck diving penetrations.

Sidemount diving is now growing in popularity within the technical diving community for general decompression diving , [ 1 ] and is becoming an increasingly popular specialty training for recreational diving , with several diver certification agencies offering recreational and technical level sidemount training programs.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Terminology [ edit ] Sidemount diver using an OMS Profile adapted wing BCD Sidemount diving Sidemount diving is the practice of diving with two or more cylinders secured at the sides of the body in line with the torso and without cylinders on the diver's back.

[ 5 ] A common characteristic of the sidemount configuration is the use of bungee cords hooked over the cylinder valve to keep it tucked in close to the armpit. These bungees are normally routed from behind the diver's upper back to a chest D-ring. The lower part of the cylinder is secured to the diver's harness near the waist or hips by bolt snaps clipped to a butt-plate or waistband D-rings.

[ 6 ] Sidemounting stages Sidemount stages is the practice of using sidemount configuration (bungee loops and/or buttplate rails) as a means for stowing stage/deco cylinders in a streamlined manner against the sides of the torso, when otherwise diving in back-mounted doubles or CCR.

[ 7 ] Monkey diving Monkey diving is the use of sidemount configuration and procedures with a single cylinder. It is presented as an option on some recreational level sidemount courses (dependent on agency) and may also be a considered strategy for some overhead-environment (cave/wreck) penetrations. The use of a single cylinder may require counter-weighting to prevent lateral instability in the water, depending on the buoyancy of the chosen cylinder, and does not provide a redundant gas supply.

[ 8 ] No-mount diving No-mount diving is a specialized overhead-environment strategy for dealing with particularly tight restrictions.

[ 9 ] This may involve divers wearing a very basic harness under their existing configuration, or simply hand-carrying cylinders. Upon reaching a restriction through which they could not otherwise pass, they will 'strip down' out of their primary gear, hand-hold or attach a cylinder/s to their 'no-mount' harness and move forwards.

[ 9 ] A 'no-mount' harness can consist of nothing more than a weight-belt with several D-rings attached. The evolution of sidemount techniques and configurations has largely made this approach unnecessary, as a minimalist sidemount harness/BCD can be worn beneath back-mounted doubles, or even a CCR.

[ 8 ] Benefits [ edit ] Sidemount diver partially removes (forward rotates) both primary cylinders to permit passage through a restriction in a wreck.

Flexibility [ edit ] Sidemount diving offers some benefits in the flexibility of equipment. Cylinders suitable for sidemount diving are usually freely available for rental, unlike manifolded twin sets for back-mounted use, which allows the traveller to conduct technical or overhead environment dives without having to source twin cylinder sets. When diving in remote locations, the transportation of single diving cylinders, especially by hand, may be less physically taxing.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Sidemount harness can be lighter and less bulky than back-mounted alternatives – allowing for easier and cheaper air travel.

[ 12 ] Accessibility [ edit ] Unlike back-mounted cylinders, the sidemount diver has immediate access to, and can see, the regulators and tank valves of their cylinders. This enables quicker and more certain problem identification and resolution, without requiring 'behind the head' shut-down drills that require a higher level of joint and suit flexibility and the ability to identify and correctly operate equipment which is out of sight.

[ 12 ] Low profile [ edit ] Sidemount diving configuration places the cylinders under the diver's armpits, in line with their body, allowing the diver to pass through smaller restrictions than would be possible with back-mounted cylinders. The ability to remove tanks and push them in front allows the diver to pass through very small passages and holes when penetration diving – being limited only by the bulk of their bodies and diving suits.

[ 13 ] Streamlining for reduced drag while swimming is not always achieved.

[ 12 ] Safety [ edit ] Increased accessibility to regulator first-stages and cylinder valves improves efficiency and speed of critical cylinder shut-down procedures, allows immediate gas-loss identification and provides the diver with quick access to alternative contingency procedures, such as swapping regulators between cylinders, manual operation of a cylinder valve to control gas flow through a regulator which is free-flowing, or to allow breathing directly from the tank valve.

[ 14 ] Mounting the cylinders at the diver's sides reduces exposure of valves and regulator first-stages to impact and abrasion damage, or accidental shut-down through roll-off against a ceiling. It also significantly reduces the risk of entanglement behind the diver, where it is most difficult to rectify.

[ 14 ] Comfort [ edit ] Some divers will testify that sidemount diving configuration offers greater stability and easier-to-attain trim and control in the water. It is also claimed to be less physically tiring to carry, and get into, sidemount equipment than back-mounted doubles – especially when operating from a small boat or a rough shore entry.

[ 15 ] The ability to attach, remove and replace cylinders while in the water allows the diver to avoid carrying twinned cylinders. The reduced physical exertion when conducting regulator shut-down procedures is a major benefit to divers who suffer from shoulder or back discomfort or reduced mobility.

[ 12 ] Redundancy of gas [ edit ] Technical divers have generally used a redundant gas supply system, either isolation-manifolded or independent back-mounted cylinders. Recreational divers have traditionally resorted to using buddy supplied gas, or relatively small bailout 'pony cylinders' or 'ascent bottles' for out-of-air emergencies. Whether attached to the primary cylinder, or slung at the chest, these cylinders often present problems with stability and streamlining, whilst not always providing more than a bare minimum supply of air for emergency ascent. Sidemount diving with two equal-sized cylinders helps resolve stability and streamlining issues, and can ensure that an adequate redundant reserve of air is maintained, similar to back-mounted twins.

[ 12 ] Back-mounted manifolded cylinders provide easy access to the whole gas supply in the event of a regulator failure and shut-down. However, the manifold itself creates additional potential o-ring failure points, and a major leak at the manifold will deprive the diver of at least one-half of the remaining gas supply. Independent cylinders, when sidemounted, provide more reliable gas redundancy, and allow greater access to all remaining gas by switching regulators between cylinders or feather breathing, provided the diver is competent at the additional skills required.

[ 16 ] ) Convenience [ edit ] Sidemount does not require complicated hardware. It can be done using the most commonly available rental cylinders (Al 80s), needing only simple rigging. If the diver is also renting the regulators, they can usually be reconfigured for the purpose with a simple wrench and one or two low pressure port plugs. The harness and buoyancy compensator can be light and compact for travel.

[ 14 ] Problems [ edit ] Sidemount diving can increase the task loading on the diver, and can cause more drag when swimming, depending on which alternative configuration is compared. The diver's head may be more vulnerable to impact with the overhead, due to lack of the back gas set.

[ 12 ] This may be mitigated by the use of a helmet.

[ citation needed ] Sidemount for the recreational diver [ edit ] Sidemount diver removes a cylinder on ascent.

The benefits for cave diving and wreck diving with tight penetrations are largely accepted, but they are not so obvious for the typical recreational diver.
Most recreational divers rely on their buddy for bailout gas, and do not carry a redundant gas supply. The position of the cylinder valve behind the head has proven to be reasonably safe in millions of dives, though some divers do have physical difficulty reaching the valve while wearing the set, particularly if the cylinder is mounted relatively low on the harness. Though sidemount divers may benefit from being easily able to see and manipulate valves, first stages or cylinders, this is rarely required in recreational use. In single cylinder diving there is seldom a reason to shut a cylinder valve while diving, and there is no need for changing cylinders or managing different gases. The recreational diver with a single cylinder is not supposed to enter low overhead spaces, so the single valve behind the diver's head is unlikely to come into contact with objects which might roll it closed.

[ citation needed ] Divers with back problems often benefit from sidemounting, since the weight is transferred from the spine to the hips and shoulders and the back is kept less rigid. Furthermore, sidemount divers benefit from an increased gas supply, potentially allowing longer dives. Tucking the cylinders under the arms reduces water resistance, potentially increasing kick efficiency.

[ citation needed ] Sidemount divers using two cylinders will generally benefit from improved stability and balance due to the lowered center of gravity relative to backmount divers and improved trim due to the more adjustable designs of common sidemount harnesses. When using a single cylinder in sidemount some of that benefit is negated since balance is off, though with an aluminium cylinder and proper body tension single cylinder sidemount diving is easier and more comfortable than many divers expect.

[ citation needed ] Transportation on the surface can be easier either with backmount or with sidemount, depending on requirements. Carrying weight on the back is less stressful on the spine than carrying it to one side when out of the water, so for carrying a single cylinder, a backpack-style backmount BCD can be more comfortable. A heavy twinset can be unwieldy and heavy on the back though. In the case of sidemount, the two cylinders can be carried separately, distributing load and making transport on rough ground easier.

[ citation needed ] Sidemount divers generally have more options available for donning and doffing than backmount divers, since they can choose to don or doff their single or double cylinders either on the surface or while in the water, depending on preference and conditions. Individual cylinders can be passed to and from a boat crew or a buddy on shore who is not burdened by gear, or lowered and raised by a line. In rougher conditions, cylinders can be prepared for hand-off below the surface and quickly passed to boat crew or attached to a line for later retrieval.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The 1960s – UK sump diving [ edit ] The concept of sidemounting cylinders originated from cave diving in the UK, during the 1960s. During 'dry' explorations of Wookey Hole, the River Axe and other underground systems, divers occasionally encountered submerged passages that blocked further exploration. These cavers began incorporating scuba equipment specifically to progress beyond underwater areas. However, because they operated in very confined spaces, and most exploration remained primarily 'dry', they began experimenting and improvising with extremely minimalist configurations, minimising bulk, allowing cylinders to be easily removed and replaced, and retaining the capacity to squeeze through the tightest restrictions.

[ 11 ] [ 17 ] The nature of these 'dives' in cramped sumps did not prioritize the need for buoyancy control or underwater propulsion – so the bare minimum needed was a mask, a cylinder, a regulator, a method of attachment to the body and, only on rare occasions, a set of fins.

[ 9 ] Many of these early sump explorers adopted an approach based upon a sturdy belt, with attached cam-band, that allowed a cylinder to be dropped in and carried alongside the outer thigh. This allowed them to crawl, or wriggle, through the dry cave sections, whilst presenting a secure method of attachment for passing through submerged areas.

[ 9 ] Swimming efficiency, reduced water resistance, trim and buoyancy control were not generally required due to the nature of those caves. At the time, this approach to 'wet' cave exploration was generally called the 'English System'.

[ 18 ] The 1970s – Florida [ edit ] During the 1970s the 'English system' began to be incorporated by American cave divers, operating in Florida.

[ 9 ] Those cave systems were predominantly flooded and involved prolonged swimming with SCUBA; thus more emphasis was paid towards developing the diving performance of the system, in particular buoyancy and trim. Divers required buoyancy control devices for extended finning and began shifting the location of the cylinders from against the thigh, up to the armpit and against the torso.

[ citation needed ] These exploratory level cave divers began by making their own systems, using and adapting 'off-the-shelf' SCUBA equipment for their needs or creating configurations 'from scratch', based upon webbing harnesses and improvised bladders for buoyancy.

[ citation needed ] The 1990s – release of first commercial rig [ edit ] In the mid-1990s Lamar Hires designed the first commercial sidemount diving system and this was manufactured by Dive Rite. Dive Rite focused on the newly released 'Transpac' harness.

[ 19 ] Other cave divers continued to manufacture their own DIY configurations.

At this time, the use of sidemounted configuration was primarily restricted to a small number of exploration-grade cave pioneers.

[ citation needed ] The 2000s – cave diving popularity and sidemount evolution [ edit ] In 2001 Brett Hemphill designed the Armadillo Side-Mount Harness. The Armadillo innovated several features that would be utilized in many future side-mount harness designs ; Butt anchoring rear attachment pad, Cylinder bungee attachment located under the wing, cylinder bungee location straps for quick location of bungees and primary BCD inflation located at the bottom of the harness instead of the top.

[ 20 ] Widespread popularity of sidemount diving systems did not truly emerge until the mid-2010s, when the growing popularity of technical and cave diving became exposed to sidemount proponents on the internet who were offering an alternative approach that matched the minimalism and functionality of the popular 'DIR/Hogarthian' back-mounted systems, whilst offering advantages in flexibility, comfort, accessibility and – highly debated online – safety.

[ 21 ] The increasing interest in sidemount diving configurations prompted several manufacturers and individuals to design and sell their own designs of a sidemount system. Hollis, OMS, UTD developed equipment, while Steve Bogaerts (a UK-born cave pioneer, who lives and dives in Mexico) released the popular minimalist 'Razor' system and began teaching a specific model training program for his rig.

[ citation needed ] At this time, several technical scuba agencies developed formal sidemount training programs and incorporated sidemount diving configuration as an equipment option within existing technical diving programs.

[ citation needed ] When PADI instructor, Jeff Loflin, [ 22 ] developed a sidemount diving speciality course, it proved extremely popular, and was replicated by many PADI technical-level instructors.

[ citation needed ] This led to PADI offering standardised sidemount diving programs at both recreational and technical levels, making sidemount a viable and mainstream option for both recreational and technical divers.  Other agencies, such as ANDI , IANTD , SSI , TDI , UTD and ISE (Innerspace Explorers) also provide sidemount training at varied levels.

[ citation needed ] Distinctive schools of design [ edit ] British / Mexico Cave [ edit ] A typically minimalist and lightweight approach, generally used with aluminum cylinders.  Most popular with warm-water/wetsuit and travelling divers. Most often seen in Mexican cave systems. This is the evolution from sidemount pioneers who initially used lightweight hydration bladders (i.e. MSR) for their buoyancy requirements, with a basic harness for cylinder and weight attachment.

[ 23 ] Harness A 'hogarthian' inspired, bare webbing harness, using separate shoulder and lumbar plates.

[ citation needed ] Lower cylinder attachment D-rings on the rear waist-belt, [ citation needed ] Upper cylinder attachment Continuous and loop bungees, [ citation needed ] Wing shape Triangle, diamond or box bladders (lift focused over the hips, less up the torso) [ citation needed ] Example rigs Apeks WSX, Razor 2.0, Scubarrow, XDeep Stealth, UTD Z-Trim, Aquamundo, Diamond, Hollis Katana [ citation needed ] Influential proponents Steve Bogaerts, Steve Martin, Garry Dallas [ citation needed ] American / Florida Cave [ edit ] These are the robust 'big rigs', generally used with steel cylinders.  Most popular with cold-water sidemount divers in the US and Europe. Most often seen in Florida cave systems. This is the evolution from sidemount pioneers who initially used home-converted BCDs/wing systems, typically in response to a higher buoyancy requirement from using steel cylinders/higher weighting needed for colder water exposure protection.

[ citation needed ] Harness Typically an in-built harness to the BCD, with quick-release buckles and adjustments.

[ citation needed ] Lower cylinder attachment Butt-plate with rails [ citation needed ] Upper cylinder attachment 'Old-school', [ clarification needed ] independent and ring bungees, [ citation needed ] Wing shape Donut and horseshoe bladders (lift distributed evenly up the torso) [ citation needed ] Example rigs Armadillo, DiveRite Nomad, Hollis SMS100, Hollis SMS75, Halcyon Contour [ citation needed ] Influential proponents Lamar Hires, Woody Jasper, Mark Long, Wes Skiles , Edd Sorenson [ citation needed ] Configurations [ edit ] Various harness/BCD configurations have been used to sidemount cylinders. The choice between different configuration approaches is typically determined by the nature of the diving undertaken (open water, technical, wreck or cave) and by the divers' existing equipment, financial budget and whether they have a preferred diving philosophy (minimalist, DIR, Hogarthian, etc.).  The size, material, and volume of diving cylinders to be used also has a large impact on sidemount BCD requirements.

[ 9 ] [ 24 ] Carrying capacity [ edit ] A suitably skilled sidemount diver may be able to comfortably handle a total of 6 aluminium 80 cylinders, 3 mounted on each side.

[ 25 ] Backplate and wing harness adaptation [ edit ] Rigid Hogarthian style backplate and wing BCD systems may be modified by adding butt-plates, bungee cords and optional special sidemount buoyancy compensators. Cylinders are supported at the valve end by bungee loops that run from the backplate to the front chest D-rings. The lower cylinder clip attaches to D-rings mounted on the waist belt or 'rails' on a butt plate.

Sidemount divers who conduct penetration diving in tight environments will generally prefer a flexible fabric backplate, [ 26 ] or webbing harness only, which is considered less likely to get stuck in a small restriction than a rigid backplate.

An example of a commercial backplate and wing harness adapter, including integrated butt plate and attachment points for bungee loops, is the OMS Profile.

[ 27 ] Specialized and hybrid harnesses [ edit ] Tech sidemount with two 12l steel cylinders for main gas supply and two aluminium 80s for decompression gas Specialized sidemount harnesses are available 'off-the-shelf' commercially.

[ 28 ] Some of these are designed specifically for sidemounting only, but others are 'hybrid' designs, enabling the diver to swap between sidemount and back-mounted cylinders, as needed.

[ 9 ] Examples of dedicated sidemount rigs: Apeks WSX25 and WSX45 Hollis SMS50 [ 29 ] Razor 2 [ 30 ] DiveRite Nomad LT [ 31 ] XDeep Stealth 2.0 [ 32 ] Golem Gear A2 and S [ 6 ] UTD 'Z-system' [ 33 ] Examples of hybrid sidemount rigs: Hollis SMS100 or SMS75 [ 34 ] OMS Tesseract [ 35 ] DiveRite Nomad XT or EXP Custom Divers Rhino [ 36 ] White Arrow S-Wing [ 37 ] Some manufacturers now provide sidemount rigs targeted for recreational diving use. These are typically variants of existing dedicated sidemount rigs, with the low pressure inflator (LPI) mounted at the top of the BCD (rather than at the bottom corner) for an 'over the shoulder' configuration more familiar to diver's transitioning to sidemount from a traditional BCD.

Examples of dedicated recreational sidemount rigs: Hollis SMS50 'Sport' [ 38 ] DiveRite Nomad LT 'Blue Water' [ 39 ] Hybrid (sidemount/backmount) harness. Front view Hybrid (sidemount/backmount) harness. Back view Adapted Wing sidemount BCD (32 lb donut wing/OMS Profile) with soft backplate (Oxycheq Travel-Lite).

Adapted Wing Sidemount BCD (rear view) with OMS Profile sidemount-adapter in on a 32 lb single-tank donut wing.

View of Apeks sidemount harness from the back of the harness showing the buoyancy compensator.

Inside view of Apeks sidemount harness showing weight pocket, the harness webbing and buoyancy compensator.

Minimalist webbing harness [ edit ] Minimalist sidemount harness showing webbing, sliders and D-rings, buoyancy compensator, integrated weight holders and cylinder A webbing harness with shoulder straps, waist belt and crotch strap, supporting a variety of sliders and D-rings for attachment of cylinders and accessories, with or without integrated weighting or separate weight belts, and with or without a back-mounted buoyancy compensator, which may be attached to the harness, or directly to the diver. Cylinders are usually attached to a shoulder or chest D-ring and waist belt D-ring on each side. Additional accessories may include canister lights and clip-on pockets for small equipment. This style of harness may be off the shelf from an original equipment manufacturer or retailer, [ 40 ] or home made, as most of the parts are freely available or relatively simple to make.

Belt style 'Sump' harness [ edit ] In the UK, cave diving was an additional skill learned by cavers to explore flooded parts of a cave system, rather than divers choosing to explore caves. The early equipment was little more than cylinders fitted with belt loops and slid onto the standard caver's belay or battery belt along with any extra weights needed to achieve neutral buoyancy, and a caver's belt mounted battery pack.

[ 41 ] This simple sidemount configuration was particularly low profile and suited to small cylinders, and worked well for low visibility, usually fairly shallow dives, which were often more of a crawl or wriggle though tight confines than a swim.

As penetration distances into caves increased, the basic belt was replaced by a more sturdy harness with shoulder straps and padding on the waist band to distribute the load more comfortably.

A disadvantage of this arrangement is that the cylinders and lead weights must be fitted to the harness before it is put on. This usually required the diver to lie down to fit the harness, and if the cylinders were large, to be assisted to a standing position.

Belt loop on cylinder for sidemounting in the British cave diving style Diving cylinders set up for British cave diving sidemounting The original belt style British sidemount harness, with cylinders, weights and battery canister mounted.

A diver putting on his belt style sidemount harness. Getting up afterwards often required assistance.

A diving cylinder ready for use on a British cave diving sidemount harness.

Back view of the modified British sidemount harness.

Back view of the modified British sidemount harness with cylinders, weights and battery pack.

Front view of the modified British sidemount harness.

Front view of the modified British sidemount harness with cylinders.

British cave diving style sidemounting harness, side view, with cylinders, weights and battery pack British cave diving style sidemounting harness, side view, with cylinders, weights and battery pack Helmet used for British style cave diving.

Simplified British cave diving sidemount harness, front view.

Simplified British cave diving sidemount harness, back view.

Simplified British cave diving sidemount harness, side view.

Equipment [ edit ] Harness [ edit ] The core item of sidemount diving is the sidemount harness, by which the rest of the equipment is supported. There are several styles.

Cylinders [ edit ] Detail showing choker Sidemount cylinder set with regulators fitted Cylinder Cylinders of varying sizes and materials can be used for sidemount diving. The optimum choice of cylinder will be determined by the water conditions and/or choice of exposure protection used.

Regulator set Each primary sidemount cylinder requires a regulator 1st stage, a regulator second stage and a submersible pressure gauge (SPG). The left hand cylinder will also include a low-pressure inflator (LPI) for BCD inflation. If a drysuit is used, the drysuit inflator will be attached to the right hand cylinder. The most common regulator configuration mimicks hogarthian regulator set-up, with a long (5–7 foot) hose on the right cylinder and a short hose on the left cylinder, where the regulator is contained in a bungee necklace.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] However, some sidemount divers prefer an opposite configuration, two long hoses or two short hoses.

Cylinder straps Sidemount cylinders are secured to the diver's butt-plate or rear harness D-rings via a cam-band or worm clamp to which a bolt snap is attached via cord. The placement of the cam-band/worm clamp along the cylinder length is determined by characteristics needed to ensure cylinder trim in line with the diver's torso.  The upper cylinder may be secured directly via the bungee strap, or by using a choker into a ring-bungee configuration.

Choker (#1) A simple loop of sturdy nylon cord (often 440 cord) [ clarification needed ] secured around the cylinder neck. A double-ended bolt snap can be removed and replaced as required, or a single bolt snap can be permanently attached. The purpose is to provide additional cylinder security and stability when conducting water entries with the sidemount cylinders in place.

[ 9 ] It can also be used as an emergency attachment, should the bungee fail.

Choker (#2) A small strap around the neck of a sidemount cylinder used to pull the bolt snap closer to the cylinder neck. Primarily used in conjunction with the DiveRite 'Ring Bungee' mounting method; this has the effect of constraining the top of the cylinder to lie closer to the shoulder of the diver for a lower profile.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] The choker is passed through the jaw of the snap and tightened, then the clip is clipped to the bungee which is clipped to the shoulder D-ring, allowing the clip to slide along the bungee.

Rebreather sets [ edit ] See also: Diving rebreather § Side-mounted rebreathers , and KISS Rebreathers § Sidewinder Liberty sidemount rebreather for low profile cave diving Liberty sidemount rebreather Sidemount allows a low profile to penetrate tight restrictions in cave and wreck diving, and is convenient for carrying a bailout rebreather.  A sidemount rebreather as the main breathing apparatus can be mounted on one side of the diver's body and can be balanced weight-wise and hydrodynamically by a large bailout cylinder sidemounted on the other side. Sidemount rebreathers are sensitive to diver orientation, which can change hydrostatic work of breathing over a larger range than for back mount, and the resisistive work of breathing is also relatively large due to the long breathing hoses and multiple bends necessary to fit the components into a long narrow format. As of 2019, no sidemount rebreather had passed the CE test for work of breathing. Sidemount rebreathers may also be more susceptible to major loop flooding due to lack of a convenient exhalation counterlung position to form a water trap.

[ 46 ] This section needs expansion with: mention KISS Sidewinders. You can help by adding to it .

( December 2024 ) Bungees [ edit ] The use of bungees for upper cylinder attachment and trim is an essential characteristic of sidemount configuration.

[ 17 ] [ clarification needed ] The bungee is attached to the rear upper harness/BCD and routes under the diver's armpits to the front shoulder webbing. Appropriate length and thickness bungees are critical to ensure that the sidemount cylinders remain in trim horizontally alongside the diver's torso with the valves under the armpits. The cylinder/s should neither rise above, or drop below, the diver when they are in flat, horizontal trim position.  The cylinder is secured by wrapping, or routing, the bungees around the cylinder valve handle, stem and/or cylinder neck.  In addition to providing the desired cylinder positioning and trim, the bungees also provide the capacity to secure the cylinder top end to the diver while the cylinders are detached at the bottom and maneuvered into a forward position.

[ citation needed ] Double Independent Bungee This method utilizes two lengths of bungee, typically attached to the rear of the harness/BCD via stainless steel quick-links. They may attach via dedicated D-rings on the diver's BCD or a 'daisy chain' length of looped nylon webbing that permits easy adjustment of bungee length/fit.

[ clarification needed ] Continuous Bungee This is a single length of bungee cord, routed from one shoulder D-ring to the other, via the rear of the diver and under the armpits. It is also a popular method of 'back-up' or reserve bungee, that is carried in the diver's pouch and deployed in case the primary bungee fails during the dive.

[ clarification needed ] Old School Bungee This method uses a double strand of bungee is secured at the rear through a strip of horizontal webbing. The bungees route under the arms and are secured to the shoulder D-rings via bolt snaps.

[ clarification needed ] Loop Bungee An evolution of the old school bungee, the loop bungee is a double strand of bungee that is secured to the rear harness and runs under the armpits. It is secured to the shoulder harness via a fixed, smaller, loop of bungee tied through a triglide retainer.

[ clarification needed ] Floating Loop Bungee (also known as the sliding loop bungee ) This is a derivative of the basic loop bungee, except the smaller loop on the shoulder harness is free-floating. The attachment is typically just a small loop of bungee tied directly around the shoulder harness webbing.

[ clarification needed ] Ring Bungee The 'Ring Bungee' introduces a metal ring along the bungee length (in the armpit area).

[ 9 ] This permits the use of a choker to connect tanks to the ring, making bungee wrapping of the cylinder valve/neck unnecessary. A popular configuration has the bolt snap connected to a ring by a quick link, with a length of bungee from the ring to another quick link which is used to connect the assembly to a D-ring on the back of the harness. The bolt snap is clipped to the shoulder D-ring and the cylinder neck bolt snap is clipped to the ring. The choker is used to minimise the distance the cylinder top can dangle away from the ring bungee.

[ clarification needed ] Sidemount Buoyancy Bladders [ edit ] Sidemount systems provide buoyancy through a wing-style bladder that is located behind the diver.  These bladders are typically designed according to one of two concepts; Triangular, Diamond or Box Shaped Bladders This design of bladder owes its heritage to the early use of MSR hydration bags converted for diving buoyancy. The concept maximizes buoyancy provision over the hip area, with little or no buoyancy held on the upper back. The bladder is normally attached at the top to the shoulder plate or spine webbing; and at the base to the waist-belt webbing.  They are often 'wrap-around' in design and some use lengths of bungee for connection around the divers stomach area and through the crotch. Notable examples are the Razor 2.0, XDeep Stealth, Scubarrow and UTD Z-Trim.

[ citation needed ] The Aquamundo sidemount wing – a triangle design bladder, with design heritage from the British / Mexican Cave school of sidemount Donut or Horseshoe Bladders This design of bladder concept stems from sidemount pioneers who converted jacket-style or wing BCDs for use as homemade sidemount systems. The buoyancy provision runs along the entire back area. These bladders typically provide greater buoyancy capacity than the triangular style designs. Notable examples are the Armadillo, DiveRite Nomad and Hollis SMS100.

[ citation needed ] Sidemount Accessories [ edit ] Most sidemount accessories will be appropriate to the diving environment and task, as is generally the case for scuba diving. None of the items listed below is unique to sidemount diving – they are generally penetration diving accessories used by sidemount divers because sidemount is commonly associated with tight penetration diving.

Cutting devices Sidemount divers, particularly those operating in overhead environments will carry two or more cutting devices. These should be stowed where they can be easily accessed, even when in a tight passage. Popular stowage locations include; a sheath mounted on the harness or lower arm. Redundant/back-up devices may be carried in a pocket.

[ 9 ] Short bladed knives, trauma shears or emergency line cutters are the most popular selections for primary and back-up cutting tools.

Lights Sidemount divers who enter overhead environments will typically carry a primary torch, often of umbilical/canister design, along with one or two back-up torches.  Specific sidemount umbilical/canister torches are now sold, with a 90 degree junction for the umbilical which permits them to be mounted on the butt-plate or upper-rear crotch strap. Back-up torches are typically a robust LED design, with a battery/burn life indicated to be 2-3x that of the planned dive duration.

Reels and spools Sidemount divers will typically carry one or more reels/spools. In open-water these may be used for deployment of delayed surface marker buoys (DSMB).  In overhead environments, these will include a primary guideline and safety/jump spools – in like with cave or technical wreck diving protocols. These are typically attached to the diver on rear D-rings, normally on the butt-plate or rear waist strap, to prevent them dangling below the diver.

Line arrows and markers Sidemount divers in overhead environments will carry a selection of directional (arrows) and non-directional (cookies) line markers. The use of referencing exit markers (REM) is also becoming popular with sidemount divers.

[ 47 ] Helmet Helmets are particularly popular with sidemount divers, as they provide a convenient mounting point for primary and/or back-up lights. The primary function of the helmet remains to provide head protection in overhead environments. Sidemount configuration can mean that the more typical method of mounting back-up lights below the diver's shoulder D-rings becomes less favorable. This area is more heavily loaded with bungee and deco stage attachments, reducing access to back-up lights stowed from the D-ring. Mounting primary lights on the helmet can be advantageous as it frees up the hands in very confined spaces and/or when heavily task-loaded with other equipment. The draw-backs to helmet mounted lights are that it can increase the risk of snagging the helmet on obstructions and an increased potential to inadvertently dazzling dive buddies.

[ 9 ] Sidemount divers may choose to make their own helmet by adapting an existing climbing, kayaking or skate-boarding helmet, or may purchase an off-the-shelf cave/sidemount diving helmet.

Home constructed sidemount helmet with GoPro video camera and back-up/video lights attached.

Sidemount helmet with bungee strap Technical diver with sidemount helmet, pre-dive.

Pocket A pocket is useful for carrying small accessories and spares. A small nylon pouch which clips, via double-ended bolt snaps onto the rear D-rings has the advantages of streamlining, while permitting easy access to the contents by removing or replacing the pouch as necessary.

[ 9 ] Training [ edit ] There are three main levels of sidemount training: Level 1 [ edit ] "Recreational", "Rec", or "Basic" sidemount training is offered by most agencies, and aims to develop initial equipment familiarity and operation. At this level, students are taught to adjust, fit and operate the sidemount rig, whilst diving with one or two cylinders maximum.

[ 42 ] [ 48 ] These training courses then develop core diving skills that are specifically relevant to sidemount equipment usage – namely: equipment set-up, diver and cylinder trim, buoyancy control, alternative propulsion techniques and cylinder handling in the water. Many basic courses also teach supplementary diving skills, such as DSMB deployment and variations on open water skills, such as inverted (upside-down) fining and inverted mask-clearing. Knowledge development covers topics such as: gas management, dive planning and equipment considerations/options.

[ citation needed ] A recreational sidemount diver with 2 cylinders Level 2 [ edit ] "Technical" or "Tech" (sometimes called "advanced") sidemount courses develop higher level sidemount skills with a focus on technical decompression diving with 3 or more cylinders. A higher level of equipment proficiency and diving skill is required; as additional deco cylinders will be added to the rig, enabling mixed-gas and accelerated decompression procedures to be conducted.

[ citation needed ] A technical sidemount diver as part of a mixed (backmount/sidemount) technical diving team These courses generally require the student to be already certified as a technical diver (when crossing over from a backmount tech qualification), or the student first learns tec sidemount as a prerequisite for completing further technical decompression training in sidemount configuration.

[ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] Level 3 [ edit ] "Advanced", "Overhead" or "Cave/Wreck" sidemount is the highest level of sidemount training which develops skills specifically for demanding penetration dives in the overhead cave or wreck environment.  These courses are focused on maximizing the benefits of sidemount for passage through restricted and confined areas; and also teach multiple stage (additional tanks of bottom gas) diving techniques.

[ citation needed ] Access to courses at this level is typically reserved for fully qualified cave or technical wreck sidemount divers, who have significant experience and skill.

[ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] An advanced sidemount diver conducting overhead penetration in a shipwreck, using multiple stages and passing tight restrictions.

Procedures [ edit ] One of the advantages of the sidemount system is the easy access to cylinder valves, and the protected position they occupy in comparison with most back mount systems, where the valves are relatively vulnerable to bumping against an overhead and being "rolled off" (closed by rubbing against the overhead).

[ 14 ] The standard arrangement for sidemount is that all cylinders are independent, and each is provided with a single demand valve, an SPG, and on one or two, a low pressure inflator hose for buoyancy compensator and, if used, the drysuit. This implies that if gas is shared in an emergency, the recipient will be breathing from a different cylinder to the donor, unlike the more usual arrangement with backmount, where both divers breathe off the same set.

[ 14 ] In the case of recreational sidemount, with only one cylinder, the regulator would have an octopus demand valve for air sharing and the procedures would revert to much the same as for a single back mount cylinder.

Gas management [ edit ] The sidemount diver typically operates two independent tanks for 'bottom gas' during a dive. Compared with back-mounted double cylinders and an isolation manifold, the use of independent cylinders requires additional gas management skills. The sidemount diver has to swap regulators at planned intervals to ensure that the use of gas is balanced from both cylinders – thus ensuring good balance and trim in the water, whilst preserving a sufficient supply of air for emergency sharing.

[ 49 ] As of 2013, the only sidemount system offering a manifold system is the UTD 'Z-Manifold', which was no longer available by 2022. This equipment provided a link between cylinders and dispensed with the need to swap regulators and balance tanks at the cost of adding several possible points of failure, and usually placing the valved manifold behind the neck. In all other instances, the sidemount diver will follow a gas management strategy, which enables roughly equal consumption of gas from both sidemount cylinders and retains a necessary minimum reserve in both cylinders to enable an air-sharing exit/ascent from the dive.

[ 14 ] The basic principle of breathing gas management is never to run out of suitable breathing gas while underwater. The implications depend on the team size and the dive profile, and range from very simple for a situation where the diver can make a safe free ascent at any point of the dive, to complex, when a team of two or three divers is constrained from surfacing immediately by decompression obligations or a hard overhead, and rely on each other for emergency gas supply at any point of the planned dive, particularly when a variety of gases are carried which are each only suitable for a specific depth range.

[ citation needed ] It is standard practice to allow for the possibility of total failure of gas supply from any one cylinder at any point of the dive, and to turn the dive if the gas supply is compromised beyond the planned limits.

[ 14 ] Rule of thirds and gas reserves [ edit ] Most technical and overhead-environment divers will maintain the rule of thirds as the least conservative option when diving sidemount. Because air-sharing will remain a possibility while a second diver is present, it is considered good practice that both cylinders retain independent reserves of sufficient gas for both divers to reach the surface safely from any point in the planned dive. one third of the capacity of the cylinder is considered a simple rule of thumb reserve sufficient for most circumstances, but there are times when it is not enough and times when it will be more than enough. The principle of the rule of thirds is that one third of the gas supply is available for the penetration, one third for the return and one third is a reserve which allows for gas sharing on the return. Therefore, the dive is turned when either cylinder drops to two thirds of total capacity.

[ citation needed ] It is not safe practice to drain one cylinder, retaining the entire reserve in the other, in case of a catastrophic failure of the second cylinder supply. Sidemount divers are trained to maintain a roughly equal balance of gas supply in each primary cylinder throughout the dive. This ensures that they always retain an equal reserve of gas for donation to an out-of-gas diver; and also helps preserves their stability and lateral trim by maintaining equal buoyancy characteristics in the tanks on either side of their body.

[ citation needed ] Incremental Regulator Switching This is the primary method taught to sidemount divers for balancing the gas in their cylinders. It involves switching between the left and right side regulators are pre-determined increments of pressure.  The smaller the increment, the closer the match of pressure between primary cylinders. Typical increments might be 30bar (metric) or 500psi (imperial).

[ citation needed ] Swapping after 1/6 A less used method of maintaining cylinder balance is to swap regulators for every 1/6 cylinder gas consumption. This would mean each regulator was breathed from twice, before reaching the gas turn-point (2/3) and a further two switches on each regulator until the reserve (1/3) was reached.

[ 50 ] Swapping after 1/3 The sidemount diver could also opt to switch regulators with every 1/3 gas consumed (on each cylinder). This would mean each regulator was used once, before reaching the gas turn-point (2/3) and once more, per regulator, before reaching reserve level (1/3). This method does not promote a fine cylinder buoyancy balance across the torso.

[ citation needed ] Regular regulator switching also helps to confirm that both left and right-side regulators remain fully functional. Overhead environment divers find this an especially prudent measure when sidemount diving through restrictions in high silt and muddy conditions.

Skills [ edit ] See also: Scuba skills The following represents a summary of the skills taught by a sample of agencies at various sidemount diving levels: [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Level 1: "Recreational (Rec or Basic Sidemount)" [ citation needed ] Equipment configuration and assembly Pre-dive safety checks Attaching tanks on land and at the surface (shallow and deep water) Descent procedures Trim and buoyancy Propulsion techniques – frog kick, modified flutter kick, back kick, helicopter turn Gas planning and management (independent cylinders) Regulator switching Air sharing – donor and receiver Tank positioning and adjustment for continual good trim Removal of single tank while swimming Removal of two tanks while swimming Inverted and/or vertical mask clearing DSMB deployment ascent procedures Level 2: "Technical (Tec or Advanced Sidemount)" [ citation needed ] Equipment configuration and assembly Stage bottle configuration and assembly Water entry procedures Descent procedures Trim and buoyancy Propulsion techniques – frog kick, modified frog and flutter kick, back kick, helicopter turn, finger walking, pull and glide Sidemount diving mobility – inverted propulsion, rolls, loops etc.

Gas planning and management, including decompression gasses Team drills and development Guideline/penetration contingency drills Sidemount regulator shut-downs Feather breathing from a shut-down free-flowing regulator [ 16 ] (Manually operating the cylinder valve to supply air on demand from a cylinder with a malfunctioning demand valve).

[ 53 ] Swapping regulators between cylinders underwater In-water stage bottle attachment, removal and replacement Sidemount decompression procedures Practice of all sidemount skills (Level 1 & Level 2) within specific over-head environment (cave/wreck) Compatibility in mixed configuration team diving [ edit ] The basic sidemount configuration requires different techniques for sharing gas, compared to the isolation manifolded twins back mount configuration.

[ 54 ] This means that a single set of standardised safety procedures is not possible while diving with team members using back-mounted tanks.

The UTD Z-system provides an approach to emulate back-mounted Hogarthian configuration by quick-connecting two primary gas supply sidemount cylinders to a manifold block mounted behind the shoulders on the Z-system harness, from which long hose primary and necklace secondary demand valves are supplied, reducing the demand valve arrangement to a functional approximation of the standard Hogarthian configuration at the expense of additional complexity of components.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] The added failure points may not be necessary when using more than one bottle at the time.

[ clarification needed ] Additional stage cylinders are side-mounted with independent regulators.

Sidemount diver in fairly tight space Left side view of sidemount diver in cave Top view of sidemount diver Sidemount diver: detail of top of cylinder Sidemount diver in cave showing 2 cylinders and BC back view References [ edit ] ^ "PADI launches new Tec Sidemount Diver course" . Diverwire. 5 March 2012. Archived from the original on 6 June 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Hires, Lamar (Summer 2010).

"Sidemount – Not Just For Cave Divers Anymore" . Alert Diver Magazine. Archived from the original on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "PADI puts full weight behind sidemount diving" . Diver Magazine. 6 June 2010. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "Holy Sidemount!" . X-Ray Magazine. 25 April 2010. Archived from the original on 3 December 2020 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Liddiard, John (June 2012).

"Stage or Sidemount – What's the Difference?" . Diver Magazine. Archived from the original on 9 August 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ a b "Golem Gear, Inc. – Armadillo Sidemount Exploration Harness A2" . Golemgear.com . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Bowen, Curt.

"CCR Sidemount – Stage Configuration for Exploration" . Advanced Diver Magazine. Archived from the original on 15 September 2010 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ a b Davis, Andy.

"Modern sidemount diving" .

scubatechphilippines.com .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2023 . Retrieved 15 June 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Kakuk, Brian; Heinerth, Jill (2010).

Side Mount Profiles . High Springs, FL: Heinerth Productions.

ISBN 978-0-9798789-5-4 .

^ Davis, Andy.

"Sidemount Diving Course Notes, Chapter 2" .

Sidemount Diving Course Notes . Scuba Tech Philippines . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ a b Bogaerts, Steve (2010).

"Why Sidemount" .

GUE Conference Presentation . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c d e f Hires, Lamar (August 2008). "9: Equipment Configuration – Side Mount". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

94– 106.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ "Side-Mount Diving" . Sport Diver Magazine. 29 June 2010. Archived from the original on 15 June 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g Davis, Andy (9 March 2023).

"What are the benefits of sidemount diving" .

scubatechphilippines.com .

Archived from the original on 27 June 2023 . Retrieved 26 January 2024 .

^ Cohen, Larry (15 January 2010).

"Sidemount Workshop – a matter of comfort" .

X-Ray Mag . X-Ray Magazine.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ a b Tec Sidemount Instructor Guide . Professional Association of Diving Instructors. June 2012.

^ a b Davis, Andy.

"Sidemount Diving Course Notes" .

Sidemount Diving Techniques . Scuba Tech Philippines.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Ryall, Dave.

"Cave Diving British Style" .

Sidemount Diving Techniques . Cave Diving Group (CDG). Archived from the original on 2 March 2001 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "TransPac XT" . Dive Rite. 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2015 . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ "Armadillo sidemount harness" . Advanced Diver Magazine.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2015 . Retrieved 12 January 2015 .

^ Martin, Steve (January 2012).

"Sidemount Diving – The Next 'Big Thing' in British Diving" . Sport Diver Magazine. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Loflin, Jeff (31 December 2018).

"Technical Scuba – Sidemount Diving" .

Archived from the original on 30 July 2012 . Retrieved 19 August 2012 .

^ Davis, Andy.

"What are the two styles of sidemount BCD design?" .

scubatechphilippines.com .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2023 . Retrieved 15 June 2023 .

^ Neto, Rob (2020).

Sidemount Diving The Almost Comprehensive Guide 2nd edition, Chapter 2 - Choosing A Sidemount Rig . Chipola Publishing.

ISBN 979-8-6762-2433-2 .

^ Davis, Andy.

"What are the benefits of sidemount diving?" .

scubatechphilippines.com .

Archived from the original on 27 June 2023 . Retrieved 27 June 2023 .

^ "Oxycheq Ultra Lite Backplate" . Oxycheq. 18 August 2012.

Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "OMS Profile Sidemount System" . Big Blue Technical Diving News and Events. 25 November 2009. Archived from the original on 1 May 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Davis, Andy (15 October 2013).

"A List of Current Sidemount Diving Systems" . Scuba Tech Philippines.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 28 November 2013 .

^ Cooper, Tony (23 April 2012).

"Underwater Explorers: The Hollis SMS 50 review 2012" . Underwaterexplorers.blogspot.com.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2013 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "Go Side Mount Shop. Manual for the Razor Harness 2" . Shop.gosidemount.com . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "Sidemount diving, Nomad sidemount system, sidemount training, Dive Rite scuba" . Diverite.com. Archived from the original on 18 May 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "ProTec Dive Center Sidemount Diving – Sidemount Harness" . Protecsidemount.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2011 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "Z-Harness" .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2012 . Retrieved 2 November 2012 .

^ "SMS100 Sidemount Harness Manual" (PDF) . Hollis Gear.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 October 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "Seaduction – Field Test: OMS Sidemount Systems" . Seaduction.com. 5 March 2011. Archived from the original on 30 July 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Pat (1 April 2012).

"Custom Divers Rhino revealed" . British Diver.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ "HLBdive White Arrow Sidemount Wing" . hlbdive.com. February 2013. Archived from the original on 28 December 2012 . Retrieved 6 February 2013 .

^ DiverWire.

"HOLLIS to Unveil new SMS50 SPORT Sidemount System at DEMA Show" . DiverWire . Retrieved 25 February 2013 .

^ "Dive Rite Releases Sidemount BCD For Ocean Diving" .

Diverwire . 6 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 12 February 2013 . Retrieved 25 February 2013 .

^ Bogaerts, Steve (31 August 2011).

"Go Side Mount" . Go Cavern Diving.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Price, Duncan (4 April 2005).

"Rebreather" . Sump4.com.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ a b Sidemount Instructor Guide . Professional Association of Diving Instructors. March 2012.

^ Jablonski, Jarrod (21 March 1997).

"Hogarthian Gear Configuration" . originally posted to rec.scuba by Carl Heinzl on 21 March 1997.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2009 . Retrieved 25 February 2013 .

^ Hires, Lamar (26 August 2009).

"Sidemount Scuba Diving Nomad Tank Chokers: Dive Rite" . DiveRite84.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 .

^ Hires, Lamar.

"New Nomad Tank Attachment" . DiveRite.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2015 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 .

^ Heinerth, Jill (10 March 2019).

"Diving Sidemount Rebreathers" .

www.youtube.com .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2022 . Retrieved 24 October 2022 .

^ Philips, Bil (29 August 2011).

"Cave Explorer and Cave Instructor Bil Phillips introduces the REM" . gosidemount.com.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 25 February 2013 .

^ Davis, Andy.

"Sidemount Diving Course Notes, Chapter 5" .

Sidemount Diving Course Notes . Scuba Tech Philippines.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Davis, Andy.

"Sidemount Diving Course Notes, Chapter 8" .

Sidemount Diving Course Notes . Scuba Tech Philippines.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Neto, Rob (26 February 2024).

"Sidemount Gas Management" . Sidemount Diving Book . Retrieved 26 February 2024 .

^ Davis, Andy.

"Sidemount Diving Course Notes, Chapter 10" .

Sidemount Diving Course Notes . Scuba Tech Philippines.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Rockwood, Kelly (27 October 2011).

"Testing the new PADI Sidemount Diver Course" .

Tecrec Blog . PADI TecRec Blog.

Archived from the original on 27 March 2013 . Retrieved 19 August 2012 .

^ "Valve Feather" .

www.youtube.com . SDI TDI ERDI PFI FRTI. 21 February 2017.

Archived from the original on 6 January 2019 . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ a b "Z-Side-Mount System" . UTD International. 5 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Jablonski, Jarrod .

"The Hogarthian Gear Configuration" . Jeff Bentley.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2008 . Retrieved 13 October 2008 .

Further reading [ edit ] Heinerth, Jill (2012).

Side Mount Profiles . Heinerth Productions Inc.

ISBN 978-0-9798789-5-4 .

Hartmann, Alexander (2014).

Sidemount Guide . epubli GmbH.

ISBN 978-3-7375-0296-2 .

Neto, Rob (2020).

Sidemount Diving: The Almost Comprehensive Guide 2nd edition . Chipola Publishing.

ISBN 979-8-6762-2433-2 .

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐kchlr
Cached time: 20250815093157
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.325 seconds
Real time usage: 1.533 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14675/1000000
Revision size: 76623/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 700058/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 32867/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 247583/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.689/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7485855/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1113.590      1 -total
 35.76%  398.239      1 Template:Reflist
 27.37%  304.793     49 Template:Cite_web
 22.47%  250.172     40 Template:Citation_needed
 20.29%  225.933     42 Template:Fix
 14.00%  155.925      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 13.68%  152.343      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.84%  109.577    108 Template:Category_handler
  8.13%   90.510     53 Template:Delink
  7.49%   83.379     35 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3526480:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815093157 and revision id 1305999482. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sidemount_diving&oldid=1305999482 " Categories : Underwater diving procedures Underwater diving equipment configurations Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2024 Articles to be expanded from December 2024 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2013 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 09:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sidemount diving 4 languages Add topic

