Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Opération Satanique 3 New Zealand reaction and investigation 4 France implicated 5 Aftermath Toggle Aftermath subsection 5.1 Nuclear testing 5.2 Greenpeace and Rainbow Warrior 5.3 Reparations 5.4 Foreign relations 5.5 Further investigations 5.6 French agents 6 Rainbow Warrior memorial 7 In popular culture 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior 16 languages العربية Català Deutsch Français 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Русский Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 36°50′32″S 174°46′18″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.84222°S 174.77167°E ﻿ / -36.84222; 174.77167 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1985 covert attack by French foreign intelligence service on a Greenpeace ship Sinking of Rainbow Warrior Rainbow Warrior pictured in Scheveningen in 1979 Date 10 July 1985 (40 years ago) ( 1985-07-10 ) 11:38 p.m. – 11:45 p.m. ( NZST ; UTC+12:00 ) Location Ports of Auckland Auckland , New Zealand 36°50′32″S 174°46′18″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.84222°S 174.77167°E ﻿ / -36.84222; 174.77167 Caused by Retaliation for protests by Greenpeace against French nuclear testing Goals To sink Rainbow Warrior Methods Bombing Resulted in Rainbow Warrior sunk, Fernando Pereira killed Parties France Greenpeace New Zealand Lead figures President François Mitterrand Defence Minister Charles Hernu DGSE ( Action Division ) [ a ] Skipper Peter Willcox First mate Martini Gotje Prime Minister David Lange Units involved Ouvéa Provence Rainbow Warrior New Zealand Police Casualties and losses None 1 killed None The sinking of Rainbow Warrior , codenamed Opération Satanique , [ 1 ] was an act of French state terrorism .

[ 2 ] Described as a "covert operation" by the "action" branch of the French foreign intelligence agency , the Directorate-General for External Security (DGSE), the terrorist attack was carried out on 10 July 1985. During the operation, two operatives (both French citizens) sank the flagship of the Greenpeace fleet, Rainbow Warrior , at the Port of Auckland on her way to a protest against a planned French nuclear test in Moruroa .

Fernando Pereira , a photographer, drowned on the sinking ship.

The sinking was a cause of embarrassment to France and President François Mitterrand . They initially denied responsibility, but two French agents were captured by New Zealand Police and charged with arson , conspiracy to commit arson, willful damage and murder . It resulted in a scandal that led to the resignation of the French Defence Minister Charles Hernu , while the two agents pleaded guilty to manslaughter and were sentenced to ten years in New Zealand prison. Despite being sentenced to ten years' imprisonment, due to pressures from the French state they spent merely two years confined to the French Polynesian island of Hao before being freed by the French government.

[ 3 ] France was also forced to apologise and had to pay reparations to New Zealand, Pereira's family and Greenpeace.

Background [ edit ] France began testing nuclear weapons in 1966 on Mururoa Atoll in the Tuamotu Archipelago of French Polynesia . In 1985, the South Pacific nations of Australia , the Cook Islands , Fiji , Kiribati , Nauru , New Zealand , Niue , Papua New Guinea , Samoa , Solomon Islands , Tonga , Tuvalu and Vanuatu signed the Treaty of Rarotonga declaring the region a nuclear-free zone.

[ 4 ] Since being acquired by Greenpeace in 1977, Rainbow Warrior was active in supporting several anti-whaling, anti-seal hunting, anti-nuclear testing and anti-nuclear waste dumping campaigns during the late 1970s and early 1980s. Since early 1985, the ship was based in the southern Pacific Ocean, where its crew campaigned against nuclear testing. After relocating 300 Marshall Islanders from Rongelap Atoll , which had been polluted by radioactive fallout by past American nuclear tests, it travelled to New Zealand to lead a flotilla of yachts protesting French nuclear testing at the Mururoa Atoll.

[ 5 ] During previous nuclear tests at Mururoa, protest ships had been boarded by French commandos after sailing into the shipping exclusion zone around the atoll. For the 1985 tests, Greenpeace intended to monitor the impact of nuclear tests and place protesters on the island to monitor the blasts.

French agents posing as interested supporters or tourists toured the ship while it was open to public viewing.

DGSE agent Christine Cabon, who had previously worked on intelligence missions in the Middle East, posed as environmentalist "Frederique Bonlieu" to infiltrate the Greenpeace office in Auckland .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] While working for the Auckland office, Cabon secretly monitored communications from Rainbow Warrior , collected maps and investigated underwater equipment.

Opération Satanique [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fernando Pereira , a photographer who was trapped and drowned in the sinking ship Three agents on board the yacht Ouvéa imported the limpet mines used for the bombing. Two more agents, Dominique Prieur and Alain Mafart , posing as the newlywed couple "Sophie and Alain Turenge", picked up the mines and delivered them to the bombing team, consisting of the divers Jean Camas ("Jacques Camurier") and Jean-Luc Kister ("Alain Tonel").

After sufficient information had been gathered, Camas and Kister attached two limpet mines to Rainbow Warrior berthed at Marsden Wharf. They were detonated seven minutes apart.

[ 8 ] The first bomb went off at 23:38, blasting a hole about the size of an average car.

While the ship was initially evacuated, some of the crew returned to the ship to investigate and film the damage. Portuguese-Dutch photographer, Fernando Pereira , returned below deck to fetch his camera equipment. At 23:45, the second bomb went off. Pereira drowned in the rapid flooding that followed, and the other ten crew members either safely abandoned ship on the order of Captain Peter Willcox or were thrown into the water by the second explosion.

Rainbow Warrior partially sank four minutes later.

New Zealand reaction and investigation [ edit ] Rainbow Warrior , 1981 After the bombing, the New Zealand Police started one of the country's largest police investigations. They identified two of the French agents, Captain Dominique Prieur and Commander Alain Mafart , as possible suspects. Prieur and Mafart were identified with the help of a Neighbourhood Watch group and arrested. Both were questioned and investigated. Because they were carrying Swiss passports , their true identities were discovered, along with the French government's responsibility.

[ 9 ] The other agents of the French team all escaped from New Zealand. Christine Cabon, whose role had ended before the bombing, had left for Israel immediately before the sinking. After she was identified as a participant in the operation, Auckland police requested that the Israeli authorities detain her. Cabon was tipped off and fled before she could be arrested.

[ 10 ] Three other agents, Chief Petty Officer Roland Verge ("Raymond Velche"), Petty Officer Jean-Michel Bartelo ("Jean-Michel Berthelo") and Petty Officer Gérard Andries ("Eric Audrenc"), who had carried the bombs to New Zealand on the yacht Ouvéa , escaped by that yacht and were arrested by Australian police on Norfolk Island . New Zealand sent a team of detectives and a forensic scientist to Norfolk Island to interview the suspects and collect evidence. They required time to analyse the evidence before making arrests. The Australian authorities gave the New Zealand team a day to make a decision, after which the suspects were released. They were then picked up by the French submarine Rubis , after they scuttled Ouvéa .  New Zealand issued arrest warrants for the Ouvéa crew on 26 July on charges of arson and murder, by which time the crew had left Australian jurisdiction.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Rainbow Warrior , 1985 in Auckland Several agents, including Jean-Luc Kister, one of the bombers, had posed as tourists. They took a ferry to the South Island, went skiing at Mount Hutt , and then left the country using false documents about ten days later.

[ 13 ] Another agent, Louis-Pierre Dillais , possibly the commander of the operation, was also never captured.

[ 11 ] France implicated [ edit ] France, being an ally of New Zealand, initially denied involvement and joined in condemning what it described as a terrorist act . The French embassy in Wellington denied involvement, stating that "the French Government does not deal with its opponents in such ways".

[ 14 ] Once it was realised that the bombing was the action of the government of a friendly state, the New Zealand government stopped referring to it as a "terrorist act", instead calling it "a criminal attack in breach of the international law of state responsibility , committed on New Zealand sovereign territory". The "breach of international law" aspect was referred to in all communications with the United Nations to dissuade any arguments from the French government that might imply justification for their act.

[ 11 ] Prieur and Mafart pleaded guilty to manslaughter and were sentenced to ten years' imprisonment on 22 November 1985. France threatened an economic embargo of New Zealand's exports to the European Economic Community if the pair were not released.

[ 15 ] Such an action would have crippled the New Zealand economy , which was dependent on agricultural exports to the United Kingdom.

[ 16 ] France launched their own commission of enquiry headed by Bernard Tricot which declared the French government innocent of any involvement in the terrorist act, claiming that the arrested agents, who had not yet pleaded guilty, had merely been spying on Greenpeace. When The Times and Le Monde contradicted these findings by claiming that President Mitterrand had approved the bombing, Defence Minister Charles Hernu resigned and the head of the DGSE, Admiral Pierre Lacoste , was fired.

Operation Satanic was a public relations disaster. Eventually Prime Minister Laurent Fabius admitted the bombing had been a French plot. On 22 September 1985, he summoned journalists to his office to read a 200-word statement in which he said: "The truth is cruel," and acknowledged there had been a cover-up. He went on to say that "Agents of the French secret service sank this boat. They were acting on orders." [ 17 ] Aftermath [ edit ] Several figures, including then New Zealand Prime Minister David Lange , have referred to the bombing as an act of terrorism [ 18 ] or state-sponsored terrorism , [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] with scholars since describing the attack as an act of state terrorism.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Nuclear testing [ edit ] The next nuclear test Héro was conducted at Mururoa on 24 October 1985 with a yield of two kilotonnes of TNT (8.4 TJ). France conducted 54 more nuclear tests until the end of nuclear testing in 1996.

[ 25 ] Greenpeace and Rainbow Warrior [ edit ] A Greenpeace Rainbow Warrior benefit concert at Mount Smart Stadium , Auckland, on 5 April 1986 included performances by Herbs , Neil Young , Jackson Browne , Graham Nash , Topp Twins , Dave Dobbyn and a Split Enz reunion.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Rainbow Warrior was refloated for forensic examination. She was deemed irreparable and scuttled in Matauri Bay , near the Cavalli Islands on 12 December 1987, to serve as a dive wreck and fish sanctuary.

[ 28 ] Her masts had been removed and put on display at the Dargaville Maritime Museum. Greenpeace acquired a new ship and gave it the name Rainbow Warrior earlier that same year. On 14 October 2011, Greenpeace launched a new sailing vessel, again called Rainbow Warrior , which is equipped with an auxiliary electric motor.

[ 29 ] The ships are informally known as Rainbow Warrior II and Rainbow Warrior III , respectively.

Reparations [ edit ] The Rainbow Warrior Memorial from above In 1987, after international pressure, France paid $8.16m to Greenpeace in damages, which helped finance another ship.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] It also paid compensation to the Pereira family, reimbursing his life insurance company for 30,000 Dutch guilders and making reparation payments of 650,000 francs to Pereira's wife, 1.5 million francs to his two children, and 75,000 francs to each of his parents.

[ 32 ] Foreign relations [ edit ] The failure of Western leaders to condemn a violation of a friendly nation's sovereignty caused a great deal of change in New Zealand's foreign and defence policy.

[ 33 ] New Zealand distanced itself from the United States, a traditional ally, and built relationships with small South Pacific nations, while retaining excellent relations with Australia and, to a lesser extent, the United Kingdom.

[ 34 ] Hao atoll In June 1986, in a political deal with Prime Minister of New Zealand David Lange , presided over by United Nations Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar , France agreed to pay NZ$13 million (US$6.5 million) to New Zealand and apologise, in return for which Alain Mafart and Dominique Prieur would be detained at the French military base on Hao Atoll for three years. However, the two agents had both returned to France by May 1988, after less than two years on the atoll. Mafart returned to Paris on 14 December 1987 for medical treatment and was apparently freed after the treatment. He continued in the French Army and was promoted to colonel in 1993. Prieur returned to France on 6 May 1988 because she was pregnant, her husband having been allowed to join her on the atoll. She, too, was freed and later promoted. The removal of the agents from Hao without subsequent return was ruled to be in violation of the 1986 agreement.

[ 3 ] Following the breach of the arrangement, in 1990 the UN secretary-general awarded New Zealand another NZ$3.5 million (US$2 million) to establish the New Zealand / France Friendship Fund.

[ 31 ] Although France had formally apologised to the New Zealand Government in 1986, [ 35 ] during a visit in April 1991, French Prime Minister Michel Rocard delivered a personal apology.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] He said it was "to turn the page in the relationship and to say, if we had known each other better, this thing never would have happened". The Friendship Fund has provided contributions to a number of charity and public purposes.

[ 38 ] During a visit in 2016, French Prime Minister Manuel Valls reiterated that the incident had been "a serious error".

[ 39 ] Further investigations [ edit ] In 2005, French newspaper Le Monde released a report from 1986 which said that Admiral Pierre Lacoste , head of DGSE at the time, had "personally obtained approval to sink the ship from the late president François Mitterrand ." [ 40 ] Soon after the publication, former Admiral Lacoste came forward and gave newspaper interviews about the situation, admitting that the death weighed on his conscience and saying that the aim of the operation had not been to kill.

[ 41 ] He acknowledged the existence of three teams: the yacht crew, reconnaissance and logistics (those successfully prosecuted), plus a two-man team that carried out the bombing.

[ 8 ] [ 42 ] A 20th anniversary memorial edition of the 1986 book Eyes of Fire: The Last Voyage of the Rainbow Warrior by New Zealand author David Robie —who was aboard the bombed ship—was published in July 2005.

[ 43 ] French agents [ edit ] Twenty years after the bombing, Television New Zealand (TVNZ) sought access to a video record made at the preliminary hearing in which the two French agents pleaded guilty. The footage had remained sealed since shortly after the conclusion of the criminal proceedings. The two agents opposed release of the footage and unsuccessfully took the case to the New Zealand Court of Appeal and, subsequently, the Supreme Court of New Zealand . On 7 August 2006, Justices Hammond , O'Regan and Arnold dismissed the former French agents' appeal and TVNZ broadcast their guilty pleas the same day.

[ 44 ] In 2005, in an interview with TVNZ, Louis-Pierre Dillais acknowledged his involvement with the bombing.

[ 45 ] In 2007, the New Zealand Green Party criticised the government over its purchase of arms from Belgian arms manufacturer FN Herstal , whose U.S. subsidiary was led by Dillais.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] At that time, Greenpeace was still pursuing the extradition of Dillais for his involvement in the act.

[ 47 ] In 2006, Antoine Royal revealed that his brother, Gérard Royal , had claimed to be involved in planting the bomb. Their sister is French Socialist Party politician Ségolène Royal who was contesting the French presidential election .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Other sources identified Royal as the pilot of the Zodiac inflatable boat that carried the bombers.

[ 50 ] The New Zealand government announced there would be no extradition request since the case was closed.

[ 51 ] In September 2015, TVNZ's Sunday programme tracked down Jean-Luc Kister, one of the two bombers. Kister, who retired from the DGSE in about 2000, admitted his lead role and feelings of responsibility for the lethal attack. He also pointed to the French president, as commander of the armed forces and intelligence services assigned the operation. Reporter John Hudson , who spent two days with Kister in France, said that Kister "wanted an opportunity to talk about his role in the bombing... It has been on his conscience for 30 years. He said to us, 'secret agents don't talk', but he is talking. I think he wanted to be understood." Kister considered the mission "a big, big failure".

[ 13 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Rainbow Warrior memorial [ edit ] The Rainbow Warrior Memorial which stands in Matauri Bay Built between 1988 and 1990, a memorial for the Rainbow Warrior was created by New Zealand sculptor Chris Booth. The memorial was erected in Matauri Bay in Northland, New Zealand. It was commissioned by Ngati Kura and New Zealand China Clays.

[ 54 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The sinking, and subsequent investigation, was the subject of several films, including The Rainbow Warrior Conspiracy (1988), The Rainbow Warrior (1993) and Claudia Pond-Eyley's Departure and Return: The Final Journey of the Rainbow Warrior (2006) Murder in the Pacific is a three-part documentary about the sinking, directed by Chloe Campbell. It was broadcast on BBC2 in March 2023.

[ 55 ] The 1985 song "Hercules" by the Australian band Midnight Oil is about the sinking. In 1990 New Zealand singer/songwriter Martin Curtis recorded and released "The End of the Rainbow", on the album The Daisy Patch .

[ 56 ] The 1989 song " Little Fighter ", by the Danish/American band White Lion , is about the sinking. It is also referenced in the 2004 song " Walkampf " by German punk band Die Toten Hosen . In 2005, a supergroup of New Zealand musicians and artists recorded a cover of Anchor Me , by the New Zealand rock band The Mutton Birds , to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the bombing. The song peaked at No. 3 in the New Zealand singles chart.

See also [ edit ] Portals : Environment France New Zealand 1980s Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior at Wikipedia's sister projects : Data from Wikidata Foreign espionage in New Zealand – Espionage activities in New Zealand by foreign entities Legend of the Rainbow Warriors – Story from a 1962 religious tract New Zealand nuclear-free zone – Legal prohibition on nuclear energy or weapons within New Zealand Rainbow Warrior Case – 1986 dispute between New Zealand and France The Rainbow Warrior Conspiracy – 1988 Australian–New Zealand mini-series (1988) The Rainbow Warrior (film) – 1993 film by Michael Tuchner Xavier Maniguet – French intelligence officer (1946–2009) References [ edit ] ^ Including: Pierre Lacoste Dominique Prieur Alain Mafart Christine Cabon Roland Verge Jean-Michel Bartelo Gérard Andries Jean-Luc Kister Jean Camas Gérard Royal Louis-Pierre Dillais ^ Bremner, Charles (11 July 2005).

"Mitterrand ordered bombing of Rainbow Warrior, spy chief says" .

The Times . London.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2017 . Retrieved 16 November 2006 .

^ Selth, Andrew.

"International Terrorism and Australian Foreign Policy" (PDF) .

AustLII . Retrieved 6 July 2025 .

^ a b "Case concerning the difference between New Zealand and France concerning the interpretation or application of two agreements, concluded on 9 July 1986 between the two states and which related to the problems arising from the Rainbow Warrior Affair" (PDF) .

Reports of International Arbitral Awards .

XX : 215– 284, especially p 275. 30 April 1990.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 May 2016 . Retrieved 21 October 2013 .

^ Truver, Scott C. (1986). "Maritime Terrorism, 1985".

Proceedings .

112 (5).

United States Naval Institute : 160– 173.

^ The evacuation of Rongelap Archived 16 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine (from the Greenpeace website. Accessed 12 July 2010.) ^ Dennett, Cecile Meier and Kelly (9 July 2017).

"Rainbow Warrior spy tracked down in France 32 years after bombing" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ The French Government and Greenpeace Agents back in court on Friday Archived 1 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine The Canberra Times , 20 November 1985, at Trove ^ a b "At the end of the Rainbow" .

New Zealand Herald . 8 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 July 2016 .

^ King, Michael (1986).

Death of the Rainbow Warrior . Auckland, N.Z.: Penguin. p. 171.

ISBN 0-14-009738-4 .

OCLC 14638318 .

^ "Rainbow Warrior spy Christine Cabon breaks 32-year silence" . 8 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2018 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 – via The New Zealand Herald .

^ a b c "The Bombing of the Warrior" .

Rainbow Warrior home page .

Greenpeace . Archived from the original on 10 March 2012 . Retrieved 4 November 2014 .

^ Robie, David (1 July 2025).

"Australia obstructed probe into deadly 'Rainbow Warrior' bombing" .

Declassified Australia . Retrieved 13 July 2025 .

^ a b Taylor, Phil (6 September 2015).

"Rainbow Warrior bomber finally unmasked" .

The New Zealand Herald .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 September 2015 .

^ Diary compiled by Mike Andrews (Secretary of the Dargaville Maritime Museum) ^ Shabecoff, Philip (3 October 1987).

"France Must Pay Greenpeace $8 Million in Sinking of Ship" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2018 . Retrieved 11 April 2010 .

^ Szabo, Michael (1991).

Making waves . Greenpeace New Zealand. Auckland [N.Z.]: Reed.

ISBN 0-7900-0230-2 .

OCLC 27687705 .

^ Evening Mail – Monday 23 September 1985 ^ Brown, Paul and Evans, Rob (23 August 2005).

"How Rainbow Warrior was played down" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2017 . Retrieved 3 September 2017 .

^ Page, Campbell and Templeton, Ian (24 September 1985).

"French inquiry into Rainbow Warrior bombing" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2017 . Retrieved 3 September 2017 .

^ "Reality behind the Rainbow Warrior outrage" .

The New Zealand Herald . 2 July 2005.

Archived from the original on 3 September 2017 . Retrieved 2 September 2017 .

^ Conte, Alex (2010).

Human Rights in the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism: Commonwealth Approaches: The United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 86.

ISBN 978-3642116087 .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2021 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

^ Robie, David (31 July 2016).

"Frontline: The Rainbow Warrior, secrecy and state terrorism: A Pacific journalism case study" .

Pacific Journalism Review .

22 (1): 187.

doi : 10.24135/pjr.v22i1.19 .

ISSN 2324-2035 .

^ Clark, Roger S (1988).

"State Terrorism: Some Lessons from the Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior" .

Rutgers Law Journal .

20 (2).

HeinOnline : 393– 414.

Archived from the original on 27 December 2022 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

^ Veitch, James (1 July 2010).

" 'A Sordid Act': The 'Rainbow Warrior' Incident" .

New Zealand International Review .

35 (4): 6– 9.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 – via InformIT .

^ Capcom Espace (2005).

"Les essais nucleaire Francaispublisher=Capcom Espace" .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2015 . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

^ "Rainbow Warrior music festival" .

NZHistory . History Group of the New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2014 . Retrieved 17 April 2014 .

^ "Rainbow Warrior concert 1986" .

Frenz Forum . 14 July 2006.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 April 2014 .

^ "Wreck to reef-the transfiguration of the Rainbow Warrior" .

New Zealand Geographic (23). July–September 1994.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 October 2012 .

^ Rainbow Warrior Archived 19 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine Greenpeace International , October 2011. Accessed 10 February 2015 ^ Willsher, Kim (6 September 2015).

"French Spy who sank Greenpeace ship apologises for lethal bombing" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .

^ a b Boczek, Boleslaw Adam (2005).

International Law: A Dictionary . Maryland: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. p. 97.

ISBN 0-8108-5078-8 .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2021 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .

^ Reports of International Arbitral Awards : Case concerning the differences between New Zealand and France arising from the Rainbow Warrior affair (PDF) . United Nations. 6 July 1986. pp.

199– 221.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 April 2016 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .

^ Keith Sinclair , A History of New Zealand Penguin Books , New Zealand, 1991 ^ Nuclear Free: The New Zealand Way , The Right Honourable David Lange , Penguin Books, New Zealand, 1990 ^ "French send PM letters of apology".

Auckland Star . Auckland. 23 July 1986.

^ Armstrong, John (2 July 2005).

"Reality behind the Rainbow Warrior outrage" .

New Zealand Herald .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2017 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .

^ Bar-Siman-Tov, Yaacov (2004).

From Conflict Resolution to Reconciliation . Oxford University Press. p. 190.

ISBN 0-19-516643-4 .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2021 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .

^ "Kokako Chick thrives thanks to Rainbow Warrior bombers" .

New Zealand Herald . NZME Publishing Limited. 8 July 2008.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2016 . Retrieved 8 May 2016 .

^ Young, Audrey (2 May 2016).

"France reaches out for Kiwi friendship" .

New Zealand Herald .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2016 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .

France committed a serious error, which tainted the friendship uniting our peoples.

^ "Mitterrand ordered bombing of Rainbow Warrior, spy chief says" .

The Times . 11 July 2005. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008 . Retrieved 11 March 2013 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Simons, Marlise (10 July 2005).

"Report Says Mitterrand Approved Sinking of Greenpeace Ship" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 1 November 2013 .

^ Field, Catherine (30 June 2005).

" 'Third team' in Rainbow Warrior plot" .

New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 6 June 2010 .

^ Eyes of Fire: The Last Voyage of the Rainbow Warrior .

Auckland University Press . 2005.

ISBN 978-1877314469 .

Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 6 June 2010 .

^ "Transcript Mafart Prieur v TVNZ" (PDF) .

Courts of New Zealand . 22 November 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 June 2018 . Retrieved 27 June 2018 .

^ a b Goldenberg, Suzanne (25 May 2007) "Rainbow Warrior ringleader heads firm selling arms to US government" Archived 1 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

guardian.co.uk , Retrieved 26 May 2007 ^ NZ trades with Arms Company whose US chief executive was a lead agent in the Rainbow Warrior bombing Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine NZ Green Party Just Peace newsletter No 110, 18 May 2007. Retrieved 21 February 2015 ^ Greenpeace gunning for the leader of Warrior bombers Stuff.co.nz, Retrieved 26 May 2007 Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ NZH Staff (30 September 2006).

"Presidential hopeful's brother linked to Rainbow Warrior bomb" .

The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 1 October 2006 .

^ "NZ rules out new Rainbow Warrior probe" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 1 October 2006.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2007 . Retrieved 1 October 2006 .

^ Guerres secrètes à l'Élysée , by Paul Barril, ed Albin Michel, Paris (1996) ^ Kay, Martin (2 October 2006). "French frogman slips the net; Paper identifies bomber, but PM says the case will remain closed".

The Dominion Post . pp. A1.

^ "New Zealand Greenpeace Rainbow Warrior bomber apologises" .

BBC News . 6 September 2015.

Archived from the original on 6 September 2015 . Retrieved 7 September 2015 .

^ Neuman, Susan (6 September 2015).

"French Agent Apologizes For Blowing Up Greenpeace Ship In 1985" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2015 . Retrieved 8 September 2015 .

^ "Rainbow Warrior memorial" .

nzhistory.govt.nz .

Archived from the original on 27 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 October 2022 .

^ Nicholson, Rebecca (2 March 2023).

"Murder in the Pacific review – the bombing of the Rainbow Warrior boat makes for thrilling, urgent TV" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 24 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 .

^ "Martin Curtis - Albums & DVD" .

www.martincurtis.co.nz . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Michael King, Death of the Rainbow Warrior (Penguin Books, 1986).

ISBN 0-14-009738-4 Kois, Dan (22 July 2025).

"The Last Days of the Rainbow Warrior" .

Slate . Retrieved 24 July 2025 .

David Robie , Eyes of Fire: The Last Voyage of the Rainbow Warrior (Philadelphia: New Society Press, 1987).

ISBN 0-86571-114-3 The Sunday Times Insight Team, Rainbow Warrior: The French Attempt to Sink Greenpeace (London: Century Hutchinson Ltd, 1986).

ISBN 0-09-164360-0 Wright, Gerry (2012).

Rainbow Warrior Salvage (1st ed.). Auckland: Gerry Wright.

ISBN 9780473227500 .

External links [ edit ] Sinking the Rainbow Warrior , NZHistory – impact on New Zealand's international relations.

greenpeace.org.au New Zealand police history "French Connections" Transcript of the 1985 investigation by the Australian programme Four Corners .

2010 documentary The Rainbow Warrior , 41 minutes, produced by TVNZ, distributed by Journeyman Pictures 2015 news report "Rainbow Warrior Bomber" , 21 minutes, based around an exclusived interview with Colonel Jean Luc Kister, a French intelligence agent who planted two bombs on the Rainbow Warrior . Produced by TVNZ, distributed by Journeyman Pictures Detail text and letter from NZ PM D. Lange regarding incident in 'Sailing The Dream' at Google Books Films (all are productions for television): The Rainbow Warrior Conspiracy at IMDb (Australia 1989) The Rainbow Warrior at IMDb (New Zealand 1992) The Boat and the Bomb at IMDb (United Kingdom and Netherlands 2005) L' Affaire du Rainbow Warrior at IMDb (France 2006, concentrating on the experience of French journalists) Blowing Up Paradise 2006 BBC Documentary movie by Ben Lewis about French Atomic Testing in Pacific and associated murder of Rainbow Warrior Greenpeace activist by French Secret Service.

v t e Greenpeace People Phil Radford Michael Bailey Kumi Naidoo Irving Stowe Ben Metcalfe Paul Watson Rex Weyler Jim Bohlen Will E. Jackson David McTaggart Robert Hunter Patrick Moore Oscar Soria John Sauven Andy Stirling Stephen Tindale Jean McSorley Dorothy Stowe Peter Willcox Fernando Pereira Daniel Beltrá Dennis Delaney Von Hernandez Ships Phyllis Cormack Rainbow Warrior (I) Rainbow Warrior (II) Rainbow Warrior (III) Esperanza Arctic Sunrise Sirius Solo Greenpeace Gondwana Yellow Thing Fri (yacht) Regional offices Greenpeace Aotearoa New Zealand Greenpeace Australia Pacific Greenpeace East Asia Greenpeace Nordic Greenpeace Southeast Asia Greenpeace USA Related organisations Sea Shepherd Conservation Society Greenpeace Foundation London Greenpeace Don't Make a Wave Committee Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (NZ) Publications Unearthed Other related topics Golden Rule (ketch) Greenpeace – The Album Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Rainbow Warrior Case How to Change the World (film) The Rainbow Warrior Conspiracy (miniseries) The Rainbow Warrior (film) Mister Splashy Pants Public Eye Award World Park Base v t e David Lange Prime Minister of New Zealand (1984–89) Leader of the Labour Party (1983–89) Member of Parliament for Mangere (1977–96) Premiership 1984–1989 General elections 1984 1987 Electoral history 1977 Mangere by-election 1980 leadership election 1983 leadership election 1988 leadership election Related articles Fish and Chip Brigade Shadow Cabinet 1984 constitutional crisis Rogernomics New Zealand nuclear-free zone Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Tomorrow's Schools Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation Lange v Atkinson v t e Shipwrecks and maritime incidents in 1985 Shipwrecks 10 Feb: ARA Santa Fe 30 Mar: Mercedes I 11 Apr: TCG Yildirim 10 Jul: Rainbow Warrior Sinking 3 Aug: HMS Narwhal 19 Dec: Eagle Tire Co.

Unknown date: Narciso Monturiol , HMS Porpoise , Samir Other incidents 15 May: Kumudini 1 Aug: Silco 3 Aug: Europa 10 Aug: K-431 September (unknown date): USS Darter 7 Oct: Achille Lauro hijacking 23 Oct: USS Swordfish 30 Oct: Golden Hinde 1984 1986 v t e Terrorism in New Zealand Notable attacks Huntly rail bridge bombing (1951) Wanganui Computer Centre bombing (1982) Wellington Trades Hall bombing (1984) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior (1985) Eagle Airways Flight 2279 (2008) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) Auckland supermarket stabbing (2021) Counter-terrorism Terrorism Suppression Act 2002 Outlawed terror organisations 2007 New Zealand police raids v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐7557b9c9dc‐cghrk
Cached time: 20250818125640
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.495 seconds
Real time usage: 1.824 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8631/1000000
Revision size: 47378/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 665706/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14137/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 235217/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.840/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24198573/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 5/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1325.465      1 -total
 29.68%  393.394      2 Template:Reflist
 17.93%  237.604     39 Template:Navbox
 13.02%  172.565     18 Template:Cite_news
 11.30%  149.790      7 Template:Annotated_link
 10.47%  138.761      1 Template:Infobox_civil_conflict
  9.05%  119.892      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  8.72%  115.587      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.28%  109.787      4 Template:IMDb_title
  6.35%   84.131      1 Template:Greenpeace Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2298023:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818125640 and revision id 1304903942. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sinking_of_the_Rainbow_Warrior&oldid=1304903942 " Categories : Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Explosions in 1985 1985 scandals 1980s murders in New Zealand 1985 crimes in New Zealand 1985 murders in Oceania Maritime incidents in 1985 1985 in international relations 1985 in the environment July 1985 in Oceania 1980s in Auckland Anti–nuclear weapons movement International maritime incidents Shipwrecks of the Northland Region François Mitterrand French Fifth Republic History of environmentalism French military scandals Espionage in New Zealand Espionage scandals and incidents Ship bombings Frogman operations France–New Zealand relations Directorate-General for External Security Maritime incidents in New Zealand Military operations involving France Combat incidents Environmental killings Ships sunk as artificial reefs French intelligence operations Crime in Auckland Terrorism committed by France Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2019 Use New Zealand English from December 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 21:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior 16 languages Add topic

