Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 1.1 Physical layer 1.2 Link layer 1.3 Network layer 1.4 Interconnection 2 Uses 3 Protocols 4 References 5 Other sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents SpaceWire 7 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spacecraft communications network This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) SpaceWire Specifications Created by European Space Agency Speed 2.0–400 Mbit/s Style Serial Hotplugging interface Yes External interface Yes Website spacewire.esa.int SpaceWire Connector Specifications Type Data connector Production history Designer European Space Agency General specifications Hot pluggable Yes External Yes Audio signal No Video signal No Pins 9 Connector Micro-D Data Data signal Yes Bitrate 2.0–400 Mbit/s Protocol Serial Pinout Pin Name Description Pin 1 DIN+ Data In Pos.

Pin 2 SIN+ Strobe In Pos.

Pin 3 Inner Shield Ground Pin 4 SOUT- Strobe Out Neg.

Pin 5 DOUT- Data Out Neg.

Pin 6 DIN- Data In Neg.

Pin 7 SIN- Strobe In Neg.

Pin 8 SOUT+ Strobe Out Pos.

Pin 9 DOUT+ Data Out Pos.

SpaceWire is a spacecraft communication network based in part on the IEEE 1355 standard of communications. It is coordinated by the European Space Agency (ESA) in collaboration with international space agencies including NASA , JAXA , and RKA .

Within a SpaceWire network the nodes are connected through low-cost, low- latency , full-duplex , point-to-point serial links, and packet switching wormhole routing routers.

Architecture [ edit ] Physical layer [ edit ] SpaceWire's modulation and data formats generally follow the data strobe encoding - differential ended signaling (DS-DE) part of the IEEE Std 1355-1995. SpaceWire utilizes asynchronous communication and allows speeds between 2 Mbit/s and 200 Mbit/s, with initial signalling rate of 10 Mbit/s.

[ 1 ] DS-DE is well-favored because it describes modulation, bit formats, routing, flow control , and error detection in hardware, with little need for software. SpaceWire also has very low error rates, deterministic system behavior, and relatively simple digital electronics. SpaceWire replaced old PECL differential drivers in the physical layer of IEEE 1355 DS-DE by low-voltage differential signaling (LVDS). SpaceWire also proposes the use of space-qualified 9-pin connectors.

SpaceWire and IEEE 1355 DS-DE allows for a wider set of speeds for data transmission, and some new features for automatic failover . The fail-over features let data find alternate routes, so a spacecraft can have multiple data buses, and be made fault-tolerant . SpaceWire also allows the propagation of time interrupts over SpaceWire links, eliminating the need for separate time discretes.

Link layer [ edit ] Each transferred character starts with a parity bit and a data-control flag bit. If data-control flag is a 0-bit, an 8-bit LSB character follows. Otherwise one of the control codes, including end of packet (EOP).

[ 2 ] Network layer [ edit ] The network data frames look as follows: Address byte Address byte...

Protocol ID Frame data One or more address bytes are used for the routing. Addresses are either physical ones (0–31), or logical ones. The difference is that the physical addresses are deleted from the frame header during routing - which is used for hop-based routing (based on path specified in the frame itself). Logical addresses may be deleted as well, depending on the router configuration.

Interconnection [ edit ] The hardware devices may be connected either directly, or via a SpaceWire router. In the former case, usually pairs of devices are used to guarantee a fail-safe operation, which is handled by the software.

A SpaceWire router is usually a crossbar switch -type device, operating in wormhole switching mode. This also may limit the speed of the communication to the lowest common speed.

[ 3 ] The routing decisions are based on the programmed routing table and the initial incoming frame contents.

Uses [ edit ] SpaceWire is used all around the globe.

[ 4 ] Its use began primarily in ESA projects, but it is currently used by NASA , JAXA , RKA , and many other organizations and companies. Some NASA projects using it include the James Webb Space Telescope , Swift's Burst Alert Telescope , the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter , LCROSS , the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES-R), and the SCaN Testbed, previously known as the Communications, Navigation, and Networking Reconfigurable Testbed (CoNNeCT). It has also been selected by the United States Department of Defense for Operationally Responsive Space. SpaceWire initiatives are being coordinated between several space agencies in the frame of Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) in order to extend its communication model to the network and transport layers of the OSI model .

SpaceWire supports highly fault-tolerant networks and systems, which is one reason for its popularity.

[ 5 ] Protocols [ edit ] The ESA has a draft specification in place for the Protocol ID.

The following Protocol ID's have been assigned in ECSS-E-ST-50-51C: Protocol ID Name Description 1 Remote Memory Access Protocol (RMAP) used to remotely access/alter register configuration of the devices 2 CCSDS Packet Transfer Protocol [ 6 ] a common protocol used for sending Telecommands and receiving Telemetry 238 Proposal for Reliable Data Delivery Protocol (RDDP) used on GOES-R 239 Serial Transfer Universal Protocol (STUP) Used on SMCS-332 ASIC References [ edit ] ^ "SpaceWire's User Guide" (PDF) .

Star-dundee.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2019 . Retrieved 27 October 2019 .

chapter 3.3.5 ^ "SpaceWire Characters" .

Star-dundee.com . Retrieved 28 October 2018 .

^ "Radiation-Tolerant 10x SpaceWire Router" (PDF) .

Gaisler.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2018 .

^ "Who Uses SpaceWire? - STAR-Dundee" .

Star-dundee.com . Retrieved 28 October 2018 .

^ Dr Barry M Cook; Paul Walker.

"Ethernet over SpaceWire - software issues" . 4links.co.uk, p. 2 Archived 2019-08-30 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Space Packet Transfer Protocol" (PDF) .

Public.ccsds.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 September 2018 . Retrieved 28 October 2018 .

Other sources [ edit ] ECSS-E-ST-50-12C - SpaceWire - Links, nodes, routers, and networks , ESA - ESTEC .

ECSS-E-50-12A (SUPERSEDED only document number has been changed to ECSS-E-ST-50-12C) SpaceWire - Nodes, links, and networks , ESA - ESTEC .

ECSS-E-ST-50-11C Draft 1.3 "Space engineering - SpaceWire protocols" External links [ edit ] Official website v t e James Webb Space Telescope Timeline of JWST Instruments and sensors Fine Guidance Sensor and Near Infrared Imager and Slitless Spectrograph Mid-Infrared Instrument Near-Infrared Camera Near-Infrared Spectrograph Elements Integrated Science Instrument Module Optical Telescope Element (mirrors) Spacecraft bus Sunshield Stages Launch and commissioning (2021-2022) Ariane flight VA256 Images Webb's First Deep Field (2022) Discoveries CEERS-93316 (2022) F200DB-045 (2022) GLASS-z12 (2022) Maisie's Galaxy (2022) JADES-GS-z13-0 (2022) LHS 475 b (2023) AzTECC71 (2023) UNCOVER-BD-1 (2023) UNCOVER-z12 (2023) UNCOVER-z13 (2023) JADES-GS-z14-0 (2024) A2744z7p9OD (2025) Institutions NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Space Telescope Science Institute European Space Agency Canadian Space Agency Related SpaceWire OTE Pathfinder James E. Webb (namesake) List of deep fields Deep Sky (2023 documentary) Unknown: Cosmic Time Machine (2023 documentary) Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SpaceWire&oldid=1280296910 " Categories : Computer buses ECSS standards Fault-tolerant computer systems James Webb Space Telescope Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 13 March 2025, at 19:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SpaceWire 7 languages Add topic

