Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common law examples Toggle Common law examples subsection 1.1 Adoption 1.2 Doctrine of survival 1.3 Ejectment 1.4 Reasonable person 2 English examples Toggle English examples subsection 2.1 Jurisdiction of the Exchequer 2.2 Jurisdiction of the Court of King's Bench 2.3 Resignation from Parliament 3 Australian examples Toggle Australian examples subsection 3.1 Mabo v Queensland 4 Philosophical arguments 5 Use in fiction 6 Limitations on use 7 Codified legal fictions 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Legal fiction 20 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fact assumed for the purpose of a legal rule Not to be confused with legal drama , legal thriller , or police procedural .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Legal fiction" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A legal fiction is a construct used in the law where a thing is taken to be true, which is not in fact true, in order to achieve an outcome. Legal fictions can be employed by the courts [ 1 ] or found in legislation.

Legal fictions are different from legal presumptions which assume a certain state of facts until the opposite is proved, such as the presumption of legitimacy .

The term legal fiction is sometimes used in a pejorative way.

Jeremy Bentham was a famous historical critic of legal fictions.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Proponents of legal fictions, particularly of their use historically, identify legal fictions as " scaffolding around a building under construction ".

[ 4 ] Common law examples [ edit ] Adoption [ edit ] Child adoption is a legal fiction in that the adoptive parents become the legal parents, notwithstanding the lack of a biological relationship.

[ 5 ] Once an order or judgment of adoption is entered, the biological parents become legal strangers to the child, legally no longer related nor with any rights related to the child. Conversely, the adoptive parents are legally considered to be parents of the adopted child. A new birth certificate reflecting this is issued, which is a legal fiction.

[ citation needed ] Doctrine of survival [ edit ] See also: Simultaneous death If two or more people die within a period of time or in a manner that renders it impossible to tell the order in which they died, the older of the two is considered to have died first.

[ 6 ] This is in order to safeguard the operation of certain general legal rules, e.g. in inheritance law , where the younger person will inherit the older, hence being able to pass on. If a parent dies alongside a child, who has a child of their own, the rule of the elder predeceasing the child will allow the grandchild (typically) to inherit both, the parent directly and grandparent indirectly, with the parent instantaneously inheriting and then bequeathing.

The doctrine of survival, although still existing in England, has been abolished in many U.S. states by the Uniform Simultaneous Death Act .

Ejectment [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The common law had a procedure whereby title to land could be put in direct issue, called the " writ of right". The defendant could insist on trial by "wager of battle", that is trial by combat , a judicially sanctioned duel . To avoid the plaintiff staking life and limb, a tale was told in the pleadings about how one John Doe leased land from the plaintiff but was ousted by Richard Roe, who claimed a contrary lease from the defendant . Such events would lead to the "mixed action in ejectment ", a procedure to determine title via trial by jury . This is the origin of the names John Doe and Richard Roe for anonymous parties. The fiction of Doe, Roe, and the leases was not challenged by the parties unless they wished to stake their life on a trial by combat. Wager of battle fell into disuse by the end of the thirteenth century though it was not abolished in England until 1819.

Reasonable person [ edit ] In cases where the court must determine whether a standard has been reached, such as whether a defendant has been negligent , the court frequently uses the legal fiction of the " reasonable person ".

[ note 1 ] This is known as the " objective test ", and is far more common than the "subjective test" where the court seeks the viewpoint of the parties (or "subjects"). Sometimes, the court may apply a "mixed test", as in the House of Lords' decision in DPP v Camplin 1978.

[ 7 ] [ note 2 ] English examples [ edit ] Jurisdiction of the Exchequer [ edit ] Main article: Writ of Quominus In England , a legal fiction extended the jurisdiction of the Court of the Exchequer to all types of cases involving debt . The Exchequer had a much lighter caseload than the King's Bench and other courts in England. Litigants would commence an action in the Exchequer Court by pleading that they owed money to the King, which they could not pay because their debtor had in turn wrongfully withheld payment to them. The debt owed to the King became a legal fiction in that the original debtor was not entitled to controvert this allegation in order to oust the Exchequer from jurisdiction.

Jurisdiction of the Court of King's Bench [ edit ] Main article: Bill of Middlesex The Bill of Middlesex was a legal fiction used by the Court of King's Bench to gain jurisdiction over cases traditionally in the remit of the Court of Common Pleas . Hinging on the King's Bench's retaining criminal jurisdiction over the county of Middlesex , the Bill allowed it to take cases traditionally in the remit of other common law courts by claiming that the defendant had committed trespass in Middlesex. Once the defendant was in custody, the trespass complaint would be quietly dropped and other complaints (such as debt or detinue) would be substituted.

Resignation from Parliament [ edit ] Main article: Resignation from the British House of Commons In 1623, a rule was declared that Members of Parliament were given a trust to represent their constituencies and, therefore, were not at liberty to resign. However, an MP who accepted an "office of profit" from the Crown (including appointment as a minister) was obliged to leave the House and seek re-election, because it was thought their independence might be compromised if they were in the monarch's pay.

The device was invented that the MP who wished to quit applied to the Crown for the post of " Steward of the Chiltern Hundreds " or " Steward of the Manor of Northstead " with no duties or income, but legally an office of profit in the monarch's gift. The first MP to avail themself of the Chiltern Hundreds to leave Parliament was John Pitt in 1751. The requirement for ministerial re-election has been abolished, but the "Chiltern Hundreds" mechanism remains to enable MPs to resign.

Australian examples [ edit ] Mabo v Queensland [ edit ] Some legal fictions have been invalidated due to increased historical knowledge and changes in social norms, as in the Mabo case, where the High Court of Australia rejected previous authorities that held that Indigenous Australians were too "low in the scale of social organization" at the time of British settlement to be capable of holding title to land.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Philosophical arguments [ edit ] William Blackstone defended legal fictions, observing that legislation is never free from the iron law of unintended consequences .

[ citation needed ] Using the metaphor of an ancient castle , Blackstone opined: We inherit an old Gothic castle, erected in the days of chivalry , but fitted up for a modern inhabitant. The moated ramparts , the embattled towers, and the trophied halls, are magnificent and venerable, but useless. The interior apartments, now converted into rooms of convenience, are cheerful and commodious, though their approaches are winding and difficult.

Henry Maine , on the other hand, argued that legal fictions seem an ornate outgrowth of the law that ought to be removed by legislation .

Jeremy Bentham sharply criticised the notion of legal fictions, saying that "fictions are to law what fraud is to trade." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Use in fiction [ edit ] In the novel Joan and Peter (1918) by H. G. Wells , Peter's parents die in a sailing accident. As it is not known which parent dies first, a legal fiction is applied maintaining that the husband, being a man and therefore stronger, lived longer which results in the father's will determining Peter's legal guardian . Later in the novel a witness to the accident declares seeing the mother floundering some time after the father has disappeared, and so the legal fiction is overturned and the mother's will is followed, providing Peter with a new legal guardian. Wells was in error as to the English law, which actually presumes that the older person died first.

[ dubious – discuss ] In Act II, Scene 1 of Gilbert and Sullivan 's The Gondoliers , Giuseppe Palmieri (who serves jointly with his brother Marco as King of Barataria) requests that he and his brother be recognized individually, that they might receive individual portions of food as they have two independent appetites. He is turned down because the joint rule "... is a legal fiction, and legal fictions are solemn things." [ 11 ] In the novel Lud-in-the-Mist (1926) by Hope Mirrlees , the concept of the legal fiction as a secular substitute for spiritual mysteries and magical illusions is a central theme. Legal fictions in the novel include referring to fairy fruit, mention of which is taboo, as woven silk fabric in order to allow the law to regulate it; and declaring members of the country's Senate "dead in the eyes of the law" in order to remove them from office, since the senators serve for life.

Limitations on use [ edit ] Legal fictions derive their legitimacy from tradition and precedent, rather than formal standing as a source of law. Historically, many legal fictions were created as ad hoc remedies forged to meet a harsh or an unforeseen situation. Conventions and practices over the centuries have imparted a degree of stability both to the institution of legal fictions and to specific legal fictions (such as adoptions and corporate personhood ) that have been repeatedly invoked in judicial precedents. While judiciaries retain discretion in the use of legal fictions, some general propositions regarding the appropriateness of using legal fictions might be expressed as follows: A legal fiction should not be employed to defeat law or result in illegality: it has been always stressed that a legal fiction should not be employed where it would result in the violation of any legal rule or moral injunction. In Sinclair v. Brougham 1914 AC 378 the House of Lords refused to extend the juridical basis of a quasi-contract to a case of an ultra vires borrowing by a limited company, since it would sanction the evasion of the rules of public policy forbidding an ultra vires borrowing by a company. In general, if it appears that a legal fiction is being used to circumvent an existing rule, the courts are entitled to disregard that fiction and look at the real facts. The doctrine of " piercing the corporate veil " is applied under those circumstances.

Legal fiction should operate for the purpose for which it was created and should not be extended beyond its legitimate field.

Codified legal fictions [ edit ] Some legal fictions are codified in statutory or regulatory law. A person having ordinary skill in the art [ 12 ] is an example of such a legal fiction.

See also [ edit ] Ad hoc Copyright traps De jure En ventre sa mere Fiction Person having ordinary skill in the art Notes [ edit ] ^ The "reasonable person" is also known as the "objective bystander" or "the man on the Clapham omnibus ".

^ In Camplin , in determining whether the defendant had been provoked to murder (an objective test), the jury should be allowed to consider the age of the defendant, who was 15 (a subjective test).

References [ edit ] ^ Black's Law Dictionary, 804 (5th ed. 1979) ^ a b Raymond Wacks (2012).

Understanding Jurisprudence: An Introduction to Legal Theory . Oxford University Press. p. 202.

ISBN 978-0-19-960826-3 . Retrieved April 28, 2015 .

^ a b Moglen, Eben (1998).

"Legal Fictions and Common Law Legal Theory – Some Historical Reflections" . Columbia University.

^ Fuller 1931, pp. 363, 513, 877.

^ Fuller, Lon L.

(1931).

"Legal Fictions" .

Illinois Law Review .

XXV . CA, USA: Stanford University Press: 39.

ISBN 9780804703284 .

{{ cite journal }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ In England and Wales: Law of Property Act 1925 , s. 184 ^ DPP v Camplin [1978] AC 705 House of Lords ^ Mabo v Queensland (No 2) [1992] HCA   23 at paras. 39 to 42, (1992) 175 CLR 1 ^ Hope, Deborah (25 February 2006).

" 'Minor role' for terra nullius" .

The Australian .

News Corp Australia .

ProQuest 356242488 .

^ Brennan J (1995).

"Aboriginal land claims, an Australian perspective" .

High Court of Australia . Archived from the original on 24 December 2022 . Retrieved 3 December 2022 .

^ Gilbert, William S.

The Savoy Operas . London: Macmillan, 1962. p.131 ^ The Patent Act of 1952 – Legislative History – The Federico Commentary External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Legal fiction .

Look up legal fiction in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Legal fictions at Wikimedia Commons Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Fictions" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 319–320.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐lx5jn
Cached time: 20250815123627
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.473 seconds
Real time usage: 0.623 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2517/1000000
Revision size: 14472/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 93659/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12159/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50010/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.297/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22918607/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  534.274      1 -total
 20.07%  107.227      2 Template:Reflist
 15.81%   84.495      1 Template:Law
 15.49%   82.765      1 Template:Navbox
 15.43%   82.465      2 Template:Lang
 12.69%   67.821      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.98%   63.986      1 Template:Cite_book
 10.12%   54.044      1 Template:Short_description
  8.61%   46.027      3 Template:Ambox
  6.29%   33.623      1 Template:Globalize Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:258949:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815123627 and revision id 1306019047. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legal_fiction&oldid=1306019047 " Category : Legal fictions Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2022 Articles needing additional references from May 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles needing additional references from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from January 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 12:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legal fiction 20 languages Add topic

