Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Type specimens and circumscription 2 Forms of plant names 3 Components of plant names Toggle Components of plant names subsection 3.1 Binary name 3.2 In cultivated plants 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Botanical name 21 languages العربية Bosanski Català Dansk Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands Português Simple English தமிழ் తెలుగు 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific name for a plant, alga or fungus Bellis perennis has one botanical name and many common names, including perennial daisy, lawn daisy, common daisy, and English daisy.

A botanical name is a formal scientific name conforming to the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN) and, if it concerns a plant cultigen , the additional cultivar or Group epithets must conform to the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP). The code of nomenclature covers "all organisms traditionally treated as algae, fungi , or plants, whether fossil or non-fossil, including blue-green algae ( Cyanobacteria ), chytrids , oomycetes , slime moulds and photosynthetic protists with their taxonomically related non-photosynthetic groups (but excluding Microsporidia )." [ 1 ] The purpose of a formal name is to have a single name that is accepted and used worldwide for a particular plant or plant group. For example, the botanical name Bellis perennis denotes a plant species which is native to most of the countries of Europe and the Middle East , where it has accumulated various names in many languages. Later, the plant was introduced worldwide, bringing it into contact with more languages. English names for this plant species include: daisy, [ 2 ] English daisy, [ 3 ] and lawn daisy.

[ 4 ] The cultivar Bellis perennis 'Aucubifolia' is a golden-variegated horticultural selection of this species.

Type specimens and circumscription [ edit ] The botanical name itself is fixed by a type , which is a particular specimen (or in some cases a group of specimens) of an organism to which the scientific name is formally attached. In other words, a type is an example that serves to anchor or centralize the defining features of that particular taxon.

[ citation needed ] The usefulness of botanical names is limited by the fact that taxonomic groups are not fixed in size; a taxon may have a varying circumscription , depending on the taxonomic system , thus, the group that a particular botanical name refers to can be quite small according to some people and quite big according to others. For example, the traditional view of the family Malvaceae has been expanded in some modern approaches to include what were formerly considered to be several closely related families. Some botanical names refer to groups that are very stable (for example Equisetaceae , Magnoliaceae ) while for other names a careful check is needed to see which circumscription is being used (for example Fabaceae , Amygdaloideae , Taraxacum officinale ).

[ citation needed ] Forms of plant names [ edit ] Depending on rank , botanical names may be in one part ( genus and above), two parts (various situations below the rank of genus) or three parts (below the rank of species). The names of cultivated plants are not necessarily similar to the botanical names, since they may instead involve "unambiguous common names" of species or genera. Cultivated plant names may also have an extra component, bringing a maximum of four parts: [ citation needed ] in one part Plantae (the plants) Marchantiophyta (the liverworts) Magnoliopsida (class including the family Magnoliaceae ) Liliidae (subclass including the family Liliaceae ) Pinophyta (the conifers ) Fagaceae (the beech family) Betula (the birch genus) in two parts Acacia subg.

Phyllodineae (the wattles) lchemilla subsect.

Heliodrosium Berberis thunbergii (Japanese barberry) a species name, i.e., a combination consisting of a genus name and one epithet Syringa 'Charisma' – a cultivar within a genus Hydrangea Lacecap Group – a genus name and Group epithet Lilium Darkest Red Group – a genus name and Group epithet Paphiopedilum Greenteaicecreamandraspberries grex snowdrop 'John Gray' – an unambiguous common name for the genus Galanthus and a cultivar epithet in three parts Calystegia sepium subsp.

americana (American hedge bindweed), a combination consisting of a genus name and two epithets Crataegus azarolus var.

pontica (a Mediterranean hawthorn) Bellis perennis 'Aucubifolia' – a cultivar Brassica oleracea Gemmifera Group – a species name and Group epithet in four parts Scilla hispanica var.

campanulata 'Rose Queen' – a cultivar within a botanical variety apart from cultivars, the name of a plant can never have more than three parts.

Components of plant names [ edit ] A botanical name in three parts, i.e., an infraspecific name (a name for a taxon below the rank of species) needs a "connecting term" to indicate rank. In the Calystegia example above, this is "subsp.", an abbreviation for subspecies . In botany there are many ranks below that of species (in zoology there is only one such rank, subspecies, so that this "connecting term" is not used in zoology). A name of a "subdivision of a genus" also needs a connecting term (in the Acacia example above, this is "subg.", an abbreviation for subgenus ). The connecting term is not part of the name itself.

[ citation needed ] A taxon may be indicated by a listing in more than three parts: " Saxifraga aizoon var.

aizoon subvar.

brevifolia f.

multicaulis subf.

surculosa Engl. & Irmsch." but this is a classification, not a formal botanical name. The botanical name is Saxifraga aizoon subf.

surculosa Engl. & Irmsch. ( ICN Art 24: Ex 1).

Generic, specific, and infraspecific botanical names are usually printed in italics . The example set by the ICN is to italicize all botanical names, including those above genus, though the ICN preface states: "The Code sets no binding standard in this respect, as typography is a matter of editorial style and tradition not of nomenclature". Most peer-reviewed scientific botanical publications do not italicize names above the rank of genus, and non-botanical scientific publications do not, which is in keeping with two of the three other kinds of scientific name : zoological and bacterial ( viral names above genus are italicized, a new policy adopted in the early 1990s).

[ citation needed ] Binary name [ edit ] For botanical nomenclature, the ICN prescribes a two-part name or binary name for any taxon below the rank of genus down to, and including, the rank of species. Taxa below the rank of species get a three part ( infraspecific name ).

[ citation needed ] A binary name consists of the name of a genus and an epithet.

In the case of a species this is a specific epithet : Bellis perennis is the name of a species, in which perennis is the specific epithet. There is no connecting term involved to indicate the rank.

In the case of a subdivision of a genus (subgenus, section, subsection, series, subseries, etc.) the name consists of the name of a genus and a subdivisional epithet . A connecting term should be placed before the subdivisional epithet to indicate the rank: Paraserianthes sect.

Falcataria In cultivated plants [ edit ] In the case of cultivated plants, there is an additional epithet which is an often non-Latin part, not written in italics. For cultivars, it is always given in single quotation marks. The cultivar , Group , or grex epithet may follow either the botanical name of the species, or the name of the genus only, or the unambiguous common name of the genus or species. The generic name, followed by a cultivar name, is often used when the parentage of a particular hybrid cultivar is not relevant in the context, or is uncertain.

See also [ edit ] (specific to botany) Author citation (botany) Botanical nomenclature Correct name (botany) Hybrid name (botany) International Association for Plant Taxonomy International Plant Names Index The Plant List Validly published name (botany) World Checklist of Selected Plant Families (more general) Glossary of scientific naming Biological classification Binomial nomenclature Nomenclature codes Open nomenclature Plant epithet Taxonomy Undescribed species References [ edit ] ^ McNeill, J.; Barrie, F.R.; Buck, W.R.; Demoulin, V.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D.L.; Herendeen, P.S.; Knapp, S.; Marhold, K.; Prado, J.; Prud'homme Van Reine, W.F.; Smith, G.F.; Wiersema, J.H.; Turland, N.J. (2012).

International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code) adopted by the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress Melbourne, Australia, July 2011 . Vol. Regnum Vegetabile 154. A.R.G. Gantner Verlag KG.

ISBN 978-3-87429-425-6 .

Archived from the original on 2013-11-04.

^ Ecological Flora of the British Isles Archived 2007-03-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ " Bellis perennis " .

Germplasm Resources Information Network .

Agricultural Research Service , United States Department of Agriculture . Retrieved 2011-06-05 .

^ L. B. McCarty (15 January 2001).

Color Atlas of Turfgrass Weeds . John Wiley & Sons. p. 102.

ISBN 978-1-57504-142-1 .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2016.

Bibliography [ edit ] Pavord, Anna (2005).

The naming of names the search for order in the world of plants . New York: Bloomsbury.

ISBN 9781596919655 . Retrieved 18 February 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Brickell, C.D.; Alexander, C.; David, J.C.; Hetterscheid, W.L.A.; Leslie, A.C.; Malecot, V.; Jin, X.; Editorial committee; Cubey, J.J. (2009).

International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP or Cultivated Plant Code), incorporating the Rules and Recommendations for naming plants in cultivation (PDF) (8th ed.). International Association for Plant Taxonomy and International Society for Horticultural Science. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-08-13 . Retrieved 2013-12-29 .

Adopted by the International Union of Biological Sciences International Commission for the Nomenclature of Cultivated Plants.

Plant botanical definition list . Retrieved 12 November 2016.

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Botanical_name&oldid=1280034079 " Categories : Botanical nomenclature Plant taxonomy Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 This page was last edited on 12 March 2025, at 02:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Botanical name 21 languages Add topic

