Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization 3 Scientific activities 4 General public 5 Mathematical designs 6 Head of Institut Henri Poincaré 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Institut Henri Poincaré 11 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Italiano 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°50′41″N 2°20′38″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.84472°N 2.34389°E ﻿ / 48.84472; 2.34389 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Institut Henri Poincaré" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Henri Poincaré Institute (or IHP for Institut Henri Poincaré ) is a mathematics research institute part of Sorbonne University , in association with the Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS). It is located in the 5th arrondissement of Paris , on the Sainte-Geneviève Hill.

History [ edit ] Just after World War I, mathematicians Émile Borel in France and George Birkhoff in the United States persuaded French and American sponsors ( Edmond de Rothschild and the Rockefeller Foundation respectively) [ 1 ] to fund the building of a centre for lectures and international exchanges in mathematics and theoretical physics. The Institute was inaugurated on 17 November 1928 and named after French mathematician Henri Poincaré (1854–1912).

The institute's objective has been to promote mathematical physics, and it soon became a meeting place for the French scientific community. In the 1990s, the IHP became a thematic institute modelled on Berkeley's Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI).

Organization [ edit ] The IHP's governing board has about 35 members. There are no permanent researchers other than the director and the deputy director. From 2009 to 2017, the institute was headed by mathematician Cédric Villani , Fields Medals laureate in 2010, as director. French cosmologist Jean-Philippe Uzan was his deputy director. Since 2018, Sylvie Benzoni has been the institute's director.

Together with the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques (IHES), the Centre International de Rencontres Mathématiques (CIRM) and the Centre International de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées (CIMPA) it is a member of the Carmin LabEx (Laboratory of Excellence), which aims at facilitating exchanges between mathematicians by building infrastructures for pooling skills and information.

Main entrance of the Institute Scientific activities [ edit ] As a venue for national and international mathematical exchanges, the Institute organizes "thematic quarters" (three-month programmes on specific topics), intensive short-time collaborations, PhD training courses, conferences and seminars in mathematics or related fields, such as physics, biology or computer science. Topics are selected by the IHP's Scientific Steering Committee. The IHP welcomes around 11,000 mathematicians each year.

In 2013, the Institute launched the "Poincaré Chair", a research program designed to foster the international careers of young researchers. Numerous seminars or series of lectures take place at the IHP, such as the Bourbaki and Bourbaphy Seminars, the History of Mathematics Seminar, as well as some more specialised lectures in algebra, number theory, mathematical physics and elliptic curves.

The institute also publishes four international scientific journals, the Annals of the Institut Henri Poincaré ( Journal of Theoretical and Mathematical Physics , Probability and Statistics , Non-Linear Analysis , and Combinatorics, Physics and their Interactions ).

General public [ edit ] The Institute co-organises and sponsors numerous, scientific and cultural events aimed at the general public (2011: Mathematics, a Beautiful Elsewhere at the Fondation Cartier; 2011: A tribute to Evariste Galois; 2012: Centenary of Henri Poincaré's Death...). It has close ties with the associations and societies for the promotion of mathematics housed in its premises.

Mathematical designs [ edit ] The library of the Henri Poincaré Institute holds a collection of some 400 mathematical models and designs that come in different materials: glass, plastic, cardboard, wire, sewing thread on a rigid frame, and plaster. This collection, which started with a donation by Martin Shilling, has been enhanced over the years, notably by wooden models built between 1912 and 1914 by lecturer Joseph Caron of the École Normale Supérieure .

Head of Institut Henri Poincaré [ edit ] 1928–1948: Émile Borel 1949–1975: Paul Montel 1975–1984: Charles Pisot 1984–1985: Pierre Lelong 1986–1987: Bernard Teissier 1988–1989: Jacques Stern 1990–1994: Pierre Grisvard 1994–1995: Joseph Oesterlé 1999–2008: Michel Broué 2009–2017: Cédric Villani 2018–present: Sylvie Benzoni See also [ edit ] Annales Henri Poincaré Henri Poincaré Émile Borel References [ edit ] ^ Rockefeller and the internationalization of mathematics between two World Wars [Texte imprimé][: documents and studies for the social history of mathematics in the 20th century / Reinhard Siegmund-Schultze. - Basel; Boston; Berlin : Birkhäuser, cop. 2001. - 1 vol. (XIII-341 p.) : fig., ill., carte; 24 cm. - (Science networks historical studies; volume 25). - Bibliogr. p. [307]-318. Index.

ISBN 3-7643-6468-8 (rel.). - ISBN 9783764364687 (rel.)] External links [ edit ] IHP welcome Institute homepage A short history of the Institute (in French, 1993) v t e Sorbonne University Faculties Arts and Humanities Art History and Archaeology Journalism Communication Science History Geography and Planning Philosophy Musicology English Studies Spanish Studies Germanic and Nordic Studies Arabic and Hebrew Studies Iberian and Latin American Studies Italian studies Slavic studies Modern Western Civilizations French and Comparative Literature Sociology and Computer Science for the Humanities Science and Engineering Engineering Mathematics and Theoretical Physics Astrophysics Statistics Mathematics Robotics Quantum Physics Informatics and Computer Science Marine biology (Roscoff) Marine biology (Banyuls) Developmental Biology, and Oceanography Medical AP-HP Sorbonne University Hospital Group Hôpital Charles-Foix Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital Hôpital Fondation Rothschild Quinze-Vingts National Ophthalmology Hospital Hôpital Saint-Antoine Hôpital Tenon Hôpital Armand-Trousseau Hôpital de La Roche-Guyon Institutes CELSA Sorbonne School of Advanced Studies in Information and Communication Sciences Sorbonne University Polytechnic School Institute of Art and Archaeology Henri Poincaré Institute Jussieu Institute of Mathematics Paris Institute of Statistics Paris Institute of Astrophysics Institute of Mineralogy, Materials Physics and Cosmochemistry National Institute of Teaching and Education of Paris Charles Foix Longevity Institute Léon Robin Research Center for Ancient Thought Sorbonne Institute for Research on Modern Western Civilizations Sorbonne Institute of Papyrology Independent National Museum of Natural History University of Technology of Compiègne INSEAD Sports Sorbonne University Sports Association of Sciences and Medicine ASSUL - Sorbonne University Arts and Humanities Sports Association Campus Sorbonne Jussieu - Pierre and Marie Curie Malesherbes Clignancourt Cordeliers Michelet Neuilly Jardin des plantes Serpente Library Sorbonne Neo-Hellenic Studies Library Ascoli Library Léon-Robin Library Sainte-Geneviève Library ( Sorbonne Nouvelle University library) Abu Dhabi Related People Sorbonne University Abu Dhabi La Gazelle Alma Mater Category v t e The European Mathematical Society International member societies European Society for Mathematical and Theoretical Biology National member societies Armenia Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Mathematical Society of France SMAI SFdS Georgia Germany German Mathematical Society GAMM Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Italian Mathematical Union SIMAI AMASES Kosovo Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Montenegro Netherlands Norway Norwegian Mathematical Society NSF Poland Portugal Romania Russia Moscow Mathematical Society St. Petersburg Mathematical Society Serbia Slovakia Slovenia DMFA SDAMS Spain Catalan Mathematical Society RSMS SEIO SEMA Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Edinburgh Mathematical Society IMA London Mathematical Society Institutional Members Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics Centre de Recerca Matemàtica Centre International de Rencontres Mathématiques Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica Erwin Schrödinger International Institute for Mathematical Physics EURANDOM Faculty of Mathematics at the University of Barcelona Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques Institut Henri Poincaré Institut Mittag-Leffler Institute for Mathematical Research International Centre for Mathematical Sciences Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences Stefan Banach International Mathematical Center Thomas Stieltjes Institute for Mathematics 48°50′41″N 2°20′38″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.84472°N 2.34389°E ﻿ / 48.84472; 2.34389 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Institut_Henri_Poincaré&oldid=1300172316 " Categories : Research institutes in France International research institutes for mathematics French National Centre for Scientific Research Research institutes established in 1928 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 17:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Institut Henri Poincaré 11 languages Add topic

