Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Evolution in the politics and iconography of Augustus 2 Sculpture 3 Architecture 4 Painting 5 Metalwork and carved gems 6 Provincial art Toggle Provincial art subsection 6.1 Gaul Narbonensis 7 Notable artists 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Augustan and Julio-Claudian art 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art of the Augustan and Julio-Claudian periods of Roman history This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ara Pacis Augustae Augustan and Julio-Claudian art is the artistic production that took place in the Roman Empire under the reign of Augustus and the Julio-Claudian dynasty , lasting from 44 BC to 69 AD. At that time Roman art developed towards a serene " neoclassicism ", which reflected the political aims of Augustus and the Pax Romana , aimed at building a solid and idealized image of the empire.

The art of the age of Augustus is characterized by refinement and elegance, adapted to the sobriety and measure that Augustus had imposed on himself and his court. During the principality of Augustus, a radical urban transformation of Rome began in a monumental sense.

Suetonius recalls that: Rome was not up to the grandeur of the Empire and was exposed to floods and fires, but he embellished it to such an extent that he rightly boasted of leaving the city he had found made of bricks of marble. In addition to that, it also made her safe for the future, as far as she could provide for posterity." [ 1 ] Still influential was the Greek sculpture from the 5th century BC, of which many works remained. This continuation of neo-Atticism influenced architecture, craftsmanship, and painting. Emblematic works of this era are the Ara Pacis , the Via Labicana Augustus , and the Augustus of Prima Porta .

Evolution in the politics and iconography of Augustus [ edit ] Portrait of Octavian at the Capitoline Museums Via Labicana Augustus The political evolution of Augustus was promptly reflected in official art, as evidenced by the series of imperial portraits. Typical features of his portraits are the steady eyes, the straight nose, the rather hollowed face, the well-pronounced cheekbones, the thin mouth, and a lock of hair "with a pincer" on the right side of the forehead.

The portrait of Octavian at the Capitoline Museums shows him as he was in the period between 35 and 30 BC, when Augustus had not yet assumed the imperial titles and was still taken by the struggle for political supremacy. He has a vehement expression, but with the aura of inspiration typical of portraits of Hellenistic rulers.  However, it was probably sculpted early in his Principate.

Conversely, the statues of Augustus of Prima Porta and of Via Labicana Augustus have a composure reminiscent of Polykleitos and the other classical Greek sculptors. These show an expression of proud reserve, a disposition Augustus demonstrated in his Res Gestae Divi Augusti .

The official iconography of Augustus was widespread. The Res Gestae reports that about 80 statues made of silver were erected in the Empire.

[ 2 ] The portraits of the members of Augustus' family were based on the resemblance to Augustus, almost cancelling the individual features to accentuate the common features as much as possible.

Sculpture [ edit ] At the time of Augustus, works of careful technical and formal perfection were produced. Artists were devoted to combining detailed realism with creativity richness. This era was defined by neo-Atticim, and was ultimately a brake on the nascent individuality of Roman art.

The Ara Pacis is a symbol of the Augustan era, constructed between 13 BC and 9 BC. The general Italic approach is mixed with neo-Attic reliefs and a frieze in the style of Pergamon ; all combined without precise logical relationships between architectural parts and decorations. Only the small frieze on the central altar is considered a truly local artwork.

The Ara Pietatis , constructed under the reign of Claudius , is considered a more unified work. Artworks constructed under Claudius lacked warmth and color found in other eras.

Architecture [ edit ] See also: Roman architecture The Pula Arena Remains of the Roman Agora , Athens During the time of Augustus, Rome took on the appearance similar to that of the most important Hellenistic cities. Augustus oversaw the replacement of many brick constructions with marble.

In this period, there was more experimentation with architecture, notably concerning triumphal arches, baths, amphitheaters, and mausoleums in Rome. The Arch of Augustus , for example, was the first permanent three-bayed arch ever built in Rome. It was erected by Augustus around 20 BC.

In this period there were more buildings dedicated to entertainment: the Roman Theatre of Orange was founded in 40 BC, the Theatre of Marcellus dates back to 11 BC, and the Pula Arena was built in a time between Claudius and Titus .

The influence of Roman architecture on Greece can also be seen in this era. This is evident with the Roman Agora at Athens, constructed in 15 BC.

Painting [ edit ] Villa of Livia In this period we see the transition from the second to the third Pompeian Style .

Painted within the House of Livia on the Palatine Hill in Rome, there is a classic example of a second style. The decoration of the Casa della Farnesina , attributed to the painter Studius between 30 BC and 20 BC, was mentioned by Pliny the Elder .

[ 3 ] It is attributable to the third style.

At the end of the reign of Augustus, there were detailed garden frescoes painted in the large room of the Villa of Livia . The same painters also likely decorated the Auditorium of Maecenas (now largely lost without adequate photographic cataloging after the discovery). The painting of these types of gardens derives from eastern influence, with lower quality examples found in some tombs of the Gabbari necropolis .

The most famous hall of the Villa of the Mysteries also likely dates back to the time of Augustus, where copies of Greek paintings and Roman insertions are mixed.

The reconstructions of Pompeii after the earthquake of 62 saw new decorations, for the first time in the so-called fourth style. Also done in this style is the decorations of the Domus Transitoria and the Domus Aurea , linked to the names of the painter Fabullus and Nero himself.

[ citation needed ] Metalwork and carved gems [ edit ] The Great Cameo of France Fine Roman metalwork largely followed Greek artists such as Pasiteles , who also wrote several books on chasing . In the period of Augustus, this art had a remarkable technical and artistic level, demonstrated by the numerous silver pieces found in various parts of the Empire, notably the Hildesheim Treasure .

A group of very high quality large engraved gems have survived, including large cameos , probably from a state workshop serving the court. After 29 BC, the Gemma Augustea was created. The Great Cameo of France followed in the era of Tiberius .  The Blacas Cameo of Augustus was perhaps made soon after his death.

The Gemma Augustea The Gemma Claudia Cameo with the profile of Augustus The Portland Vase Provincial art [ edit ] Relief on the Mausoleum of the Julii The great development from which the western provinces benefited in this period coincided with the birth and establishment of the characteristics of provincial art. The art of the Roman provinces was based on the artistic tradition of plebeian art , which was already widespread among the Roman middle class, usually called to form the nuclei of the new colonies of veterans. Among the most evident examples is that of production in the colony of Aquileia .

Works that were widespread in the provinces were funeral monuments decorated with reliefs, where the client's social status, businesses and public services were highlighted (as in the Funerary Monument of Lusius Storax ). The portraits in these works are almost always generic, without real individualized details. As a result, it is often useless to try to date them based on the hairstyles and styles of the clothes depicted in the art.

There are two main original trends observed in provincial art: The conception of figures carved in blocks, with accentuation of mass at the edges ("cubistic" conception, which had also existed in Etruscan art and then disappeared in the Republican era) ; and figures with expressions of a gentler nature.

Gaul Narbonensis [ edit ] Unique are the characteristics of the artistic production in Gallia Narbonensis ( Saint-Rémy-de-Provence , Carpentras , Orange ). The monuments of this province, whose dating has long been discussed, present a rich style, with greater spatial freedom even than the coeval monuments of Rome, with stylistic elements (such as the outline of the figures highlighted with a carved line) which appear in Rome only from the second century. Notable constructions include the Mausoleum of the Julii , dated between 25 BC and 30 BC, and the Triumphal Arch of Orange from 26 AD.

Mausoleum of the Julii Triumphal Arch of Orange Relief on the Triumphal Arch of Orange Notable artists [ edit ] The list of notable Roman artists from the period includes: Ennion , glassworker Famulus , painter Quintus Pedius , painter Proclus , mosaicist Spurius Tadius , painter References [ edit ] ^ Suetonius Tranquillus, Gaius. "Vita divi Augusti".

De vita Caesarum libri VIII . p. 28.

^ Augustus. "II".

Res Gestae Divi Augusti . p. 24 . Retrieved 20 March 2020 .

^ Pliny, Natural history , XXXV, 16.

Further reading [ edit ] (in Italian) Ranuccio Bianchi Bandinelli & Mario Torelli, L'arte dell'antichità classica, Etruria-Roma , Utet, Torino 1976.

(in Italian) Pierluigi De Vecchi & Elda Cerchiari, I tempi dell'arte , volume 1, Bompiani, Milano 1999 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Augustan and Julio-Claudian art .

Julio-Claudian Art by Joe Geranio v t e Augustus Gaius Octavius · Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus ( Octavian ) · Imperator Caesar Augustus Titles Princeps Augustus Caesar Imperator Divi filius Pater patriae Pontifex maximus Wars of Augustus Second Triumvirate War of Mutina battle Forum Gallorum Liberators' Civil War Philippi Perusine War Bellum Siculum War of Actium battle Alexandria Roman Empire Cantabrian Wars Bellum Batonianum Germanic War Teutoburg Legislative activity Constitutional Reforms leges Juliae Coinage reform Bierzo Edict Propaganda Buildings Forum of Augustus Campus Martius Baths of Agrippa Porticus Argonautarum Mausoleum Solarium Augusti obelisk Saepta Julia Diribitorium Campus Agrippae Porticus Vipsania Porticus Octaviae Porticus of Livia Macellum Liviae Library of Palatine Apollo Theatre of Marcellus Roman Agora Tropaeum Alpium Actian dekanaia Caesareum of Alexandria Campsite Memorial of Augustus Palaces House of Augustus Gardens of Maecenas Palazzo a Mare Villa Giulia Villa of Augustus Religious structures Ara Pacis Pantheon Basilica of Neptune Temples Caesar Apollo Palatinus Apollo Sosianus Mars Ultor Castor and Pollux Augustus Rome and Augustus Aqueducts Aqua Virgo Aqua Alsietina Aqua Julia Roads Milliarium Aureum Via Julia Augusta Via Augusta Arches Aosta Berà Fano Orange Rome Rimini Susa Works Res Gestae Divi Augusti Memoirs of Augustus Culture Literature Augustan and Julio-Claudian art Gaius Maecenas Family Parents and siblings Gaius Octavius (father) Julius Caesar (adoptive father) Atia (mother) Octavia the Elder (sister) Octavia the Younger (sister) Wives Claudia Livia Scribonia Children Julia (daughter) Gaius & Lucius (adopted) Agrippa Postumus (adopted) Nero Drusus (stepson) Tiberius (adopted) Cornelia (stepdaughter) Circle Generals Agrippa‎ Piso Caesoninus Germanicus Marcellus Freedmen Julius Licinus Gaius Julius Hyginus Epaphroditus Portraits Prima Porta Via Labicana Meroë Head Legacy Temples of Augustus Rome Athens Nola Barcelona Roman Temple of Évora Imperial cult Sodales Augustales Felicior Augusto, melior Traiano Cultural depictions Category v t e Roman art topics Roman art periods Roman Republican art (509 BC – 27 BC) Augustan and Julio-Claudian art (44 BC – 69 AD) Flavian art (69–96) Trajanic art (98–117) Hadrianic art [ it ] (117–138) Art of the early Antonini [ it ] (138–180) Art in the age of Commodus [ it ] (180–192) Severan art (193–253) Art in the age of Gallienus [ it ] (253–268) Art of Diocletian and the tetrarchy [ it ] (284–312) Constantinian art [ it ] (312–337) Theodosian art [ it ] (379–395) Types Roman architecture Roman funerary art Roman sarcophagi Roman glass Roman mosaic Roman painting Roman pottery Roman sculpture Roman portraiture Related topics Erotic art in Pompeii and Herculaneum Fayum mummy portraits Neoclassicism Pompeian Styles Conservation and restoration of Pompeian frescoes Roman graffiti Roman music Tintinnabulum Art in related cultures Ancient Greek art Byzantine art Coptic art Early Christian art Etruscan art Gallo-Roman art Hellenistic art Late Antique art Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Augustan_and_Julio-Claudian_art&oldid=1239052296 " Categories : Augustus Ancient Roman art Cultural depictions of Augustus 40s BC establishments 60s disestablishments in the Roman Empire 1st-century BC establishments in the Roman Republic 1st century BC in art 1st century in art Julio-Claudian dynasty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2024, at 03:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Augustan and Julio-Claudian art 1 language Add topic

