Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 Actuality 3 Definitions 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Settlement geography 15 languages العربية भोजपुरी Deutsch Español Euskara हिन्दी עברית ქართული Magyar 日本語 Polski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Swiss Limmat Valley , a periurban settlement structure.

City of London Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Settlement geography is a branch of human geography that investigates the Earth's surface 's part settled by humans. According to the United Nations ' Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements (1976), "human settlements means the totality of the human community – whether city , town or village – with all the social, material, organizational, spiritual and cultural elements that sustain it." Classification [ edit ] Traditionally, it belongs to cultural geography and is divided into the geography of urban settlements ( cities and towns ) and rural settlements (e.g.

villages and hamlets ). Thereby, settlements are mostly seen as elements of the cultural landscape that developed over time. Apart from Australia , Europe and India , the term is actually rarely used in English-speaking geography. One of the last English books on settlement geography was published by Cambridge University Press in the 1990s.

[ 1 ] However, it is a traditional and actual branch in many other countries (e.g., German Siedlungsgeographie , French Geographie de l'habitat , Italian Geografia insediativa , Polish Geografia osadnictwa ).

Actuality [ edit ] Due to processes of urban sprawl such as counter urbanization , [ 2 ] peri-urbanization or postsuburbanisation the existing dichotomy between the urban and the rural is losing importance, especially in industrialized countries and newly industrialized countries . This point of view is already represented by many planning strategies such as unified settlement planning . Hence, an integrative geography of settlements that considers the urban and the rural settlements as a continuum [ 3 ] is regaining the importance lost during the 20th century. Further it is used in prehistoric, [ 4 ] historic [ 5 ] and present-focusing [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] geographic research.

Definitions [ edit ] Referring to Stone (1960), settlement geography is the description and analysis of the distribution of buildings by which people attach themselves to the land. Further, that the geography of settling designate the action of erecting buildings in order to occupy an area temporarily or permanently. It should be understood that buildings are one tangible expression of man-land relationships and that specification of this focus assumes study may be at any scale from quite general to most specific; there is no restriction to large-scale study of individual building plans or architectural details. Buildings are simply one representation of the process of people living in an area they are a mappable division of the landscape to which attention needs direction.

[ 9 ] With respect to Stone's definition, Jordan (1966) emphasizes that settlement geography not exclusively investigates the distributions, but even more the structures , processes and interactions between settlements and its environment (such as soil, geomorphology, economy or society), which produce them.

[ 10 ] More recently, however, the study of settlement has evolved into the interaction of humans with the physical and ecological world. This more holistic study is concerned with sustainability and seeks to better understand the present landscape and plan the future.

[ 11 ] In sum, settlement geography describes and explains the settlements' location , substance, form and structure , as well as the functions and processes that produced them over time ( Genesis , from Greek γέννησις, "origin, birth" or historical development). As an applied science , it projects future settlement development and contributes to the sustainable development of human-environmental systems.

See also [ edit ] Circles of Sustainability Human settlement Sustainable development UN-HABITAT Urban geography References [ edit ] ^ Hornby W.F. and M. Jones 1990: An Introduction to Settlement Geography . Cambridge, 151 pp.

^ Vartiainen, P. 1989: Counterurbanisation: a challenge for socio-theoretical geography. In: Journal of Rural Studies , Vol. 5, pp. 217–225 [1] ^ Rain, D. 2007: Towards settlement science: a research agenda for urban
geography. In: GeoJournal , Vol. 69, pp. 1-8 [2] ^ Schuldenrein, J and G. Clark 2001: Prehistoric Landscapes and Settlement Geography along the Wadi Hasa, West-Central Jordan. In: Environmental Archaeology , Vol. 6, pp. 23-38 [3] ^ Beattie, J. 2008: Colonial Geographies of Settlement: Vegetation, Towns, Disease and Well-Being In Aotearoa/New Zealand, 1830s-1930s. In: Environment and History , Vol. 14, pp. 583-610 [4] ^ Harte, E. W. 2010: Settlement geography of African refugee communities in Southeast Queensland : an analysis of residential distribution and secondary migration.

PhD Thesis, Queensland University of Technology, Queensland, 246 pp.

[5] ^ Harte, E. W., Childs, Iraphne, Hastings, Peter 2009: Settlement Patterns of African Refugee Communities in Southeast Queensland In: Australian Geographer Vol 40, pp. 51-67 [6] ^ Longley, P, et al.

1992: Do green belts change the shape of urban areas? A preliminary analysis of the settlement geography of South East England. In: Regional Studies Vol 26, pp. 437-452 [7] ^ Stone, K.H. 1965: The Development of a Focus for the Geography of Settlement. In: Economic Geography , Vol. 41, No. 4, pp. 346-355 ^ Jordan, T.G. 1966: On the nature of settlement geography. In: The Professional Geographer , Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 26-28 ^ Mayda, C. 1965: The Development of a Focus for the Geography of Settlement. In: Warf, B: Encyclopedia of Geography , SAGE.

DOI 10.4135/9781412939591 Links to related articles v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐zxm6c
Cached time: 20250812020243
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.313 seconds
Real time usage: 0.406 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1019/1000000
Revision size: 7115/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 101210/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25583/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53466/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.168/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3242031/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  304.475      1 -total
 33.06%  100.656      1 Template:Geography_sidebar
 32.16%   97.916      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 27.02%   82.278      1 Template:Short_description
 21.81%   66.394      1 Template:Navboxes
 19.17%   58.353      4 Template:Navbox
 14.75%   44.917      2 Template:Pagetype
 13.64%   41.543      1 Template:Human_geography
 11.24%   34.227      2 Template:Sidebar
  7.75%   23.590      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:33566568:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020243 and revision id 1290016296. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Settlement_geography&oldid=1290016296 " Categories : Settlement geography Human geography Urban planning Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 08:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Settlement geography 15 languages Add topic

