Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Multaka network 3 Collection 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Works 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Museo Egizio 33 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 45°04′06″N 7°41′04″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.06833°N 7.68444°E ﻿ / 45.06833; 7.68444 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Archaeological museum in Turin, Italy This article is about the museum in Turin. For the museum in Milan, see Egyptian Museum (Milan) .

Egyptian Museum of Turin Museo Egizio di Torino Entrance Location within Turin Former name Regio Museo di Antichità ed Egizio Established 1824 Location Via Accademia delle Scienze, 6 Turin , Italy Coordinates 45°04′05″N 7°41′02″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.068°N 7.684°E ﻿ / 45.068; 7.684 Type Egyptian museum Collections Egyptian art and artifacts Visitors 1,036,689 (2024) [ 1 ] Founder Charles Felix of Sardinia Director Christian Greco Website www .museoegizio .it The Museo Egizio ( Italian pronunciation: [muˈzɛːo eˈdʒittsjo] ) or Egyptian Museum is an archaeological museum in Turin , Italy, specializing in Egyptian archaeology and anthropology . It houses one of the largest collections of Egyptian antiquities , with more than 30,000 artifacts, and is considered the second most important Egyptological collection in the world, after the Egyptian Museum of Cairo .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 2019, it received 853,320 visitors, making it 
one of the most visited museums in Italy.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The Gallery of Kings at the Museo Egizio The first object having an association with Egypt to arrive in Turin was the Mensa Isiaca in 1630, an altar table in imitation of Egyptian style, which Dulu Jones suggests had been created for a temple to Isis in Rome.

[ 5 ] This exotic piece spurred King Charles Emmanuel III to commission botanist Vitaliano Donati to travel to Egypt in 1753 and acquire items from its past. Donati returned with 300 pieces recovered from Karnak and Coptos , which became the nucleus of the Turin collection.

In 1824, King Charles Felix acquired the material from the Drovetti collection (5,268 pieces, including 100 statues, 170 papyri , stelae, mummies, and other items), that the French General Consul, Bernardino Drovetti , had built during his stay in Egypt. In the same year, Jean-François Champollion used the huge Turin collection of papyri to test his breakthroughs in deciphering the hieroglyphic writing. The time Champollion spent in Turin studying the texts is also the origin of a legend about the mysterious disappearance of the " Papiro dei Re ", that was only later found and of which some portions are still unavailable. In 1950, a parapsychologist was contacted to pinpoint them, to no avail.

In 1833, the collection of Piedmontese Giuseppe Sossio (over 1,200 pieces) was added to the Egyptian Museum. The collection was complemented and completed by the finds of Egyptologist Ernesto Schiaparelli , during his excavation campaigns between 1900 and 1920, which further filled out the collection. Its last major acquisition was the small temple of Ellesiya , which the Egyptian government presented to Italy for her assistance during the Nubian monument salvage campaign in the 1960s.

Through all these years, the Egyptian collection has always been in Turin, in the building designed for the purpose of housing it, in Via Accademia delle Scienze 6. Only during the Second World War was some of the material moved to the town of Agliè . The museum became an experiment of the Italian government in privatization of the nation's museums when the Fondazione Museo delle Antichità Egizie was officially established at the end of 2004. The building itself was remodelled in celebration of the 2006 Winter Olympics , with its main rooms redesigned by Dante Ferretti , and "featured an imaginative use of lighting and mirrors in a spectacular display of some of the most important and impressive Pharaonic statues in the museum collection." [ 6 ] On April 1, 2015, a new layout of the museum was opened.

The new logo, the coordinated image and the exhibition system have been designed by the studio Migliore+Servetto Architects, whose founders, Ico Migliore and Mara Servetto , are creative advisor for the museum.

Multaka network [ edit ] In 2019, the museum joined six similar museums in Germany, the United Kingdom, Greece and Switzerland, creating the international Multaka network. This intercultural museum project organizes guided tours for refugees and migrants designed and offered for free by specially trained Arabic-speaking Multaka guides. The visitor-centered discussions with migrants in their language are focused on the historical origin and history of acquisition of cultural objects, including the visitors' own understanding of their country's cultural heritage .

[ 7 ] Collection [ edit ] Turin Papyrus Map There are more than 37,000 items in the museum, covering a period from the Paleolithic to the Coptic era. The most important are: Assemblea dei Re (Kings Assembly), a term originally indicating a collection of statues representing all the kings of the New Kingdom Temple of Ellesyia , donated as part of the International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia sarcophagi, mummies and Books of the Dead originally belonging to the "Drovetti collection" a painted fabric from Gebelein dated at about 3500 BC, discovered in 1930 by Giulio Farina ostracon of Prince Sethherkhepshef funerary paraphernalia from the Tomba di Ignoti (Tomb of Unknown) from the Old Kingdom Tomb of Kha and Merit (TT8), found intact by Schiaparelli in 1906 and transferred as a whole to the museum Bembine Tablet Tomba dipinta (Painted Tomb), usually closed to the public Papyrus collection room, originally collected by Drovetti and later used by Champollion during his studies for the decoding of the hieroglyphics Turin King List (or Turin Royal Canon) Turin Papyrus Map Turin Erotic Papyrus Judicial Papyrus of Turin The Egyptian Museum owns three different versions of the Egyptian Book of the Dead , including the most ancient copy known. An integral illustrated version and the personal copy of the architect Kha, found by Schiaparelli in 1906, are normally shown to the public.

Gallery [ edit ] Pharaonic sarcophagi covered in gold leaf Ancient Egyptian sarcophagus Sarcophagus of Horkhebit Sarcophagus of Ibi Statue of Ramesses II with Amun and Hathor Statue of Seti II Statue of Sekhmet Statue of Ptah Statue of Horemheb with Amun Sphinx of the Nineteenth Dynasty A section of text from Kha's Book of the Dead papyrus Statuette of Kha Merit's cosmetic box and contents from TT8 Egyptian dancer See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Museo Egizio (Turin) .

List of museums of Egyptian antiquities Egyptian Museum Grand Egyptian Museum Egyptian Museum (Milan) List of Jesuit sites List of largest art museums Notes [ edit ] ^ "Integrated Report 2024" .

museoegizio.it . MUSEO EGIZIO . Retrieved 10 August 2025 .

^ "Turin Egyptian Museum Private Tour for Kids and Families with Hotel Pick-Up | Italy Activities" .

Lonely Planet . Retrieved 2021-01-16 .

^ "The Egyptian Museum of Turin" .

Italian Tourism Official Website . 2015-03-23. Archived from the original on 2014-06-28 . Retrieved 2021-01-16 .

^ "MUSEI, TOP 30: COLOSSEO, UFFIZI E POMPEI SUPERSTAR NEL 2019 Franceschini: autonomia funziona, andiamo avanti su percorso innovazione" .

www.beniculturali.it (in Italian) . Retrieved 3 July 2020 .

^ Dulu Jones, "Spectacular Turin: The reopening of the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities", Minerva , 17 (May/June 2006), pp. 10f.

^ Jones, "Spectacular Turin", p. 10.

^ "Multaka" .

amir project (in Italian) . Retrieved 2024-05-20 .

Works [ edit ] Wolfgang Kosack: Schenute von Atripe De judicio finale. Papyruskodex 63000.IV im Museo Egizio di Torino. Einleitung, Textbearbeitung und Übersetzung herausgegeben von Wolfgang Kosack. Berlin 2013, Verlag Brunner Christoph, ISBN 978-3-9524018-5-9 Wolfgang Kosack: Basilios "De archangelo Michael" : sahidice Pseudo - Euhodios "De resurrectione" : sahidice Pseudo - Euhodios "De dormitione Mariae virginis" : sahidice & bohairice : < Papyruskodex Turin, Mus. Egizio Cat. 63000 XI. > nebst Varianten und Fragmente. In Parallelzeilen ediert, kommentiert und übersetzt von Wolfgang Kosack. Verlag Christoph Brunner, Berlin 2014.

ISBN 978-3-906206-02-8 .

External links [ edit ] Official website 45°04′06″N 7°41′04″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.06833°N 7.68444°E ﻿ / 45.06833; 7.68444 v t e Tourism in Turin Archaeological sites Palatine Towers Basilica and Cathedral Turin Cathedral Shroud of Turin Basilica of Corpus Domini Basilica of Our Lady Basilica of Superga Santuario della Consolata Churches Chapel of the Holy Shroud San Lorenzo Gran Madre di Dio Madonna del Pilone Monte dei Cappuccini San Domenico San Filippo Neri San Dalmazzo Santa Teresa Squares Piazza Carlo Felice Piazza Castello Piazza San Carlo Piazza Statuto Piazza Vittorio Veneto Other structures Castello del Valentino Lingotto Mole Antonelliana Palazzo Carignano Palazzo Chiablese Palazzo Madama Residences of the Royal House of Savoy University Library Villa della Regina Royal Palace with Armory and Royal Library Theatres Teatro Carignano Teatro Regio Museums Galleria Sabauda J-Museum Museo Civico d'Arte Antica Museo Egizio Museo Nazionale dell'Automobile Museum of Human Anatomy Luigi Rolando Museum of the Risorgimento Oriental Art Museum National Museum of Cinema Natural History Museum Gardens and parks Parco del Valentino Botanical Garden Sporting scenaries Juventus Stadium Pala Alpitour PalaRuffini PalaTorino Stadio Olimpico Grande Torino Torino Palavela Events and traditions Italian Environmental Film Festival Torino Film Festival Turin International Book Fair Terra Madre Salone del Gusto v t e Landmarks of Piedmont and Aosta Valley Basilica di Sant'Andrea Basilica of Superga Castello della Manta Cittadella of Alessandria Fenestrelle Fort Fénis Castle Fort Bard Gran Paradiso National Park Historic center of Aosta Mole Antonelliana Museo Egizio Residences of the Royal House of Savoy Sacra di San Michele Sacri Monti of Piedmont Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany Czech Republic Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Kulturenvanteri monument Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Museo_Egizio&oldid=1305247034 " Categories : Museo Egizio Museums established in 1824 1824 establishments in Italy Egyptological collections in Italy Archaeological museums in Italy Museums in Turin National museums of Italy 1824 establishments in the Kingdom of Sardinia Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with Italian IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 23:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Museo Egizio 33 languages Add topic

