Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Commission 2 Design and construction 3 Later history 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts 3 languages Español Français 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′25.0″N 71°6′51.5″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.373611°N 71.114306°W ﻿ / 42.373611; -71.114306 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historic building in Cambridge, Massachusetts United States historic place Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts U.S. National Register of Historic Places View looking east from Quincy Street Location Cambridge, Massachusetts Coordinates 42°22′25.0″N 71°6′51.5″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.373611°N 71.114306°W ﻿ / 42.373611; -71.114306 Built 1963 Architect Le Corbusier Architectural style Modern NRHP reference No.

78000435 [ 1 ] Added to NRHP April 20, 1978 The Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts at Harvard University , in Cambridge , Massachusetts is the only building designed primarily by Le Corbusier in the United States [ 2 ] —he contributed to the design of the United Nations Secretariat Building —and one of only two in the Americas (the other being the Curutchet House in La Plata , Argentina ).

[ 3 ] Le Corbusier designed it with the collaboration of Chilean architect Guillermo Jullian de la Fuente at his 35 rue de Sèvres studio; the on-site preparation of the construction plans was handled by the office of Josep Lluís Sert , then dean of the Harvard Graduate School of Design . He had formerly worked in Le Corbusier's atelier and had been instrumental in winning him the commission. The building was completed in 1962.

Commission [ edit ] During the mid-1950s, the idea of creating a place for the visual arts at Harvard began to take shape. A new department dedicated to the visual arts was created, and the need for a building to house the new department arose. A budget was set for $1.3 million, and the proposal was included in a Harvard fundraising program. The project immediately elicited a response from Harvard alumnus Alfred St. Vrain Carpenter, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] A.B. 1905, [ 6 ] and his wife Helen Bundy Carpenter.

[ 5 ] The couple, whose son Harlow had just attended the Harvard Graduate School of Design , donated $1.5 million for the proposed design center.

[ 7 ] [ 5 ] [ 8 ] The donation propelled the project forward, and the Committee for the Practice of Visual Arts began to look for an architect to undertake the project. Originally, the committee had recommended that the building be designed by "a first rate American architect" who would be in the company of Charles Bulfinch and Walter Gropius, among others. However, José Luis Sert, who was at the time Dean of the Graduate School of Design and chairman of the committee suggested that his friend and previous collaborator, Le Corbusier, be asked to design the building. Delayed due to scheduling and payment conflicts, Le Corbusier eventually accepted and made his first of two visits to Cambridge in 1959.

[ 9 ] Design and construction [ edit ] Because the Carpenter Center was to be his only building in America, Le Corbusier felt it should be a synthesis of his architectural principles and therefore incorporated his Five Points into its design.

[ 10 ] He took it as a particular challenge, determined that it should make a positive impact both on its surroundings— Georgian style houses —and in its mode of operation. He proposed to take pedestrians from all parts of the campus through the building, so that even though they might not be intending to visit it, they would see and thus partake in the artistic activities going on within it.

[ 11 ] After much debate, a site was chosen between Quincy and Prescott Streets, abiding by the original proposal for the building.

[ 12 ] The allotted space was quite small, so the completed building presents itself as a compact, roughly cylindrical mass bisected by an S-shaped ramp on the third floor. Le Corbusier's earliest design showed a much more pronounced ramp that further separated the two parts of the central mass. However, the early design created the problem of too much disruption of the central mass. This problem auditorium reconciled by using a pinwheel effect so that in the finally executed design, the two halves meet at a vertical core that houses an elevator. The concrete ramp is cantilevered from this central spine and stands atop a few pilotis. The landing at the top of the ramp is located in the core of the building and leads to various studios and exhibition spaces seen through glass windows and doors, providing views into the building's instructional and displaying functions without interrupting the activities in progress.

[ 13 ] The exterior of the Carpenter Center presents itself very differently from different angles. From Prescott Street looking toward the curved studio space, one can see the brise-soleil that are placed perpendicular to the direction of the central portion of the ramp, making only their narrow ends visible from the street. The Quincy Street view, however, reveals ondulatoires on this studio's exterior curve, which interfere with the building's curve less than the brise-soleil do on the opposite side. On the ramp from Quincy street just before entering the building, one sees grids of square and rectangles of the windows, brise-soleils, and studio spaces, rather than the curves of the two halves of the building.

[ 14 ] Exterior views of the Carpenter Center View facing southeast View facing northeast View facing northwest View facing west View facing southwest as walkway connects to the Harvard Art Museums 's expansion Later history [ edit ] The building now houses the Department of Art, Film, and Visual Studies (formerly Visual and Environmental Studies) of the university, and is the venue for screenings by the Harvard Film Archive .

Le Corbusier never actually saw the building. He was invited to the opening ceremony, but he declined the invitation on account of his poor health.

[ 15 ] The French artist Pierre Huyghe explored the creation of the building in his 2004 work This Is Not A Time For Dreaming .

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] National Register of Historic Places listings in Cambridge, Massachusetts References [ edit ] ^ "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . January 23, 2007.

^ Bacon, Mardges (2001).

Le Corbusier in America: Travels in the Land of the Timid . MIT Press. p. 309.

^ Lapunzina, Alejandro (1997).

Le Corbusier's Maison Curutchet . Princeton Architectural Press. p. 20.

^ "Rogue Valley Orchard History" .

truwe.sohs.org . Southern Oregon Historical Society . Retrieved May 5, 2025 .

^ a b c The Oregon Encyclopedia, "Carpenter Foundation and Alfred (1881-1974) & Helen Bundy (1886-1961) Carpenter" "Born on May 7, 1881, Alfred St. Vrain Carpenter—also known as A.S.V. or Alf—was educated at Harvard University. He moved to southern Oregon in 1909-1910 with his brother Leonard. With little background, the two established the Veritas Orchard, becoming agriculturists along with dozens of other well-to-do transplants to the Rogue Valley during what is known as the Orchard Boom." ^ Fraser, Harbour (November 1, 2005).

"Cinema Veritas" .

Harvard Magazine . Retrieved May 5, 2025 .

^ Sekler, Eduard F. (1978).

Le Corbusier at Work: The Genesis of the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts . Cambridge: Harvard University Press. p. 40.

ISBN 9780674520592 .

^ Harvard Crimson , November 19, 1957, "Oregon Couple Gives $1.5 Million To Build New Visual Arts Center" "Mr. and Mrs. Carpenter, donors of the new building, operate pear orchards in Oregon. Their interest in the visual arts was greatly stimulated when their son, Harlow Carpenter '50, of Waitsfield, Vt., received a master's degree from the Graduate School of Design in 1956. The elder Mr. Carpenter is a member of the Class of 1905." ^ Sekler (1978).

Le Corbusier at Work . p. 49.

^ Sekler (1978).

Le Corbusier at Work . p. 2.

^ Boesiger, Willy (1972).

Le Corbusier . London: Thames and Hudson. p. 132.

^ Sekler (1978).

Le Corbusier at Work . p. 58.

^ Arnheim, Rudolph (1983). "The Symbolism of Centric and Linear Composition".

Perspecta .

20 : 144.

doi : 10.2307/1567070 .

JSTOR 1567070 .

^ Sekler (1978).

Le Corbusier at Work . pp.

16– 19.

^ Weber, Nicholas Fox (2008).

Le Corbusier: A Life . Alfred A. Knopf.

^ Pierre Huyghe at ubuweb Retrieved 5 January 2012 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carpenter Center .

Photographs Harvard Film Archive Department of Visual and Environmental Studies Research on the Carpenter Center Photographs of the Carpenter Center v t e Le Corbusier Private houses Villa Fallet Villa Jeanneret-Perret Villa Savoye Villa Schwob Villa Le Lac Planeix House Villa Cook Maison Guiette/Les Peupliers Villa Stein Curutchet House Maisons Jaoul Villa Sarabhai Villa Shodhan Other buildings Tsentrosoyuz building Notre-Dame du Haut National Museum of Western Art Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts Open Hand Monument Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau Pavillon Suisse Immeuble Clarté Immeuble Molitor Cabanon de vacances Mill Owners' Association Building United Nations Secretariat Building Sanskar Kendra Museum Museum and Art Gallery Secretariat Building Palace of Assembly Baghdad Gymnasium Maison du Brésil Church of Saint-Pierre, Firminy Firminy-Vert Stadium Complexe du Capitole Couvent Sainte-Marie-de-la-Tourette Maison de la Culture de Firminy Usine Claude et Duval Unbuilt Governor's Palace Palace of the Soviets Plan Voisin Ville Contemporaine Villa Meyer Ville Radieuse Housing systems Maisons de la Weissenhof-Siedlung Butterfly roof Dom-Ino House Le Corbusier's Five Points of Architecture Cité Frugès de Pessac Cité du Refuge Unité d'habitation Unité d'Habitation of Nantes-Rezé Unité d'Habitation of Berlin Unité d'Habitation of Briey Unité d'Habitation of Firminy-Vert Furniture Chaise Longue LC4 Grand Confort Le Corbusier's Furniture Paintings and poems Poem of the Right Angle (1947–1953) Books Toward an Architecture (1923) Museums Pavillon Le Corbusier Villa La Roche Related Fondation Le Corbusier Congrès Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne List of Le Corbusier buildings The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier Modulor Palace of Ministry of National Education and Public Health Philips Pavilion Purism United Nations headquarters The Price of Desire (2014 film) People Eileen Gray Amédée Ozenfant Pierre Jeanneret Auguste Perret Adolf Loos Charlotte Perriand Commons Wikinews Wikiquote v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carpenter_Center_for_the_Visual_Arts&oldid=1305719309 " Categories : Le Corbusier buildings Art museums and galleries in Massachusetts Cinemas and movie theaters in Massachusetts Harvard Square Harvard University buildings University and college buildings completed in 1962 University and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Massachusetts National Register of Historic Places in Cambridge, Massachusetts Tourist attractions in Cambridge, Massachusetts 1960s architecture in the United States International style architecture in Massachusetts Modernist architecture in Massachusetts 1962 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using NRISref without a reference number Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 18:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts 3 languages Add topic

