Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 The River Ourcq 2.2 Potable water in Paris 2.3 Construction of the canal 2.4 Developments 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ourcq Canal 22 languages العربية Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål پنجابی Русский Suomi Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°57′14″N 2°37′57″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.9539°N 2.6325°E ﻿ / 48.9539; 2.6325 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Canal de l'Ourcq ) Canal in northeastern France Canal de l'Ourcq Location of the Canal de l'Ourcq in relation to Paris and the rivers Marne and Seine (from the European Waterways Map & Directory, 5th ed., Transmanche) Specifications Length 108.1 km (67.2 mi) Locks 5 History Date approved 1802 Date completed 1822 Geography Start point Port-aux-Perches near the village of Troesnes End point Bassin de la Villette Connects to Ourcq , Canal Saint-Martin Canal de l'Ourcq class=notpageimage| Location of the junction of the three canals at the Bassin de la Villette in Paris; the Canal Saint-Denis heads northwest to Saint-Denis, and the Canal Saint-Martin south to the Arsenal basin.

The canal at the beginning of the 20th century.

The Canal de l'Ourcq ( French pronunciation: [kanal də luʁk] ) is a 108.1 km (67.2 mi) long canal in the Île-de-France region (greater Paris) with 10 locks.

[ 1 ] It was built at a width of 3.20 m (10.5 ft) but was enlarged to 3.7 m (12 ft), which permitted use by more pleasure boats.

[ 1 ] The canal begins at Port-aux-Perches near the village of Troesnes, where it splits from the channeled river Ourcq , and flows to the Bassin de la Villette , where it joins the Canal Saint-Martin . Paris requires 380,000 cubic metres (84,000,000 imp gal; 100,000,000 US gal) of water daily for cleaning the sewer system, gutters, and parks.

[ 1 ] The Canal de l'Ourcq provides about half of the requirement. Since 1983, the waterway has been designated for use by pleasure craft, and its water is designated for non-drinking uses.

[ 2 ] The canal is considered part of the 130 km (81 mi) Parisian canal network , along with the Canal Saint-Denis , the bassin de la Villette, and the Canal Saint-Martin . The canals were created as part of the administrative management of water in Paris during the nineteenth century.

Geography [ edit ] The canal at Meaux The river Ourcq's headwaters are located in the wet prairie near Fère-en-Tardenois in the Aisne département . The river is canalized in Silly-la-Poterie . Its water then follows an 87 km (54 mi) course through the valley and empties into the Marne near Lizy-sur-Ourcq .  Pipework diverts the river from Mareuil-sur-Ourcq , where most of the water flows to Paris via the current canal.

History [ edit ] The River Ourcq [ edit ] The first efforts towards engineering the waterway were inspired by the need for firewood for heating in Paris. The Valois and Orléans families owned a large tract of forest, and in 1560 a plan was devised to carry wood via a system of simple locks . In 1661, Louis XIV allowed tolls to be collected along the Ourcq, payable to Philippe d'Orléans .

Potable water in Paris [ edit ] When Paris was known as Lutetia , the inhabitants of île Saint-Louis used water from the Seine . In the Gallo-Roman era, while the montagne Sainte-Geneviève was occupied, the water quality began to deteriorate and people began to frequent the Roman Baths or public baths .

During the 4th century, construction of the aqueduc d’Arcueil began under Emperor Julian the Apostate . This structure directed water to the Cluny Baths.  After the fall of Rome, the aqueducts, to a large extent, were destroyed. For four centuries, from the Merovingian to the Carolingian the waters of the Seine were used, mainly from sources at Belleville and Le Pré-Saint-Gervais . King Philip II , while establishing the Halles de Paris , a sheltered marketplace, had two fountains built in order to aid construction.

By the 18th century, little improvements had been made to bring potable water to Paris. Engineer Pierre-Paul Riquet proposed building a canal from the Ourcq, however his suggestion was not implemented before his death in 1680.

Construction of the canal [ edit ] Sunset along the canal at Bondy The Canal de l'Ourcq as seen from the Parc de la Villette . In the  background are the Grands Moulins de Pantin Looking east along the canal as it passes through the Sevran forest park.

On 19 May 1802, Napoleon Bonaparte ordered the creation of the canal. Specifically, he decreed that the Seine be diverted from below the Bassin de l'Arsenal to the Bassin de la Villette.  The canals would have the dual purposes of providing shipping channels which avoided the Seine and bringing water to Paris. Funding was secured via a grant and supplemental wine taxes, and the first stone was laid on 23 September.  Napoleon appointed Pierre-Simon Girard to direct the project and work was undertaken in January 1804.  The design of the canal called for a structure in which the water was both slowmoving, to aid navigation, and non-stagnant, in order to provide healthy drinking water.  The canal was also intended to feed the Canal Saint-Martin and Canal Saint-Denis .  The projected confluence would enable easier navigation through the city centre, as the Seine was not yet dammed, and the canal would provide an alternate route.

Private financiers were awarded the contract to construct and manage the canals.  The city of Paris agreed to purchase land and surrender tolls for 99 years to the firms building the canals (the cost of construction was estimated at 6 million francs).

[ 3 ] Work began in 1805 under Édouard de Villiers du Terrage .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The bassin de la Villette was filled with water on 2 December 1808, and on 15 August 1813 the first boat traveled through the canal.  After the fall of the French Empire , work stopped until the Bourbon Restoration in 1814.  The monarchy contracted with the Compagnie Vassel et Saint-Didier for 99 years, which allowed the company to collect tolls along the property, but required that the canal be completed and maintained.  It was then realized that the slope was steep, causing too strong a current. Engineer Marie-Émile Vuigner added five locks to make navigation possible. The canal was opened to navigation in 1822.

[ 1 ] According to a 1989 survey of ship lifts , from the Permanent International Association of Navigation Congresses ( PIANC ), in 1893 a canal inclined plane was constructed on the canal, near Meaux .

[ 5 ] It was only capable of lifting vessels 70 tons and 24 metres length.  The vertical lift was 12.2 metres.

Under the reign of Napoleon III , water shortages caused boats to become stranded along the canal. In response, authority was given to take water from the Marne .

[ 6 ] In 1895 construction began to widen the canal in order for it to accommodate 1,000 tonne vessels. In 1920 this widening was extended to Les Pavillons-sous-Bois .

[ 6 ] Today the canal provides approximately half of the 380,000 cubic metres (500,000 cu yd) daily water requirement for the city's public works.

Developments [ edit ] In February 2005, the Council of Paris launched a study on construction of a proposed port along the Canal de l'Ourcq. This would be on the widened section from La Villette to Pavillons-sous-Bois (11 km or 6.8 mi) which is navigable by Seine barges carrying up to 900 tonnes.

[ 7 ] The port would facilitate the transportation of material processed by the Romainville waste treatment centre managed by the metropolitan waste collection and disposal agency SYCTOM. This would avoid the need for trucks to carry this waste. In addition to the quay for barges to load and unload, the port would have facilities for reception, sorting, and shipping of bulky objects, as well as servicing waste containers from the domestic waste sorting and collection facilities.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Hugh McKnight (2005).

Cruising French Waterways . Sheridan House, Inc. pp. 67, 68.

ISBN 978-1-57409-210-3 .

^ "Canal de l'Ourcq" .

Canals of Paris . Archived from the original on 2008-06-27 . Retrieved 2008-09-25 .

^ a b Reed G. Geiger (1994).

Planning the French Canals: Bureaucracy, Politics, and Enterprise Under the Restoration . University of Delaware Press. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-87413-527-5 .

^ "Structurae [en]: Canal Saint-Denis " . Retrieved 14 September 2008 .

^ Permanent International Association of Navigation Congresses. (1989).

Ship lifts: report of a Study Commission within the framework of Permanent ...

PIANC .

ISBN 978-2-87223-006-8 . Retrieved 2011-12-14 .

^ a b "Canal de l'Ourcq - Paris.fr" .

Paris website (Paris.fr) .

^ Edwards-May, David (2010).

Inland Waterways of France . St Ives, Cambs., UK: Imray. pp.

90– 94.

ISBN 978-1-846230-14-1 .

External links [ edit ] Paris - Canal de l'Ourcq, Canal Saint-Denis and Canal Saint-Martin maps and information on places, ports and moorings on the canals, by the author of Inland Waterways of France , Imray Navigation details for 80 French rivers and canals (French waterways website section) 48°57′14″N 2°37′57″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.9539°N 2.6325°E ﻿ / 48.9539; 2.6325 v t e Tourism in Paris Landmarks Arc de Triomphe Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel Arènes de Lutèce Bourse Catacombs Conciergerie Eiffel Tower Gare d'Austerlitz Gare de l'Est Gare de Lyon Gare du Nord Gare Montparnasse Gare Saint-Lazare Grand Palais and Petit Palais Institut de France Jeanne d'Arc Les Invalides Napoleon's tomb Louvre Pyramid Luxor Obelisk Odéon Opéra Bastille Opéra Garnier Panthéon Philharmonie de Paris Place Diana Flame of Liberty Porte Saint-Denis Porte Saint-Martin Sorbonne Tour Montparnasse Museums ( list ) Army Museum Bibliothèque nationale Carnavalet Centre Pompidou Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume Louis Vuitton Foundation Musée des Arts décoratifs Musée des Arts et Métiers Musée d'Art et d'Histoire du Judaïsme Musée d'Art Moderne de Paris Maison de Balzac Musée Bourdelle Musée de la Cinémathèque Musée Cognacq-Jay Musée Grévin Musée Guimet Maison de Victor Hugo Musée Jacquemart-André Musée du Louvre Musée Marmottan Monet Musée de la Vie romantique Musée de Montmartre Musée National d'Art Moderne Musée national Eugène Delacroix Musée national Gustave Moreau Musée national des Monuments Français Muséum national d'histoire naturelle Musée de Cluny – Musée national du Moyen Âge Musée de l'Orangerie Musée d'Orsay Musée Pasteur Musée Picasso Musée du Quai Branly Musée Rodin Palais de la Légion d'Honneur Musée de la Légion d'honneur Palais de Tokyo Religious buildings Alexander Nevsky Cathedral American Cathedral American Church Armenian Cathedral of St. John the Baptist Chapelle expiatoire Grand Mosque Grand Synagogue Synagogue de Nazareth La Madeleine Notre-Dame de Paris Notre-Dame-de-Bonne-Nouvelle Notre-Dame-de-Lorette Notre-Dame-des-Victoires Sacré-Cœur Saint Ambroise Saint-Augustin Saint-Étienne-du-Mont Saint-Eustache Saint-François-Xavier Saint-Germain-des-Prés Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois Saint-Gervais-Saint-Protais Tour Saint-Jacques Saint-Jean de Montmartre Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Saint-Roch Saint-Sulpice Saint-Vincent-de-Paul Sainte-Chapelle Sainte-Clotilde Sainte-Trinité Temple du Marais Val-de-Grâce Hôtels particuliers and palaces Élysée Palace Hôtel de Beauvais Hôtel de Charost Hôtel de Crillon Hôtel d'Estrées Hôtel de la Païva Hôtel de Pontalba Hôtel de Sens Hôtel de Soubise Hôtel de Sully Hôtel de Ville Hôtel Lambert Hôtel Matignon Luxembourg Palace Petit Luxembourg Palais Bourbon Palais de Justice Palais de la Cité Palais-Royal Bridges, streets, areas, squares and waterways Avenue de l'Opéra Avenue Foch Avenue George V Boulevard de la Madeleine Boulevard de Sébastopol Canal de l'Ourcq Canal Saint-Martin Champ de Mars Champs-Élysées Covered passages Galerie Véro-Dodat Choiseul Panoramas Galerie Vivienne Havre Jouffroy Brady Latin Quarter Le Marais Montmartre Montparnasse Place Diana Place Dauphine Place de la Bastille Place de la Concorde Place de la Nation Place de la République Place des Émeutes-de-Stonewall Place des États-Unis Place des Pyramides Place des Victoires Place des Vosges Place du Carrousel Place du Châtelet Place du Tertre Place Saint-Michel Place Vendôme Pont Alexandre III Pont d'Iéna Pont de Bir-Hakeim Pont des Arts Pont Neuf Port du Louvre Rive Gauche Rue Basse Rue Bonaparte Rue Charlemagne Rue d'Argenteuil Rue de la Ferronnerie Rue de la Paix Rue de la Sourdière Rue de Montmorency Rue de Richelieu Rue de Rivoli Rue de Vaugirard Rue des Francs-Bourgeois Rue des Lombards Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré Rue Elzévir Rue Foyatier Rue Molière Rue Montorgueil Rue Radziwill Rue Rambuteau Rue Mondétour Rue Pastourelle Rue des Rosiers Rue Saint-Honoré Rue Saint-Denis Rue Sainte-Anne Saint-Germain-des-Prés Trocadéro Viaduc d'Austerlitz Parks and gardens ( list ) Bois de Boulogne Jardin d'Acclimatation Bois de Vincennes Parc floral Jardin du Luxembourg Parc André-Citroën Parc Clichy-Batignolles Parc de Belleville Parc de Bercy Parc de la Butte-du-Chapeau-Rouge Parc des Buttes Chaumont Parc Georges-Brassens Parc Monceau Parc Montsouris Tuileries Garden Coulée verte René-Dumont Sport venues Accor Arena Auteuil Hippodrome Halle Georges Carpentier Longchamp Hippodrome Parc des Princes Piscine Molitor Porte de La Chapelle Arena Stade Jean Bouin Stade Pershing Stade Pierre de Coubertin Stade Roland Garros Stade Sébastien Charléty Vélodrome de Vincennes Vincennes Hippodrome Cemeteries Montmartre Cemetery Montparnasse Cemetery Passy Cemetery Père Lachaise Cemetery Oscar Wilde's tomb Picpus Cemetery Région parisienne Basilica of Saint-Denis Château d'Écouen Château de Chantilly Château de Fontainebleau Château de Malmaison Château de Rambouillet Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye Château de Sceaux Château and Gardens of Versailles ( Grand Trianon and Petit Trianon , including the Fresh pavilion ) Château de Vincennes La Défense Grande Arche Paris La Défense Arena Disneyland Paris Disneyland Park Walt Disney Studios Park Exploradôme Fort Mont-Valérien Mémorial de la France combattante Suresnes American Cemetery and Memorial France Miniature Musée de l'air et de l'espace Musée Fragonard d'Alfort Parc Astérix Parc de Saint-Cloud Provins La Roche-Guyon Sèvres – Cité de la céramique Stade de France Vaux-le-Vicomte Culture and events Bastille Day military parade Dîner en Blanc Fête de la Musique Nuit Blanche Paris Air Show Paris Fashion Week Paris-Plages Republican Guard Solidays Other Axe historique Bateau-Lavoir Bateaux Mouches Café des 2 Moulins Café Procope Folies Bergère Fountains in Paris La Ruche Les Deux Magots Maxim's Moulin de la Galette Moulin Rouge Paris Métro entrances Montmartre Funicular Paris Musées Paris syndrome Paris Zoological Park Pyramide inversée World Heritage Centre Related List of tourist attractions in Paris Art in Paris Paris syndrome Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ourcq_Canal&oldid=1263277241 " Categories : Geography of Paris Transport in Paris Canals in France 19th arrondissement of Paris Canals opened in 1813 1813 establishments in France Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages with French IPA Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 December 2024, at 19:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ourcq Canal 22 languages Add topic

