Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Early negotiations 3 Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage 4 Strengthened agreement on funding Toggle Strengthened agreement on funding subsection 4.1 Loss and Damage Fund 4.2 Paris climate finance summit 5 Research on Loss and Damage 6 References Toggle the table of contents Loss and damage (climate change) 13 languages العربية Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Deutsch فارسی Français Hausa हिन्दी Igbo Italiano മലയാളം Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept to address adverse effects of climate change This article is about loss and damage in the context of climate change. For other uses, see Loss and damage (disambiguation) .

Loss and damage (in the context of climate change ) is a concept to describe results from the adverse effects of climate change and how to deal with them (beyond climate change adaptation ).

[ 1 ] There has been slow progress on implementing mitigation and adaptation. Some losses and damages are already occurring, and further loss and damage is unavoidable.

[ 2 ] : 62 There is a distinction between economic losses and non-economic losses. The main difference between the two is that non-economic losses involve things that are not commonly traded in markets.

[ 3 ] The appropriate response by governments to loss and damage has been disputed since the UNFCCC 's adoption of the term and concept. Establishing liability and compensation for loss and damage has been a long-standing goal for vulnerable and developing countries in the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) and the Least Developed Countries Group in negotiations.

[ 4 ] However, developed countries have resisted this. The present UNFCCC mechanism to address loss and damage, the "Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage", focuses on research and dialogue rather than liability or compensation. At COP 27 in 2022, after years of negotiation, nations agreed on a proposal to establish a multilateral loss and damage fund to support communities in averting, minimizing, and addressing damages and risks where adaptation is not enough or comes too late.

[ 5 ] : 63 Definition [ edit ] Despite the increasing dialogue and attention to the topic, it is also noted that there is 'not one definition of L&D'.

[ 6 ] : 2563 In fact, the UN distinguishes between L&D (Loss and Damage) as the dialogue under the negotiations for the UNFCCC and 'losses and damages' as the impacts seen and researched.

[ 7 ] The exact wording in the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report is: "Research has taken Loss and Damage (capitalised letters) to refer to political debate under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) following the establishment of the Warsaw Mechanism on Loss and Damage in 2013, which is to 'address loss and damage associated with impacts of climate change, including extreme events and slow onset events, in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.' Lowercase letters (losses and damages) have been taken to refer broadly to harm from (observed) impacts and (projected) risks and can be economic or non-economic (Mechler et al., 2018)." [ 7 ] : 2914 [ 8 ] Loss can be understood as irreversible harm caused by climate change, for example, through the complete destruction or permanent reduction in the functioning of assets, infrastructure, or resources, the complete submergence of small island nations due to sea-level rise, the irreversible extinction of a species, or the permanent loss of cultural heritage sites due to erosion caused by extreme weather events.

[ 9 ] Damage refers to harmful effects and costs associated with climate change that can be quantified and potentially compensated (including economic, social, and environmental costs). Damage can be temporary or partially reversible, and it often involves repair, restoration, or compensation, for example, the destruction of infrastructure by hurricanes, economic losses due to crop failure caused by drought, or the costs of relocating coastal communities due to erosion and rising sea levels.

[ 9 ] Loss and damage is connected to provision of climate finance and support, including liability, compensation and litigation. Loss and damage is also connected closely to mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to climate risks . Losses and damages arise when mitigation and adaptation actions to reduce climate impacts fail.

[ 2 ] : 62 They include the damages (and the risks of future damages) beyond those addressed by mitigation and adaptation. These losses and damages are sometimes referred to as 'residual' impacts or risks. Given the slow progress on implementing mitigation and adaptation, some losses and damages are already occurring, and further loss and damage is unavoidable.

[ 2 ] : 62 The UNFCCC has defined loss and damage to include harms resulting from sudden-onset events (climate disasters, such as cyclones ) as well as slow-onset processes (such as sea level rise ).

[ 10 ] Loss and damage can occur in human systems (such as livelihoods) as well as natural systems (such as biodiversity ), though the emphasis in research and policy is on human impacts .

[ 11 ] In human systems, a distinction is made between economic losses and non-economic losses. Economic losses and damage affect resources, goods and services that are commonly traded in the market. Non-economic losses and damage contain loss of family members and disappearance of cultures.

[ 12 ] The main difference between the two is that non-economic losses involve things that are not commonly traded in markets.

[ 3 ] Climate reparations are loss and damage payments which are based on the concept of reparations . To proponents, they are a form of climate justice . Compensation is necessary to hold countries accountable for loss and damage resulting from historical emissions, and is an ethical and moral obligation.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] A Bangladeshi consultant remarked at COP26 , "The term 'loss and damage' is a euphemism for terms we're not allowed to use, which are ' liability and compensation ' ... 'Reparations' is even worse." [ 16 ] Early negotiations [ edit ] As the UNFCCC was being drafted in 1991, the AOSIS proposed the creation of an international insurance pool to "compensate the most vulnerable small island and low-lying coasta l developing countries for loss and damage arising from sea level rise".

[ 4 ] In the proposal, the amount to be contributed by each country to this pool would be determined by their relative contribution to global emissions and their relative share of global gross national product, a formula "modelled on the 1963 Brussels Supplementary Convention on Third Party Liability in the field of Nuclear Energy". This proposal was rejected, and when the UNFCCC was adopted in 1992 it contained no mention of loss or damage.

[ 17 ] Loss and damage was first referred to in a formally-negotiated UN text in the 2007 Bali Action Plan , which called for "Disaster reduction strategies and means to address loss and damage associated with climate change impacts in developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change ".

[ 18 ] Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage [ edit ] The Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage, created in 2013, acknowledges that "loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change includes, and in some cases involves more than, that which can be reduced by adaptation".

[ 19 ] Its mandate includes "enhancing knowledge and understanding", "strengthening dialogue, coordination, coherence and synergies among relevant stakeholders", and "enhancing action and support, including finance, technology and capacity-building, to address loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change".

[ 19 ] However, it makes no provisions for liability or compensation for loss and damage. The only reason loss and damage was even discussed in Warsaw was because the entire delegation of developing countries staged a walkout at negotiations.

[ 20 ] The Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage was set up in 2013 as a climate policy mechanism to deal with climate-related effects in highly vulnerable countries and was endorsed in 2015 by the Paris Agreement. Yet, the concepts, methods, tools, and directions for policy and implementation of loss and damage have remained contested and vague.

[ 9 ] The Paris Agreement provides for the continuation of the Warsaw International Mechanism but explicitly states that its inclusion "does not involve or provide a basis for any liability or compensation".

[ 21 ] The inclusion of this clause was the condition on which developed countries, particularly the United States, agreed to include a reference to loss and damage.

[ 4 ] [ 22 ] Strengthened agreement on funding [ edit ] See also: climate finance Loss and Damage Fund [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Loss and Damage Fund .

[ edit ] The Loss and Damage Fund is a climate finance mechanism created during the 27th Conference of Parties (COP) , held in Egypt in 2022. The fund was designed to address loss and damage, to support communities when adaptation strategies are inadequate or implemented too late, and damage and risk has already happened.

[ 23 ] : 63 Paris climate finance summit [ edit ] Before the Paris climate finance summit in June 2023 more than 100 leading economists signed a letter calling for the establishment of an extreme wealth tax as a loss and damage mechanism as the 1% of richest people, who are responsible for twice as many emissions as the poorest 50% (2% tax can generate around 2.5 trillion). If compare the emissions of high income countries with the damage caused to low income by climate change, the result is that rich countries have a debt of around 6 trillion to the low income per year.

[ 24 ] The idea was not accepted in the summit, even though some advance was achieved: the World Bank allowed low income countries to temporarily stop paying debts if they are hit by climate disaster (most of financial help to climate vulnerable countries is coming in the form of debts, which often worsens the situation as those countries are overburdened with debts). Around 300 billion dollars was pledged as financial help in the forthcoming years, though trillions are needed to really solve the problem.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Research on Loss and Damage [ edit ] The 5th Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), published in 2013-2014 had no separate chapter on loss and damage, but Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability (WG2) [ 27 ] Chapter 16 about adaptation limits and constraints, is very relevant for people interested in loss and damage. A qualitative data analysis of what the IPCC 5th Assessment Report has to say about loss and damage surprisingly showed that the term was used much more often in statements about Annex 1 countries (e.g. US, Australia or European countries) than in text about non-Annex 1 countries (most countries in Africa, Asia Latin America and the Pacific), which tend to be more vulnerable to impacts of climate change.

[ 28 ] An IPCC assessment of Loss and Damage in 2018 found that residual risks (risks beyond those addressed by adaptation actions) will rise with further warming. This may lead to impacts beyond adaptation limits.

[ 29 ] [ 6 ] : 2563–2564 The IPCC 6th Assessment Report included a section on Loss and Damage. Some of the main topics of UNFCCC negotiation texts and of scientific research in this area are risk finance (for residual risks), finance sources and options for losses and damages, and transformative finance. Examples for transformative finance include financing relocation and retreat of assets and communities, or for switching livelihoods when current ones become unfeasible.

[ 6 ] : 2563–2564 References [ edit ] ^ "Introduction to loss and damage" .

unfccc.int . Retrieved 10 January 2020 .

^ a b c United Nations Environment Programme (2023).

Adaptation Gap Report 2023: Underfinanced. Underprepared. Inadequate investment and planning on climate adaptation leaves world exposed . Nairobi.

https://doi . org/10.59117/20.500.11822/43796 ^ a b UNFCCC (2013).

Non-economic losses in the context of the work programme on loss and damage.

UNFCCC Technical Paper.

^ a b c "Loss, Damage and Responsibility after COP21: All Options Open for the Paris Agreement" .

ResearchGate . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ United Nations Environment Programme (2023).

Adaptation Gap Report 2023: Underfinanced.Underprepared. Inadequate investment and planning on climate adaptation leaves world exposed . Nairobi.

doi : 10.59117/20.500.11822/43796 ^ a b c New, M., D. Reckien, D. Viner, C. Adler, S.-M. Cheong, C. Conde, A. Constable, E. Coughlan de Perez, A. Lammel, R. Mechler, B. Orlove, and W. Solecki, 2022: Chapter 17: Decision-Making Options for Managing Risk . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2539–2654, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.026.

^ a b IPCC, 2022: Annex II: Glossary [Möller, V., R. van Diemen, J.B.R. Matthews, C. Méndez, S. Semenov, J.S. Fuglestvedt, A. Reisinger (eds.)]. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2897–2930, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.029.

^ Mechler, Reinhard; Bouwer, Laurens M.; Schinko, Thomas; Surminski, Swenja; Linnerooth-Bayer, Joanne, eds. (2019).

Loss and damage from climate change: concepts, methods and policy options . Climate risk management, policy and governance. Cham: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-72025-8 .

^ a b c Balzter, Heiko; Macul, Mateus; Delaney, Beth; Tansey, Kevin; Espirito-Santo, Fernando; Ofoegbu, Chidiebere; Petrovskii, Sergei; Forchtner, Bernhard; Nicholes, Nicholes; Payo, Emilio; Heslop-Harrison, Pat; Burns, Moya; Basell, Laura; Egberts, Ella; Stockley, Emma (January 2023).

"Loss and Damage from Climate Change: Knowledge Gaps and Interdisciplinary Approaches" .

Sustainability .

15 (15): 11864.

doi : 10.3390/su151511864 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

^ Warner, K. and van der Geest, K. (2013).

Loss and damage from climate change: Local-level evidence from nine vulnerable countries.

According to UN, loss and damage can be defined as negative outcomes that humans cannot adapt to, including land degradation, glacier retreat, and ocean acidification.

[1] International Journal of Global Warming, Vol 5 (4): 367-386.

^ An exception is this paper: Zommers et al. (2014).

Loss and damage to ecosystem services.

UNU-EHS Working Paper Series, No.12. Bonn: United Nations University Institute of Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS).

^ Bhandari, Preety; Warszawski, Nate; Cogan, Deirdre; Gerholdt, Rhys (14 December 2022).

"What Is "Loss and Damage" from Climate Change? 8 Key Questions, Answered" .

World Resources Institute .

^ Manke|, Kara (4 May 2022).

"What is the role of reparations in delivering climate justice?" .

Berkeley News . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Bhadani, Anita (29 November 2021).

"A Guide to Climate Reparations" .

YES! Magazine . Retrieved 4 November 2022 .

^ " 'A moral responsibility': Scotland calls for climate reparations ahead of COP27" .

MSN . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Sengupta, Somini (11 November 2021).

"Calls for Climate Reparations Reach Boiling Point in Glasgow Talks" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ " "Loss and Damage" in the Context of Small Islands | IOM Blog" .

weblog.iom.int . Retrieved 10 November 2023 .

^ "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its thirteenth session, held in Bali from 3 to 15 December 2007" (PDF) .

^ a b "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its nineteenth session, held in Warsaw from 11 to 23 November 2013" (PDF) .

^ David Hunter, James Salzman and Durwood Zaelke (2022).

International Environmental Law and Policy (6th ed.). Foundation Press. p. 689.

^ "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-first session, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015" (PDF) .

^ "Explainer: Dealing with the 'loss and damage' caused by climate change" .

Carbon Brief . 9 May 2017 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ United Nations Environment Programme (2023).

Adaptation Gap Report 2023: Underfinanced.Underprepared. Inadequate investment and planning on climate adaptation leaves world exposed . Nairobi.

doi : 10.59117/20.500.11822/43796 ^ Harvey, Fiona (19 June 2023).

"A wealth tax could help poorer countries tackle climate crisis, economists say" . The Guardian . Retrieved 28 June 2023 .

^ Harvey, Fiona (22 June 2023).

"World Bank offers developing countries debt pauses if hit by climate crisis" . The Guardian . Retrieved 28 June 2023 .

^ Anderson, Stefan (26 June 2023).

"Paris Climate Finance Summit Unlocks Funding, Dodges Debt" .

Health policy watch . Retrieved 28 June 2023 .

^ IPCC (2001), Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability .

^ van der Geest, Kees; Warner, Koko (2 July 2020).

"Loss and damage in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (Working Group II): a text-mining analysis" .

Climate Policy .

20 (6): 729– 742.

Bibcode : 2020CliPo..20..729V .

doi : 10.1080/14693062.2019.1704678 .

ISSN 1469-3062 .

S2CID 213311694 .

^ Roy, J.; Tschakert, P.; Waisman, H.; Abdul Halim, S.; et al. (2018).

"Chapter 5: Sustainable Development, Poverty Eradication and Reducing Inequalities" (PDF) .

Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty . pp.

445– 538.

v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index v t e Human impact on the environment General Anthropocene Ecological footprint Environmental impact assessment Environmental issues list of issues Human impact on marine life List of global issues Impact assessment Planetary boundaries Social ecology (ethics) Causes Causes of climate change Agriculture animal agriculture cannabis cultivation irrigation meat production cocoa production palm oil (US) Bitcoin Corporate behavior Deforestation and climate change Energy industry biofuels biodiesel coal electricity energy fashion fracking (US) nuclear power oil shale petroleum reservoirs transport Genetic pollution Environmental crime Explosives Industrialisation Land use Manufacturing cleaning agents concrete fashion plastics nanotechnology paint paper pesticides pharmaceuticals and personal care Marine life fishing fishing down the food web marine pollution overfishing Mining Overconsumption Overdrafting Overexploitation Overgrazing Particulates Pollution Quarrying Reservoirs Tourism Transport aviation rail roads shipping Urbanization urban sprawl War Effects Biodiversity threats biodiversity loss decline in amphibian populations decline in insect populations Climate change runaway climate change in the United States Deforestation Defaunation Desertification Ecocide Ecological crisis Effects of climate change Effects of climate change on agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Effects of climate change on livestock Environmental insecurity Environmental issues in the United States Coral reefs Externality Forest dieback Environmental degradation Erosion Freshwater cycle Greenhouse gas emissions Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Nitrogen cycle Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Loss and damage Loss of green belts Phosphorus cycle Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Technofossilization Tropical cyclones and climate change Water degradation Water pollution Water scarcity Mitigation Alternative fuel vehicle propulsion Birth control Cleaner production Climate change mitigation Community resilience Cultured meat Decoupling Ecological engineering Environmental engineering Environmental mitigation Industrial ecology Mitigation banking Organic farming Recycling Reforestation urban Restoration ecology Sustainability Sustainable consumption Waste minimization Commons Category by country assessment mitigation v t e Social and environmental accountability Ethics and principles Aarhus Convention Climate justice Corporate accountability / behaviour / environmental responsibility / responsibility / social responsibility Dirty hands Environmental racism / in Russia / in the United States / in Western Europe / inequality in the UK / injustice in Europe Ethical banking Ethical code Extended producer responsibility Externality Harm Little Eichmanns Loss and damage Organizational ethics Organizational justice Pollution Principles for Responsible Investment Racism Social impact assessment Social justice Social responsibility Stakeholder theory Sullivan principles Transparency (behavioral social) UN Global Compact Social accounting Corporate crime Double bottom line Ethical positioning index Higg Index Impact assessment ( environmental equality social ) ISO 26000 ISO 45001 Genuine progress indicator Performance indicator SA 8000 OHSAS 18001 Social return on investment Whole-life cost Environmental accounting Carbon accounting Eco-Management and Audit Scheme Emission inventory Environmental full-cost accounting / Environmental conflict / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account ISO 14000 ISO 14031 Life-cycle assessment Pollutant release and transfer register Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain Toxics Release Inventory Triple bottom line Reporting Global Reporting Initiative GxP guidelines Sustainability reporting Auditing Community-based monitoring Environmental ( certification ) Fair trade ( certification ) ISO 19011 Related Bangladesh Accord Benefit corporation Child labour Community interest company Conflict of interest Disasters Disinvestment Eco-labeling Environmental degradation Environmental pricing reform Environmental, social, and corporate governance Ethical consumerism Euthenics Global justice movement Health impact assessment Market governance mechanism Product certification Public participation SDG Publishers Compact Social enterprise Socially responsible business Socially responsible investing Socially responsible marketing Stakeholder ( engagement ) Supply chain management Environment portal Category Commons Organizations NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐sdb7d
Cached time: 20250812045540
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.645 seconds
Real time usage: 0.783 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4416/1000000
Revision size: 22357/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 145276/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1724/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 112889/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.380/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7143515/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  632.864      1 -total
 39.50%  249.992      1 Template:Reflist
 18.63%  117.916     11 Template:Cite_web
 17.61%  111.440      1 Template:Climate_change
 10.37%   65.613      1 Template:Short_description
 10.19%   64.520      1 Template:Excerpt
  9.93%   62.860      9 Template:Rp
  9.03%   57.131      9 Template:R/superscript
  6.19%   39.150      3 Template:Cite_book
  5.44%   34.427      3 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37840109:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812045540 and revision id 1257709801. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Loss_and_damage_(climate_change)&oldid=1257709801 " Categories : Effects of climate change Economics and climate change Hidden categories: Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2017 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 November 2024, at 07:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Loss and damage (climate change) 13 languages Add topic

