Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Atomic excitation 2 Perturbed gas excitation 3 Calculation of excited states 4 Excited-state absorption 5 Reaction 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Excited state 42 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių La .lojban.

Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quantum states with more energy than the lowest possible amount After absorbing energy, an electron may jump from the ground state to a higher energy excited state.

Excitations of copper 3d orbitals on the CuO 2 plane of a high- T c superconductor. The ground state (blue) is x 2 – y 2 orbitals; the excited orbitals are in green; the arrows illustrate inelastic x-ray spectroscopy.

In quantum mechanics , an excited state of a system (such as an atom , molecule or nucleus ) is any quantum state of the system that has a higher energy than the ground state (that is, more energy than the absolute minimum). Excitation refers to an increase in energy level above a chosen starting point, usually the ground state, but sometimes an already excited state. The temperature of a group of particles is indicative of the level of excitation (with the notable exception of systems that exhibit negative temperature ).

[ citation needed ] The lifetime of a system in an excited state is usually short: spontaneous or induced emission of a quantum of energy (such as a photon or a phonon ) usually occurs shortly after the system is promoted to the excited state, returning the system to a state with lower energy (a less excited state or the ground state). This return to a lower energy level is known as de-excitation [ 1 ] and is the inverse of excitation.

Long-lived excited states are often called metastable . Long-lived nuclear isomers and singlet oxygen are two examples of this.

[ citation needed ] Atomic excitation [ edit ] Atoms can be excited by heat, electricity, or light. The hydrogen atom provides a simple example of this concept.

The ground state of the hydrogen atom has the atom's single electron in the lowest possible orbital (that is, the spherically symmetric " 1s " wave function , which, so far, has been demonstrated to have the lowest possible quantum numbers ). By giving the atom additional energy (for example, by absorption of a photon of an appropriate energy), the electron moves into an excited state (one with one or more quantum numbers greater than the minimum possible). When the electron finds itself between two states—a shift which happens very fast—it's in a superposition of both states.

[ 2 ] If the photon has too much energy, the electron will cease to be bound to the atom, and the atom will become ionized .

After excitation the atom may return to the ground state or a lower excited state, by emitting a photon with a characteristic energy. Emission of photons from atoms in various excited states leads to an electromagnetic spectrum showing a series of characteristic emission lines (including, in the case of the hydrogen atom, the Lyman, Balmer, Paschen and Brackett series ).

An atom in a high excited state is termed a Rydberg atom . A system of highly excited atoms can form a long-lived condensed excited state, Rydberg matter .

Perturbed gas excitation [ edit ] A collection of molecules forming a gas can be considered in an excited state if one or more molecules are elevated to kinetic energy levels such that the resulting velocity distribution departs from the equilibrium Boltzmann distribution . This phenomenon has been studied in the case of a two-dimensional gas in some detail, analyzing the time taken to relax to equilibrium.

Calculation of excited states [ edit ] Excited states are often calculated using coupled cluster , Møller–Plesset perturbation theory , multi-configurational self-consistent field , configuration interaction , [ 3 ] and time-dependent density functional theory .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Excited-state absorption [ edit ] The excitation of a system (an atom or molecule) from one excited state to a higher-energy excited state with the absorption of a photon is called excited-state absorption (ESA). Excited-state absorption is possible only when an electron has been already excited from the ground state to a lower excited state. The excited-state absorption is usually an undesired effect, but it can be useful in upconversion pumping.

[ 10 ] Excited-state absorption measurements are done using pump–probe techniques such as flash photolysis . However, it is not easy to measure them compared to ground-state absorption, and in some cases complete bleaching of the ground state is required to measure excited-state absorption.

[ 11 ] Reaction [ edit ] Main article: Photochemistry A further consequence of excited-state formation may be reaction of the atom or molecule in its excited state, as in photochemistry .

See also [ edit ] Rydberg formula Stationary state Repulsive state References [ edit ] ^ Sakho, Ibrahima.

Nuclear Physics 1: Nuclear Deexcitations, Spontaneous Nuclear Reactions . John Wiley & Sons, 2021.

^ Quantum Leaps, Long Assumed to Be Instantaneous, Take Time ^ Hehre, Warren J. (2003).

A Guide to Molecular Mechanics and Quantum Chemical Calculations (PDF) . Irvine, California: Wavefunction, Inc.

ISBN 1-890661-06-6 .

^ Glaesemann, Kurt R.; Govind, Niranjan; Krishnamoorthy, Sriram; Kowalski, Karol (2010). "EOMCC, MRPT, and TDDFT Studies of Charge Transfer Processes in Mixed-Valence Compounds: Application to the Spiro Molecule".

The Journal of Physical Chemistry A .

114 (33): 8764– 8771.

Bibcode : 2010JPCA..114.8764G .

doi : 10.1021/jp101761d .

PMID 20540550 .

^ Dreuw, Andreas; Head-Gordon, Martin (2005). "Single-Reference ab Initio Methods for the Calculation of Excited States of Large Molecules".

Chemical Reviews .

105 (11): 4009– 37.

doi : 10.1021/cr0505627 .

PMID 16277369 .

^ Knowles, Peter J.; Werner, Hans-Joachim (1992). "Internally contracted multiconfiguration-reference configuration interaction calculations for excited states".

Theoretica Chimica Acta .

84 ( 1– 2): 95– 103.

doi : 10.1007/BF01117405 .

S2CID 96830841 .

^ Foresman, James B.; Head-Gordon, Martin; Pople, John A.; Frisch, Michael J. (1992). "Toward a systematic molecular orbital theory for excited states".

The Journal of Physical Chemistry .

96 : 135– 149.

doi : 10.1021/j100180a030 .

^ Glaesemann, Kurt R.; Gordon, Mark S.; Nakano, Haruyuki (1999). "A study of FeCO+ with correlated wavefunctions".

Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics .

1 (6): 967– 975.

Bibcode : 1999PCCP....1..967G .

doi : 10.1039/a808518h .

^ Ariyarathna, Isuru (2021-03-01).

First Principle Studies on Ground and Excited Electronic States: Chemical Bonding in Main-Group Molecules, Molecular Systems with Diffuse Electrons, and Water Activation using Transition Metal Monoxides (Thesis).

hdl : 10415/7601 .

^ Paschotta, Rüdiger.

"Excited-state Absorption" .

www.rp-photonics.com .

^ Dolan, Giora; Goldschmidt, Chmouel R. (1976). "A new method for absolute absorption cross-section measurements: rhodamine-6G excited singlet-singlet absorption spectrum".

Chemical Physics Letters .

39 (2): 320– 322.

Bibcode : 1976CPL....39..320D .

doi : 10.1016/0009-2614(76)80085-1 .

External links [ edit ] NASA background information on ground and excited states v t e Quantum mechanics Background Introduction History Timeline Classical mechanics Old quantum theory Glossary Fundamentals Born rule Bra–ket notation Complementarity Density matrix Energy level Ground state Excited state Degenerate levels Zero-point energy Entanglement Hamiltonian Interference Decoherence Measurement Nonlocality Quantum state Superposition Tunnelling Scattering theory Symmetry in quantum mechanics Uncertainty Wave function Collapse Wave–particle duality Formulations Formulations Heisenberg Interaction Matrix mechanics Schrödinger Path integral formulation Phase space Equations Klein–Gordon Dirac Weyl Majorana Rarita–Schwinger Pauli Rydberg Schrödinger Interpretations Bayesian Consciousness causes collapse Consistent histories Copenhagen de Broglie–Bohm Ensemble Hidden-variable Local Superdeterminism Many-worlds Objective collapse Quantum logic Relational Transactional Experiments Bell test Davisson–Germer Delayed-choice quantum eraser Double-slit Franck–Hertz Mach–Zehnder interferometer Elitzur–Vaidman Popper Quantum eraser Stern–Gerlach Wheeler's delayed choice Science Quantum biology Quantum chemistry Quantum chaos Quantum cosmology Quantum differential calculus Quantum dynamics Quantum geometry Quantum measurement problem Quantum mind Quantum stochastic calculus Quantum spacetime Technology Quantum algorithms Quantum amplifier Quantum bus Quantum cellular automata Quantum finite automata Quantum channel Quantum circuit Quantum complexity theory Quantum computing Timeline Quantum cryptography Quantum electronics Quantum error correction Quantum imaging Quantum image processing Quantum information Quantum key distribution Quantum logic Quantum logic gates Quantum machine Quantum machine learning Quantum metamaterial Quantum metrology Quantum network Quantum neural network Quantum optics Quantum programming Quantum sensing Quantum simulator Quantum teleportation Extensions Quantum fluctuation Casimir effect Quantum statistical mechanics Quantum field theory History Quantum gravity Relativistic quantum mechanics Related Schrödinger's cat in popular culture Wigner's friend EPR paradox Quantum mysticism Category Authority control databases National Germany Latvia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Excited_state&oldid=1285947337 " Category : Quantum states Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 19:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Excited state 42 languages Add topic

