Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Islands in the Gulf of Guinea 3 Maritime security Toggle Maritime security subsection 3.1 Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing 3.2 Further Blue Crime Consequences of IUU 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Guinea 108 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mfantse Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Obolo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 0°0′N 0°0′E ﻿ / ﻿ 0.000°N 0.000°E ﻿ / 0.000; 0.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Northeasternmost part of the tropical Atlantic Ocean Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Guinea map showing the chain of islands formed by the Cameroon line of volcanoes Gulf of Guinea Coordinates 0°0′N 0°0′E ﻿ / ﻿ 0.000°N 0.000°E ﻿ / 0.000; 0.000 River sources Niger Ocean/sea sources Atlantic Ocean Basin countries Liberia , Ivory Coast , Ghana , Togo , Benin , Nigeria , Cameroon , Equatorial Guinea , Gabon , São Tomé and Príncipe , Republic of the Congo , Democratic Republic of the Congo , Angola Surface area 2,350,000 km 2 (910,000 sq mi) Islands Bioko , São Tomé , Príncipe , Ilhéu Bom Bom , Ilhéu Caroço , Elobey Grande , Elobey Chico , Annobón , Corisco , Bobowasi Earth's ocean, showing common divisions Earth's thermohaline circulation flow Map with five-oceans (approx. boundaries) Earth's ocean Main five oceans division: Antarctic/Southern Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Further subdivision: Marginal seas v t e The Gulf of Guinea ( French : Golfe de Guinée ; Spanish : Golfo de Guinea ; Portuguese : Golfo da Guiné ) is the northeasternmost part of the tropical Atlantic Ocean from Cape Lopez in Gabon , north and west to Cape Palmas in Liberia .

[ 1 ] Null Island , defined as the intersection of the Equator and Prime Meridian (zero degrees latitude and longitude ), is in the gulf.

[ 2 ] Among the many rivers that drain into the Gulf of Guinea are the Niger and the Volta . The coastline on the gulf includes the Bight of Benin and the Bight of Bonny .

Name [ edit ] "Guinea" is thought to have originated from a local name for an area in the region, although the specifics are disputed. Bovill (1995) gives a thorough description: [ 3 ] The name Guinea is usually said to have been a corrupt form of the name Ghana , picked up by the Portuguese in the Maghrib . The present writer finds this unacceptable. The name Guinea has been in use both in the Maghrib and in Europe long before Prince Henry's time. For example, on a map dated about 1320 by the Genoese cartographer Giovanni di Carignano, who got his information about Africa from a fellow-countryman in Sijilmassa [ancient trading city in North Africa], we find Gunuia, and in the Catalan atlas of 1375 as Ginyia. A passage in Leo [Africanus] (vol. III, 822) points to Guinea having been a corrupt form of Jenne [2,000-year-old city in central Mali on Niger river], less famous than Ghana but nevertheless for many centuries famed in the Maghrib as a great market and a seat of learning. The relevant passage reads: "The Kingdom of Ghinea . . . called by the merchants of our nation Gheneoa, by the natural inhabitants thereof Genni and by the Portugals and other people of Europe Ghinea." But it seems more probable that Guinea derives from aguinaou , the Berber for Negro. Marrakech [city in southeastern Morocco] has a gate, built in the twelfth century, called the Bab Aguinaou, the Gate of the Negro (Delafosse, Haut-Sénégal-Niger, II, 277–278). The modern application of the name Guinea to the coast dates only from 1481. In that year the Portuguese built a fort, São Jorge da Mina (modern-day Elmina ), on the Gold Coast region , and their king, John II, was permitted by the Pope [Sixtus II or Innocent VIII] to style himself Lord of Guinea, a title that survived until the recent extinction of the monarchy.

The name " Guinea " was also previously applied to the south coast of West Africa (north of the Gulf of Guinea), which became known as "Upper Guinea", and to the west coast of Southern Africa (to the east), which became known as "Lower Guinea".

[ citation needed ] Today, the word "Guinea" is found in the names of three countries in Africa ( Guinea , Guinea-Bissau , and Equatorial Guinea ), and in one country in Melanesia ( Papua New Guinea ).

Geography [ edit ] The main river dispensing its waters in the gulf is the Niger River .

Different definitions of the geographic limits of the Gulf of Guinea are given; the International Hydrographic Organization defines the southwest extent of the Gulf of Guinea as "B line from Cap Lopez ( 0°37′S 8°43′E ﻿ / ﻿ 0.617°S 8.717°E ﻿ / -0.617; 8.717 ), in Gabon, northwestward to Ihléu Gago Coutinho (Ilhéu das Rôlas) ( 0°01′S 6°32′E ﻿ / ﻿ 0.017°S 6.533°E ﻿ / -0.017; 6.533 ); and thence a line from Ihléu Gago Coutinho northwestward to Cape Palmas ( 4°22′N 7°44′W ﻿ / ﻿ 4.367°N 7.733°W ﻿ / 4.367; -7.733 ), in Liberia.

[ 1 ] Old French map of the Gulf of Guinea Different limits of the Gulf of Guinea Satellite imagery of the Gulf of Guinea showing borders of states on its shores Islands in the Gulf of Guinea [ edit ] The Gulf of Guinea contains a number of islands, the largest of which are in a southwest-northeast chain, forming part of the Cameroon line of volcanoes.

Annobón , also known as Pagalu or Pigalua, is an island that is part of Equatorial Guinea .

Bobowasi Island is an island off the west coast of Africa in the Gulf of Guinea that is part of the Western Region of Ghana.

Bioko is an island off the Ambazonian region of Cameroon in the Gulf of Guinea under the sovereignty of Equatorial Guinea.

Corisco is an island belonging to Equatorial Guinea, as are the  two small islands of Elobey Grande and Elobey Chico .

São Tomé and Príncipe (officially the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe) is a Portuguese-speaking island nation in the Gulf of Guinea that became independent from Portugal in 1975. It is located off the western equatorial coast of Africa and consists of two islands, São Tomé and Príncipe . They are located about 140 kilometres (87 mi) apart and about 250 and 225 kilometres (155 and 140 mi), respectively, off the northwestern coast of Gabon . Both islands are part of an extinct volcanic mountain range . São Tomé, the sizeable southern island, is situated just north of the Equator .

Maritime security [ edit ] Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea consists of 18 sovereign states.

[ 4 ] Where most of the maritime security issues in the Gulf of Guinea have terrible consequences for the shipping industry.

Multiple institutional mandates address maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea: the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS).

[ 4 ] Additionally, maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is also addressed by the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC).

[ 4 ] There has been a 60% population growth in the Gulf of Guinea since 2000, which consequently leads people to resort to hijacking, kidnapping, robberies, and more due to food shortages.

[ 5 ] Climate change has become a huge problem in the Gulf of Guinea and as a consequence has different Maritime security issues become more pressing. These maritime security crimes are characterized not only by piracy but by a myriad of maritime crimes despite piracy often dominating the conversation on maritime security. The other notable crimes in the Gulf of Guinea are illegal fishing, kidnapping for ransom, drug trafficking, and oil-bunkering.

[ 6 ] Illegal oil-bunkering consists of the attacking of vessels transporting oil and transferring the oil to the thieves’ own vessel, after which the oil is sold in local and international markets.

[ 4 ] Illegal oil bunkering at sea is mainly prevalent in the Nigerian waters.

Kidnapping for ransom is also one of the most prevalent maritime crimes in the region. Between 2018 and 2019, the number of crew members that were kidnapped in the Gulf of Guinea increased by 50%, leading the region to account for 90% of global kidnappings at sea.

[ 7 ] About 92% of the hostage-taking and 73% of kidnappings happening in and around Africa are happening in the Gulf of Guinea.

[ 8 ] There is also a large issue of drug trafficking in the Gulf of Guinea and the region has over the last few years become a haven for drug trafficking mainly from South America into Europe.

[ 8 ] Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing [ edit ] IUU fishing also known as Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing has become a severe problem in the Gulf of Guinea. In 2000 were there reports of 212,800 tons of fish caught and in 2012, this number increased by 9 percent to 232,200 tons.

[ 9 ] IUU consequently creates spillover problems to the social, economic, and environmental life in the Gulf of Guinea.

[ 10 ] It presents a direct threat to the national security of the coastal states in the Gulf of Guinea.

[ 11 ] IUU has been linked to multiple issues and forms of organized crime. Some of these crimes are arms trafficking, drug smuggling, forced labor, piracy and more.

[ 8 ] IUU depletes fish stocks in the area and causes issues for fishermen and the local population food security . One of the main issues of IUU is that a lot of the fish that is caught in the Gulf of Guinea is fish that is unreported when caught. This causes overfishing and overfishing causes depleting fisheries all around the region. IUU fishing also becomes a severe issue in the region because it allows fishermen to fish in vessels that are not nationally regulated or managed. Furthermore, can these vessels threaten people's human security due to poor working conditions and poorly regulated boats? Many of the IUU fishing boats are old, rusty, and often in poor condition.

Both small-scale and large-scale fisheries often do illegal fishing in the Gulf of Guinea 
In the Gulf of Guinea can we see severe blue crime spillover effects of IUU through both piracy and human trafficking. Economic activity in the Gulf of Guinea has given rise to maritime piracy in the region.

[ 9 ] It is evident that in the Gulf of Guinea is there more piracy, forced labor and human trafficking as a consequence of IUU fishing, depleting fish stock and large competition of resources and food.

Further Blue Crime Consequences of IUU [ edit ] There have been many reports of forced labor at sea in the Gulf of Guinea on illegal fishing boats. The EJF [ 12 ] reports that through their studies they found that some fishermen and immigrant workers have been forced to work on fishing boats in the Gulf of Guinea for months at a time without access to land. Some of these workers were deployed to sea each day in canoes and in the night where they were forced to return to the mother ship to unload fish. Many illegal fishing boats have operated like such for many years and the workers are often contracted for two years at a time, with no chance to visit home or at times even land in general.

Many workers are paid in boxes of what the EJF called "trash fish" -caught as by-catch- and then the way they would earn money was to further sell this fish. Other reports of forced labor on illegal fishing boats report poor and non-existent safety equipment. Little to no hygiene standards, poor accommodation standards, and very little food.

[ 12 ] Even though piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has dropped since its peak in 2020, is it still a pressing issue in the region.

[ 13 ] Many pirate groups in the Gulf of Guinea often recruit unemployed and underemployed fishermen. This has become highly lucrative due to poor wages and little to no money going around. Often have these local fishermen been lured into the prospect of quick easy money and as a result sold their fishing boats to other pirates in the Gulf.

[ 14 ] Depleting fishing stocks encourages fishermen to engage in piracy and more violence in the region is occurring.

See also [ edit ] Geography portal Cetacean strandings in Ghana Guineaman, a slave ship from the region of Guinea References [ edit ] ^ a b "Limits of Oceans and Seas, Draft 4th Edition: North Atlantic Ocean and its Sub-Divisions" . International Hydrographic Organization. 2002. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ Rosenberg, Matt (30 January 2020).

"Where Do the Prime Meridian and the Equator Intersect?" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 7 July 2022 .

^ Hale, Thomas A.

"From the Griot of Roots to the Roots of Griot: A New Look at the Origins of a Controversial African Term for Bard" (PDF) .

Oral Tradition . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-12-02 . Retrieved 2008-03-26 .

^ a b c d Jessica., Larsen.

Reconciling international priorities with local needs DENMARK AS A NEW SECURITY ACTOR IN THE GULF OF GUINEA . Danish Institute for International Studies.

OCLC 1152018425 .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-12 . Retrieved 2021-06-22 .

^ Denton, Ginger L.; Harris, Jonathan R. (2021-11-02).

"The Impact of Illegal Fishing on Maritime Piracy: Evidence from West Africa" .

Studies in Conflict & Terrorism .

44 (11): 938– 957.

doi : 10.1080/1057610X.2019.1594660 .

ISSN 1057-610X .

^ Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark. (2018). Gulf of Guinea Maritime Security Programme, 2019–2021. Copenhagen: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark.

^ Nicoloso, Giulia (2020-07-17).

"Stark increase in kidnapping at sea in the Gulf of Guinea" .

Critical Maritime Routes .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-02 . Retrieved 2021-05-30 .

^ a b c Temitope, Francis & Abiodun, Temitope Francis & Yakubu, Mohammed. (2020). MARITIME INSECURITY IN THE GULF OF GUINEA (GoG) AND THE QUEST FOR SECURITY INTELLIGENCE DEPLOYMENT IN COMBATING THE MENACE. International Journal of Advanced Academic Research / Social and Management Sciences. ISSN: 2488-9849. Vol. 6, Issue 4 (April 2020) https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341525368 ^ a b Denton, Ginger L.; Harris, Jonathan R. (November 2, 2021).

"The Impact of Illegal Fishing on Maritime Piracy: Evidence from West Africa" .

Studies in Conflict & Terrorism .

44 (11): 938– 957.

doi : 10.1080/1057610X.2019.1594660 – via CrossRef.

^ Paes, Lucas de Oliveira. “Back Matter.” The Challenge of IUU Fishing in West Africa and The Potential Technology Solutions: An Analysis of International Cooperation Projects in Ghana and Guinea-Bissau, Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI), 2022, ISSN: 1894-650X. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep43908.10 . Accessed 22 July 2025.

^ Okafor-Yarwood, Ifesinachi (April 2, 2020).

"The Cyclical Nature of Maritime Security Threats: Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing as a Threat to Human and National Security in the Gulf of Guinea" .

African Security .

13 (2): 116– 146.

doi : 10.1080/19392206.2020.1724432 .

hdl : 10023/23848 – via CrossRef.

^ a b "Pirate Fishing Exposed" .

Environmental Justice Foundation .

^ "Counter-piracy in the Gulf of Guinea must not overlook local struggle and suffering | DIIS" .

^ Jesperson, Sasha; Henriksen, Rune (2022).

"Piracy as a result of IUU fishing: Challenging the causal link" .

African Security Review .

31 (3): 245– 260.

doi : 10.1080/10246029.2022.2049329 .

ISSN 1024-6029 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gulf of Guinea .

The Gulf of Guinea Commission – CGG – GGC ( Archived 2018-09-23 at the Wayback Machine ) v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e African seas Oceans and seas Alboran Sea Atlantic Ocean Indian Ocean Levantine Sea Mediterranean Sea Red Sea Southern Ocean Gulfs and bays Abu Qir Bay Acheïl Dakhlet Al Hoceima Bay Algiers Bay Algoa Bay Ambas Bay Ana Chaves Bay Angra de Cintra Antongil Bay Antsiranana Bay Arab's Gulf Baía Almeida Baía da Condúcia Baía da Corimba Baía de Mocambo Baía de Mossuril Baía de Namibe Baia de Porto Amboim Baía de Santa Marta Baía de Sucujaque Baía de Tombua Baía do Ambriz Baía do Bengo Baía do Dande Baía do Govuro Baía do Lúrio Baía do Nzeto Baía do Suto Baie de Gorée Baie de Sangareya Bandombaai Bay of Anfile Bay of Arguin Bay of Arzew Bay of Aseb Bay of Beylul Bay of Edd Bay of Hawakil Bay of Langarano Bay of Saint-Augustin Bay of Tangier Benguela Bay Bera’esoli Betty’s Bay Bight of Benin Bight of Biafra Bocock’s Bay Bombetoka Bay Bootbaai Bosluisbaai Cabinda Bay Cape Cross Bay Cape Negro Bay Chake-Chake Bay Chameis Bay Chwaka Bay Conception Bay Cuio Bay Dakhlet Nouadhibou Dalwakteah Bay Deurloopbaai Doringbaai Dungonab Bay Durissa Bay Elands Bay Enseada das Pombas Enseada de São Braz Enseada do Catumbo Enseada do Chalungo Enseada do Quicombo Enseada do Quitungo Enseada dos Três Irmãos Equimina Bay False Bay Farta Bay Fernao Veloso Bay Foul Bay Frederik se Baai Ghoubbet-el-Kharab Grosse Bucht Gulf of Aden Gulf of 'Agig Gulf of Gabès Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Hammamet Gulf of Sidra Gulf of Suez Gulf of Tadjoura Gulf of Tunis Gulf of Zula Hafun Bay South Hann Bay Harrison Cove Henties Bay Hirghīgo Bahir Selat’ē Horingbaai Hottentotsbaai Hurdiyo Hydra Bay Inhambane Bay Jammer Bucht John Owen Bay Kalawy Bay Kiwaiyu Bay Lambert Bay Lamu Bay Langbaai Loango Bay Lobito Bay Luanda Bay Lüderitz Bay McDougall Bay Manza Bay Maputo Bay Markusbaai Memba Bay Menai Bay Meob Bay Mietjie Frans se Baai Moraha Bahir Selat’ē Mossel Bay Möwebaai Noopbaai Oran Gulf Pemba Bay Pipas Bay Plaatjieskraalbaai Platbaai Plettenbergbaai Pointe-Noire Bay Porto Alexandre, Angola Prinzen Bucht Río de Oro Bay Rock Bay Roode Bay Rooiwalbaai Saint Francis Bay Saint Francis Bay (Eastern Cape) St Helena Bay Saint Sebastian Bay Saldanha Bay Sandwich Harbour Sierra Bay Skoonbergbaai Skurfbaai Slangbaai Sodwana Bay Sofala Bay Somnaasbaai Spencer Bay Spoegrivierbaai Struisbaai Swartstraat Table Bay Thysbaai Tietiesbaai Ungama Bay Walker Bay Walvis Bay (bay) Yawri Bay Yof Bay Straits Bab-el-Mandeb Bab Iskender Canal de Bolama Canal de Bolola Canal de Caió Canal de São Vicente Canal do Meio Guardafui Channel Mafia Channel Massawa Channel Mozambique Channel‎ Pemba Channel Shubuk Channel Strait of Gibraltar Strait of Sicily Straits of Tiran Tigres Strait Zanzibar Channel Historical seas Aethiopian Sea Erythraean Sea Sea of Zanj Africa portal Oceans portal v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Regions of Africa Central Guinea region Gulf of Guinea Cape Lopez Mayombe Igboland Mbaise Pool Malebo Congo Basin Chad Basin Cameroonian Highlands forests East Sudanian savanna Congolian rainforests Ouaddaï highlands Ennedi Plateau East African Great Lakes Albertine Rift East African Rift Great Rift Valley Gregory Rift Rift Valley lakes Virunga Mountains Kavirondo Zanj East African montane forests Eastern Arc Mountains Serengeti Horn of Africa Afar Triangle Al-Habash Barbaria Danakil Alps Danakil Desert Ethiopian Highlands Dahlak Archipelago Hanish Islands Gulf of Aden Gulf of Tadjoura Red Sea Indian Ocean islands Comoro Islands Lamu Archipelago Madagascar Central Highlands Northern Highlands Zanzibar Archipelago Swahili coast North Eastern Desert Maghreb Ancient Libya Atlas Mountains Barbary Coast Gibraltar Arc Ifriqiya Nile Valley Nile Delta Bashmur Cataracts of the Nile Darfur Lower Egypt Lower Nubia Middle Egypt Nile Delta Nuba Mountains Nubia The Sudans Upper Egypt Tibesti Mountains Western Sahara South Rhodesia North South Thembuland Succulent Karoo Nama Karoo Bushveld Maputaland Highveld Fynbos Indian Ocean coastal belt Albany thickets Cape Floristic Region Skeleton Coast Kalahari Desert Okavango Delta Cape Peninsula False Bay West Pepper Coast Gold Coast Slave Coast Ivory Coast Cape Palmas Cape Mesurado Guinea region Guinean Forests of West Africa Upper Guinean forests Lower Guinean forests Guinean forest-savanna mosaic Guinea Highlands Gulf of Guinea Dahomey Gap Niger Basin Niger Delta Inner Niger Delta West Sudanian savanna Yorubaland Macro-regions Aethiopia Afromontane Arab world Commonwealth realm Equatorial Africa Françafrique Greater Middle East Guineo-Congolian region Islands of Africa List of countries where Arabic is an official language Mediterranean basin MENASA Middle East Middle East and North Africa Miombo woodlands Mittelafrika Negroland Northeast Africa Portuguese-speaking African countries Sahara Sahel Southeast Africa Sub-Saharan Africa Sudan (region) Sudanian savanna Tropical Africa Zambezian region Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_Guinea&oldid=1302334225 " Categories : Gulf of Guinea Bodies of water of Benin Bodies of water of Cameroon Bodies of water of Equatorial Guinea Bodies of water of Gabon Bodies of water of Ghana Bodies of water of Nigeria Bodies of water of Togo Gulfs of Africa Gulfs of the Atlantic Ocean Tropical Atlantic Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 19:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Guinea 108 languages Add topic

