Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Production 2 Additional images 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Endoderm 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inner germ layer of embryonic development Endoderm Tissues derived from endoderm.

Details Days 16 Precursor Epiblast Identifiers MeSH D004707 FMA 69071 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] Endoderm is the innermost of the three primary germ layers in the very early embryo . The other two layers are the ectoderm (outside layer) and mesoderm (middle layer).

[ 1 ] Cells migrating inward along the archenteron form the inner layer of the gastrula , which develops into the endoderm.

[ 2 ] The endoderm consists at first of flattened cells, which subsequently become columnar. It forms the epithelial lining of multiple systems.

In plant biology , endoderm corresponds to the innermost part of the cortex ( bark ) in young shoots and young roots often consisting of a single cell layer. As the plant becomes older, more endoderm will lignify .

Production [ edit ] The following chart shows the tissues produced by the endoderm.
The embryonic endoderm develops into the interior linings of two tubes in the body, the digestive and respiratory tube.

[ 3 ] Layer Category System General [ 4 ] Gastrointestinal tract the entire alimentary canal except part of the mouth , pharynx and the terminal part of the rectum (which are lined by involutions of the ectoderm ), the lining cells of all the glands which open into the digestive tube, including those of the liver and pancreas General Respiratory tract the trachea , bronchi , and alveoli of the lungs General Endocrine glands and organs the lining of the follicles of the thyroid gland and the epithelial component of the thymus (i.e. thymic epithelial cells).

Auditory system the epithelium of the auditory tube and tympanic cavity Urinary system the urinary bladder and part of the urethra Liver and pancreas cells are believed to derive from a common precursor.

[ 5 ] In humans, the endoderm can differentiate into distinguishable organs after 5 weeks of embryonic development .

Additional images [ edit ] Section through the embryo.

Section through ovum imbedded in the uterine decidua Signaling pathway to inducing endoderm See also [ edit ] Hypoblast of primitive endoderm Ectoderm Germ layer Histogenesis Mesoderm Organogenesis Endodermal sinus tumor Gastrulation Cell differentiation Triploblasty List of human cell types derived from the germ layers References [ edit ] This article incorporates text in the public domain from page 49 of the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) ^ Langman's Medical Embryology, 11th edition. 2010.

^ Fukuda, Kimiko; Kikuchi, Yutaka (August 2005).

"Endoderm development in vertebrates: fate mapping, induction and regional specification" .

Development, Growth and Differentiation .

47 (6): 343– 355.

doi : 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2005.00815.x .

ISSN 0012-1592 .

PMID 16109032 .

S2CID 26241717 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

^ Gilbert, SF.

"Endoderm" . Sinauer Associates . Retrieved 14 March 2013 .

^ The General category denotes that all or most of the animals containing this layer produce the adjacent product.

^ Zaret KS (October 2001). "Hepatocyte differentiation: from the endoderm and beyond".

Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev .

11 (5): 568– 74.

doi : 10.1016/S0959-437X(00)00234-3 .

PMID 11532400 .

Look up endoderm in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Human embryonic development in the first three weeks Week 1 Fertilization Oocyte activation Zygote Cleavage Blastomere Morula Cavitation Blastocoel Blastocyst Inner cell mass Trophoblast Week 2 ( Bilaminar ) Hypoblast Epiblast Week 3 ( Trilaminar ) Germ layers Archenteron / Primitive streak Primitive pit Primitive node / Blastopore Primitive groove Gastrula Gastrulation Regional specification Ectoderm Surface ectoderm Neuroectoderm Somatopleuric mesenchyme Neurulation Neural crest Endoderm Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme Mesoderm Axial mesoderm Paraxial Somite Somitomere Intermediate Lateral plate Intraembryonic coelom Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme Somatopleuric mesenchyme Portal : Anatomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Endoderm&oldid=1221889889 " Categories : Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) Endoderm Germ layers Developmental biology Embryology Gastrulation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 May 2024, at 16:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Endoderm 38 languages Add topic

