Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Process 2 Economic implications 3 Wildlife considerations 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Even-aged timber management 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Even aged timber management ) Group of forest management practices A young stand of even-aged fir trees growing in a formerly clearcut area in the Sierra Nevada mountains, with an older cohort behind them.

Even-aged timber management is a group of forest management practices employed to achieve a nearly coeval cohort group of forest trees .

[ 1 ] The practice of even-aged management is often pursued to minimize costs to loggers. In some cases, the practices of even aged timber management are frequently implicated in biodiversity loss and other ecological damage .

[ 2 ] Even-aged timber management can also be beneficial to restoring natural native species succession.

[ 3 ] Process [ edit ] The first step in even aged timber management is to select a suitable stand for harvest. Trees must be of merchantable size, a desirable species, and in an area accessible to harvesting equipment. Once selected, the stand is harvested (usually using feller-bunchers, skidders, and processors). Merchantable trees (trees with boles large enough to be sold to a mill) are harvested and processed whereas unmerchantable trees (trees that are too small or of an undesirable species) are either crushed by machinery or cut to make equipment movement easier. This process is called clearcutting, and the result is a cutblock. At this stage, the forestry company is required to replant the same proportion of species that were there previous to harvest.

[ 4 ] Usually, silviculture techniques are employed to ensure that species survive and grow in the proper proportion. Shade-intolerant species such as trembling aspen ( Populus tremuloides ) and marsh reedgrass ( Calamagrostis canadensis ) will thrive in the open conditions of a clearcut, outcompeting shade-tolerant species such as white spruce ( Picea glauca ). Mechanical site preparation and herbicide treatments are often applied initially to allow for adequate shade-tolerant growth. This way, the shade-tolerants are given a head start and the shade-intolerants will catch up over time once silviculture treatments are stopped, resulting in an even-aged stand of trees with little vertical stratification.

Economic implications [ edit ] Even-aged forest management is the harvesting system of choice in many parts of the world because it is often considered to be the only method that is economically viable. Forestry operations have extremely high variable costs- per hour expenses for harvesting equipment and per kilometer expenses for log transportation compose a very large portion of the total cost to harvest a stand. Therefore, companies must obtain as much productivity as possible from their hourly equipment in order to be profitable. Uneven-aged management techniques where only certain trees are harvested, such as shelterwood systems, incur the same hourly costs while harvesting fewer trees per hour. This reality explains why in Canada, for example, 90% of forests harvested are done so by clear cut through an even-aged management system.

[ 5 ] Wildlife considerations [ edit ] Ecological analysis indicates that even aged timber management can produce inferior outcomes for wildlife biodiversity and abundance.

[ 6 ] Some species thrive on uneven or natural forest tree distribution. For example, the wild turkey thrives when uneven heights and canopy variations exist and its numbers are diminished by even aged timber management.

[ 7 ] Depending on the ecosystem, however, some species thrive under even aged timber management. Clear cutting closely mimics the results of the most prominent natural disturbance in the boreal forest- wildfires. Certain tree species of this forest type have evolved over time to regenerate favourably in open, well-lit conditions, while others are adapted to thrive in the shade they produce. Clear cutting allows shade intolerant species, such as aspen and jack pine, to regenerate where they could not in a mature forest.

Clear cutting areas for even-aged timber management can also benefit many wildlife species. The abundance of coarse woody debris added to the forest floor is beneficial to salamander and snake species, while the release of understory shrubs provides an increase of berry-foraging opportunities for bear and songbirds.

[ 8 ] In general, the immature, grassy forest regenerated after a clear cut fulfills specific habitat requirements for many species that cannot be found in mature forests. In the boreal forest , for example, wildfire has been suppressed by humans, resulting in many overmature stands. Even aged timber management restores the successional cycle and allows early successional species to recolonize immature habitat.

See also [ edit ] Main article: Outline of forestry Clearcutting Slash and burn Stand level modelling References [ edit ] ^ Robinson, Gordon (1988).

The Forest and the Trees: A Guide To Excellent Forestry . Island Press.

ISBN 978-0-933280-40-3 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Rockwood, Larry; Ronald Stewart; Thomas Dietz (2008).

Foundations of Environmental Sustainability . Oxford  University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530945-4 .

^ "Clearcuts Provide Multiple Benefits to Forests and Wildlife" . Michigan Department of Natural Resources . Retrieved 23 March 2012 .

^ "Forest Management Agreements" .

Sustainable Resource Development . Government of Alberta. Archived from the original on 9 April 2012 . Retrieved 23 March 2012 .

^ "A Cut Above- A Look At Alternatives to Clearcutting in Canada's Boreal Forest" (PDF) . Wildlands League . Retrieved 23 March 2012 .

^ Burton, P.J.; C. Messier; D.W. Smith; W.L. Adamowicz (2003).

Towards Sustainable Management of the Boreal Forest . National Research Council Canada Research Press. p. 1039.

ISBN 978-0-660-18762-4 . Archived from the original on 2007-12-25 . Retrieved 2009-08-25 .

^ Hogan, C. Michael (2008-09-09).

"Wild Turkey Meleagris gallopavo " . Global Twitcher. Archived from the original on 2017-07-25 . Retrieved 2009-08-25 .

^ "Clearcuts Provide Multiple Benefits to Forests and Wildlife" . Michigan Department of Natural Resources . Retrieved 23 March 2012 .

v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Even-aged_timber_management&oldid=1294240214 " Category : Forest management Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 14:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Even-aged timber management 1 language Add topic

