Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Location 1.2 Extent 1.3 Geology 1.4 Marine biodiversity 1.5 Coral Triangle 2 Biology Toggle Biology subsection 2.1 Biodiversity 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Battle of the Philippine Sea 3.2 Post-World War II 4 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 4.1 Fisheries 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Philippine Sea 89 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 20°N 130°E ﻿ / ﻿ 20°N 130°E ﻿ / 20; 130 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marginal sea east and north-east of the Philippines "Western Philippine Sea" redirects here. For the alternative name for part of the South China Sea, see West Philippine Sea .

For other uses, see Philippine Sea (disambiguation) .

Philippine Sea Philippine Sea Location within the Pacific Ocean Show map of Pacific Ocean Philippine Sea Philippine Sea (North Pacific ) Show map of North Pacific Philippine Sea Philippine Sea (Philippines) Show map of Philippines Location East Asia , Southeast Asia , and Micronesia Coordinates 20°N 130°E ﻿ / ﻿ 20°N 130°E ﻿ / 20; 130 Part of Pacific Ocean Basin countries List Federated States of Micronesia Indonesia Japan Palau Philippines Taiwan United States ( Guam and Northern Mariana Islands ) Surface area 5,695,000 km 2 (2,199,000 sq mi) Islands List Bonin Islands Catanduanes Dinagat Islands Green Island Guam Guiluan Island Guishan Island Halmahera Homonhon Honshu Izu Islands Kyūshū Leyte Luzon Mariana Islands Mindanao Morotai Orchid Island Palau Polillo Islands Ryukyu Islands Saipan Samar Siargao Shikoku Taiwan Tinian Ulithi Yap Trenches Izu–Bonin Trench Mariana Trench Nankai Trough Philippine Trench Ryukyu Trench Philippine Sea Alternative Chinese name Traditional Chinese 菲律賓海 Simplified Chinese 菲律宾海 Hanyu Pinyin Fēilǜbīn Hǎi Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Fēilǜbīn Hǎi Japanese name Kanji フィリピン海 Kana フィリピンかい Transcriptions Romanization Firipin Kai Indonesian name Indonesian Laut Filipina Filipino name Tagalog Dagat ng Pilipinas The Philippine Sea is a marginal sea of the Western Pacific Ocean east of the Philippine Archipelago (hence the name) and the largest sea in the world , occupying an estimated surface area of 5 million square kilometers (2 × 10 ^ 6 sq mi).

[ 1 ] The Philippine Sea Plate forms the floor of the sea.

[ 2 ] Its western border is the first island chain to the west, comprising the Ryukyu Islands in the northwest and Taiwan in the west. Its southwestern border comprises the Philippine islands of Luzon , Catanduanes , Samar , Leyte , and Mindanao . Its northern border comprises the Japanese islands of Honshu , Shikoku and Kyūshū . Its eastern border is the second island chain to the east, comprising the Bonin Islands and Iwo Jima in the northeast, the Mariana Islands (including Guam , Saipan , and Tinian ) in the due east, and Halmahera , Palau , Yap and Ulithi (of the Caroline Islands ) in the southeast. Its southern border is Indonesia 's Morotai Island .

[ 3 ] The sea has a complex and diverse undersea relief .

[ 4 ] The floor is formed into a structural basin by a series of geologic faults and fracture zones.

Island arcs , which are actually extended ridges protruding above the ocean surface due to plate tectonic activity in the area, enclose the Philippine Sea to the north, east and south. The Philippine archipelago, Ryukyu Islands , and the Marianas are examples. Another prominent feature of the Philippine Sea is the presence of deep sea trenches , among them the Philippine Trench and the Mariana Trench , containing the deepest point on the planet.

Geography [ edit ] An image captured from the ISS while flying past the Philippine Sea in June 2016 Location [ edit ] Location of the Philippine Sea The Philippine Sea has the Philippines and Taiwan to the west, Japan to the north, the Marianas to the east and Palau to the south. Adjacent seas include the Celebes Sea which is separated by Mindanao and smaller islands to the south, the South China Sea which is separated by Philippines , and the East China Sea which is separated by the Ryukyu Islands .

Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization defines the Philippine Sea as "that area of the North Pacific Ocean off the Eastern coasts of the Philippine Islands ", bounded as follows: [ 5 ] [ failed verification ] On the west.

By the eastern limits of the East Indian Archipelago , South China Sea and East China Sea .

On the north.

By the southeast coast of Kyushu , the southern and eastern limits of the Inland Sea and the south coast of Honshu Island.

On the east.

By the ridge joining Japan to the Bonin , Volcano and Ladrone (Mariana) Islands, all these being included in the Philippine Sea.

On the south.

By a line joining Guam , Yap , Pelew ( Palau ) and Halmahera Islands.

Philippines Taiwan Japan Palau Federated States of Micronesia Northern Mariana Islands class=notpageimage| Countries and territories ( red dot ) bordering or within the sea ( blue dot ) Geology [ edit ] Philippine Sea plate View of the beach, rocky coastline and the Philippine Sea in Pingtung County, Taiwan The Philippine Sea Plate forms the floor of the Philippine Sea. It subducts under the Philippine Mobile Belt which carries most of the Philippine archipelago and eastern Taiwan . Between the two plates is the Philippine Trench .

Marine biodiversity [ edit ] The Philippine Sea has a marine territorial scope of over 679,800 square kilometers (262,500 sq mi), and an EEZ of 2.2 million km 2 . Attributed to an extensive vicariance and island integrations, the Philippines contains the highest number of marine species per unit area relative to the countries within the Indo-Malay-Philippines Archipelago , and has been identified as the epicenter of marine biodiversity.

[ 6 ] With its inclusion in the Coral Triangle, the Philippine Sea encompasses over 3,212 fish species, 486 coral species, 800 seaweed species, and 820 benthic algae species, wherein the Verde Island Passage is dubbed as "the center of the center of marine fish biodiversity".

[ 7 ] Within its territory, thirty-three endemic species of fish have been identified, including the blue-spotted angelfish ( Chaetodontoplus caeruleopunctatus ) and the sea catfish ( Arius manillensis ).

[ 8 ] The Philippine marine territory has also become a breeding and feeding ground for endangered marine species, such as the whale shark ( Rhincodon typus ), the dugong ( Dugong dugon ), and the megamouth shark ( Megachasma pelagios ).

[ 7 ] Within the South China Sea , Philippine scientists have discovered an abundant amount of marine life and species that have the potential to be biomedical advances for the Philippines as well.

[ 9 ] Coral Triangle [ edit ] The Coral Triangle (also called the Indo-Malayan Triangle) is considered to be the global center of marine biodiversity. Its total oceanic area is approximately 2 million square kilometers.

[ 10 ] It encompasses the tropical waters of Malaysia , Indonesia , the Philippines , Timor-Leste , Papua New Guinea , and Solomon Islands .

[ 11 ] The Philippine islands, which lie at its apex, make up 300,000 square kilometers (120,000 sq mi) of it.

[ 12 ] The part of the Coral Triangle's coral reef area that lies within the Philippines ranges from 10,750 square kilometers (4,150 sq mi) to 33,500 square kilometers (12,900 sq mi). It contains over 500 species of scleractinian or stony corals, and at least 12 endemic coral species.

[ 10 ] The Coral Triangle contains 75% of the world's coral species (around 600 species). It is home to over 2000 types of reef fish, and six of the world's seven species of marine turtles (the hawksbill , loggerhead , leatherback , green turtle , olive ridley , and sea turtle ).

[ 13 ] There is no single causal explanation for the unusually high biodiversity found in the Coral Triangle, but most researchers have attributed it to geological factors such as plate tectonics.

[ 14 ] The Philippine Sea provides or supports the livelihoods of 120 million people, and is a source of food for the Philippine coastal communities and for millions more people worldwide.

[ 13 ] Whale- shark tourism in the Coral Triangle also provides a steady source of income for the surrounding community.

[ 13 ] The marine resources in the Coral Triangle have a high economic value, not only in the Philippines, but across the globe. The countries surrounding the Coral Triangle work to provide their people with technical assistance and other resources needed to promote conservation, sustainability, biodiversity, food security, sources of livelihood, and economic development.

[ 11 ] Climate change is affecting the coastal ecosystem found in the Coral Triangle. It is contributing to rising sea levels and ocean acidification , thus endangering marine animals like fish and turtles. This has a negative effect on local sources of livelihood, such as fishing and tourism. It is also making the waters warmer, which endangers corals. Warmer water causes corals to absorb more carbon dioxide. This alters the water's pH balance, making it acidic, a condition to which the corals are not adapted, and in which they are ill-equipped to survive.

[ 13 ] Biology [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2008 ) The Philippine Sea hosts an exotic marine ecosystem. There are 421 of the 577 known species of corals in coastal waters, including 19 seagrass species and 30 species of mangrove, both of which contribute nutrients to coral systems. The Philippines also consists of 20 percent of the shellfish globally.

Sea turtles , sharks , moray eels , octopuses , and sea snakes , along with numerous species of fish such as tuna can commonly be observed. Additionally, the Philippine Sea serves as spawning ground for Japanese eel , tuna, and different whale species.

[ 4 ] Pass of the ISS over Eastern Asia to the Philippine Sea and Guam Islands in the Philippine Sea Biodiversity [ edit ] The Philippine Sea is a centre of marine biodiversity as well as a biodiversity hotspot . However, at least 418 species are being threatened because of unsustainable practices.

The rise in temperature change caused shifts in the marine ecosystems . which could cause corals to die due to changing sea temperature. As fish and other marine life rely on corals for sustenance and habitat, communities that rely on fishing are heavily affected as well.

[ 15 ] As the Philippine Sea is situated in a particularly active Western Pacific tropical cyclone basin , the physical damage caused by typhoons coming from the east can further destroy the marine habitats.

[ 16 ] History [ edit ] The first European to navigate the Philippine Sea was Ferdinand Magellan in 1521, who named it Mar Filipinas when he and his men were in the Mariana Islands prior to the exploration of the Philippines .

[ citation needed ] Later it was discovered by other Spanish explorers [ who?

] from 1522 to 1565.

Battle of the Philippine Sea [ edit ] Main article: Battle of the Philippine Sea Japanese Carrier Division Three under attack by United States Navy aircraft from Task Force 58, late afternoon, 20 June 1944. The heavy cruiser circling at right, nearest to the camera, is either Maya or Chōkai . Beyond that, is the small aircraft carrier Chiyoda .

A historic battle between the naval fleets of the United States and Japan took place in the vicinity of the Philippine Sea. This was called The Battle of the Philippine Sea , and occurred near the Mariana Islands from 19 to 20 June 1944.

[ 17 ] It was also the largest carrier-to-carrier battle in history which featured the United States Fifth Fleet and the 1st Mobile Fleet of the Imperial Japanese Navy .

Aside from the navy, aerial activity was also present in the Battle of the Philippine Sea, as hundreds of aircraft from both countries fired at each other. The Americans indisputably won, and nicknamed the aerial war the " Great Marianas Turkey Shoot " due to the number of Japanese aircraft shot down.

[ 18 ] Japan struggled to recover from the severe damages of its imperial navy and air strength suffered from the battle. This heavily attributed to the victory of the United States in the Battle of the Philippine Sea which was a vital part of the Americans' reclamation of the Philippines, and the Mariana Islands from Japan.

[ 19 ] Post-World War II [ edit ] In 1989, the United States Department of Defense revealed the loss of a one-megaton nuclear bomb in the Philippine Sea during the 1965 Philippine Sea A-4 incident .

[ 20 ] Following an escalation of the Spratly Islands dispute in 2011, various Philippine government agencies started using the designation " West Philippine Sea " to refer to parts of the South China Sea . However, a PAGASA spokesperson said that the sea east of the Philippine archipelago will continue to be called the Philippine Sea.

[ 21 ] Economy [ edit ] Fisheries [ edit ] The Philippines depends on the Philippine Sea as one of the sources of its food, and for many people's livelihoods. In the Coral Triangle area, the Philippines harvests seaweeds, milkfish, shrimp, oyster, mussel, and live reef fish as aquaculture products. Fishermen catch many types of fish, including small pelagic, anchovy, sardine, mackerel, and tuna, among others.

[ 13 ] Recent scientific expeditions have found that the Benham Rise (also known as the Philippine Rise) in the Philippine Sea has a diverse marine ecosystem that attracts migratory commercial fish like tuna, marlin and mackerel.

[ 22 ] The Benham Rise is a rich fishing ground for fishermen from Aurora, Quezon and Bicol.

[ 23 ] The Philippines Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources trains fishermen in sustainable-fishing techniques to prevent the destruction of coral formations, which could negatively affect the food chain that the migratory fish depend on. Migratory fish generally sell at high prices. For example, a single bluefin tuna from the Benham Rise can be sold at market for ₱2,000 .

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philippine Sea .

Oceans portal Philippine Trench Philippine Sea Plate Benham Rise Devil's Sea References [ edit ] ^ "Philippine Sea" .

Encarta . Archived from the original on 20 August 2009 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ North Pacific Ocean ^ "Philippine Sea" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Retrieved 12 August 2008 .

^ a b "Philippine Sea" . Lighthouse Foundation . Retrieved 12 August 2008 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 October 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ "Environmental Biology of Fishes" .

Environmental Biology of Fishes (Online) . Springer Nature Switzerland.

ISSN 0378-1909 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ a b Goldman, Lee (10 August 2010).

"A Biodiversity Hotspot in the Philippines" .

World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ Boquet, Yves (2017).

The Philippine archipelago . Springer. p. 321.

ISBN 9783319519265 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ "The Philippines' Future Floats in the West Philippine Sea" . 5 July 2020.

ProQuest 2423812133 .

^ a b State of the Coral Triangle : Philippines (PDF) . Mandaluyong, Philippines: Asian Development Bank. 2014.

ISBN 978-92-9254-518-5 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ a b "NOAA PIFSC CRED in the Coral Triangle: Building capacity for application of an Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ Economics of Fisheries and Aquaculture in the Coral Triangle (PDF) (Report). Mandaluyong, Philippines: Asian Development Bank . 2014 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ a b c d e "Coral Triangle; Facts" .

World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ The coral triangle and climate change : ecosystems, people and societies at risk : summary (PDF) . Sydney NSW Australia: WWF Australia. May 2009.

ISBN 978-1-921031-35-9 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ "Philippine Seas" (PDF) . Greenpeace. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2017 . Retrieved 20 July 2018 .

^ "How Is Climate Change Affecting the Philippines?" .

Climate Reality Project . climaterealityproject.org. 19 January 2016 . Retrieved 20 July 2018 .

^ "Crowder, M. (2006). Dreadnoughts' FIERY FINALE. World War II, 21(5), 48".

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ Lambert, J. W. (2011). "OLD-FASHIONED TURKEY SHOOT".

Aviation History , 22(2), 22-29 .

^ Kennedy, D. M. (1999). "Victory at sea".

Atlantic , 283(3), 51-76 .

^ "U.S. Confirms '65 Loss of H-Bomb Near Japanese Islands" .

The Washington Post . 9 May 1989.

^ Quismundo, Tarra (13 June 2011).

"South China Sea renamed in the Philippines" .

Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved 26 January 2018 .

^ a b Dimacali, TJ (8 May 2017).

" 'Fish more important than gold' –BFAR on Benham Rise" .

GMA News . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ Cinco, Maricar (19 March 2017).

"Exploring Benham Rise's unknown treasures" .

Inquirer.net . Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

v t e Seas of the Philippines Ocean Pacific Ocean Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Philippine Sea Samar Sea Sibuyan Sea South China Sea West Philippine Sea Sulu Sea Visayan Sea Straits Babuyan Channel Balabac Strait Balintang Channel Basilan Strait Burias Pass Canigao Channel Cebu Strait Guimaras Strait Iloilo Strait Jintotolo Channel Linapacan Strait Luzon Strait Maqueda Channel Mindoro Strait Polillo Strait San Bernardino Strait San Juanico Strait Surigao Strait Tablas Strait Tañon Strait Tapiantana Channel Ticao Pass Verde Island Passage Gulf Albay Gulf Asid Gulf Davao Gulf Lagonoy Gulf Leyte Gulf Lingayen Gulf Moro Gulf Panay Gulf Ragay Gulf Category Oceans portal Philippines portal v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX 20°N 130°E ﻿ / ﻿ 20°N 130°E ﻿ / 20; 130 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philippine_Sea&oldid=1281334267 " Categories : Philippine Sea Seas of Asia Marginal seas of the Pacific Ocean Seas of the Philippines Bodies of water of Guam Bodies of water of the Federated States of Micronesia Seas of Taiwan Seas of Japan Bodies of water of Palau Seas of Oceania Hidden categories: CS1 errors: requires URL Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Use Philippine English from August 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in Philippine English Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Tagalog-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from March 2025 Articles to be expanded from July 2008 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 19 March 2025, at 19:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philippine Sea 89 languages Add topic

