Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Marriage plans 2 Wedding 3 Queen of Poland and Grand Duchess of Lithuania 4 Ancestors 5 References Toggle the table of contents Barbara Zápolya 22 languages Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Brezhoneg Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Barbara Zapolya ) Queen of Poland and Grand Duchess of Lithuania (1512–1515 The native form of this personal name is Szapolyai Borbála . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Barbara Zápolya Portrait by Lucas Cranach the Elder , c.

1510-1512 Queen consort of Poland Grand Duchess consort of Lithuania Tenure 8 February 1512 – 2 October 1515 Coronation 8 February 1512 Wawel Cathedral Born 1495 Trencsén , Kingdom of Hungary (most likely) Died 2 October 1515 (aged 19–20) Kraków , Kingdom of Poland Burial 18 October 1515 Wawel Cathedral , Kraków Spouse Sigismund I of Poland ​ ​ ( m.

1512) ​ Issue Hedwig, Electress of Bradenburg Anna of Poland House Zápolya Father Stephen Zápolya Mother Hedwig of Cieszyn Barbara Zápolya ( Hungarian : Szapolyai Borbála , Lithuanian : Barbora Zapojajietė , 1495–1515) was Queen of Poland and Grand Duchess of Lithuania as the first wife of Sigismund I the Old from 1512 to 1515. Marriage to Barbara represented an alliance between Sigismund and the House of Zápolya against the Habsburgs in succession disputes over the throne to the Kingdom of Hungary . The alliance was short-lived as the renewed Muscovite–Lithuanian War forced Sigismund to look for Habsburg allies. The marriage was loving, but short. Barbara was the mother of Hedwig, Electress of Brandenburg , but died soon after the birth of her second daughter Anna.

Marriage plans [ edit ] She was the daughter of Stephen Zápolya , Palatine of Hungary and Count of Szepes , and the Polish princess Hedwig of Cieszyn of the Piast dynasty .

[ 1 ] Barbara was a younger sister of John Zápolya , the future King of Hungary . The family was well known for their wealth: Stephen had more than 70 castles in Hungary and Slovakia.

[ 2 ] Her father died in 1499, leaving the family in care of Hedwig's cousin, Casimir II, Duke of Cieszyn . Barbara probably spent her childhood in the Trenčín Castle and the court of Anne of Foix-Candale , Queen of Bohemia and Hungary .

[ 1 ] Sigismund I the Old was the fifth of six sons of the Polish King and Lithuanian Grand Duke Casimir IV Jagiellon . Not having any inheritance in either Poland or Lithuania, he lived in Buda , at the court of his elder brother King Vladislaus II of Hungary , in 1498–1501 and 1502–1506.

[ 3 ] At that time he became closer with the House of Zápolya . Sigismund mediated a dispute between his brother Vladislaus and the Zápolyas, who wanted to secure the throne of Hungary to John Zápolya by securing marriage between John and Vladislaus' first-born Anne of Hungary .

[ 3 ] Vladislaus refused, favoring the interests of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor . The Hungarian nobles strongly opposed the increasing reach of the Habsburg dynasty and threatened to take up arms.

[ 3 ] The conflict lost its urgency when Vladislaus' son and heir Louis II of Hungary was born in July 1506.

[ 2 ] In August 1506, Alexander Jagiellon died without leaving an heir. Sigismund was elected as King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania and faced growing ambitions of the Habsburgs not only in Hungary and Bohemia, but also in the State of the Teutonic Order in Prussia.

[ 2 ] That forced him to look for anti-Habsburg allies and Zápolyas in Hungary were the strongest. A royal marriage would strengthen Zápolya position in any future succession disputes and would help keep Hungary out of the hands of the Habsburgs.

[ 4 ] It seems the plan was developed around 1510 by Jan Łaski , Grand Chancellor of the Crown , and Krzysztof Szydłowiecki , Marshal of the Court .

[ 4 ] Before deciding on Barbara, Sigismund also considered Catherine of Mecklenburg , but that plan was interrupted by renewed hostilities between Poland and Bogdan III the One-Eyed , Voivode of Moldavia .

[ 4 ] Wedding [ edit ] Marble bust of Barbara Zápolya long thought to be of Barbara Radziwiłł [ 5 ] In April 1511, Sigismund sent Piotr Tomicki as his envoy to Hungary.

[ 4 ] Tomicki informed King Vladislaus that his brother sought to wed a Hungarian noblewoman and asked for his assistance in locating a suitable candidate. Vladislaus' trusted physician, bribed by the Polish delegation, suggested Barbara Zápolya and Vladislaus agreed. The ruse worked to secure Vladislaus' approval for the marriage.

[ 6 ] The marriage treaty was signed on 2 December 1511. Barbara, escorted by her family and Polish nobles (Bishop Jan Lubrański , Krzysztof Szydłowiecki , Andrzej Krzycki ), departed to Poland in January 1512.

[ 7 ] Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor , attempted to interrupt the wedding with a last-minute proposal for Sigismund to marry one of the daughters of Francesco II Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantua .

[ 7 ] On 6 February 1512, Sigismund met Barbara in Łobzów, now a district of Kraków .

[ 7 ] That way 17-year-old Barbara and 45-year-old Sigismund entered Kraków together. The wedding and coronation ceremony took place on 8 February.

[ 7 ] Her dowry was 100,000 red złoty , which was a very large sum. Sigismund's youngest sister Elisabeth, who married three years later, brought only 20,000 złoty as her dowry.

[ 7 ] The celebrations, financed by a loan from Jan Boner , cost another 34,365 złoty.

[ 7 ] This showed not only the riches of the Zápolya family but also the importance of a royal wedding to their family.

[ 7 ] In exchange for the dowry, Barbara received the towns of Nowy Korczyn , Wiślica , Żarnowiec , Radom , Jedlnia , Kozienice , Chęciny , Stężyca , and others as well as income from custom taxes of several cities and an annual sum of 200 Hungarian florins from the Wieliczka Salt Mine .

[ 7 ] Queen of Poland and Grand Duchess of Lithuania [ edit ] Sigismund's Chapel at Wawel Castle was originally constructed for Barbara Zápolya Despite the age difference, the marriage was happy. The couple traveled together, even when Barbara was late in her pregnancy.

[ 8 ] Their first daughter Hedwig was born on 15 March 1513 in Poznań .

[ 8 ] After two months, Sigismund and Barbara departed towards Vilnius to attend to the renewed war with the Grand Duchy of Moscow . The two-month-old Hedwig was sent to Kraków.

[ 8 ] The couple separated for the first time in July–September 1514 when Sigismund organized the army against Moscow.

[ 8 ] Sigismund returned to his wife in Vilnius after the victory in the Battle of Orsha . In February 1515, the couple returned to Kraków where Barbara was reunited with her daughter after almost two years.

[ 9 ] Barbara, pregnant with her second child, remained in Kraków while Sigismund traveled to Bratislava and then Vienna from March to August 1515. This was the second time that the couple separated.

[ 9 ] During that time, they exchanged frequent letters (20 letters by Sigismund and only two letters by Barbara survive) expressing their warm feelings for each other.

[ 9 ] Sigismund particularly expressed his affection for Barbara and concern for her well-being, reminding her to take good care of her health and encouraging her to keep up her spirits.

[ 10 ] Contemporary sources almost universally praised Barbara for her virtues.

Marcin Bielski wrote of her devotion to God, obedience to husband, kindheartedness and generosity to paupers.

[ 11 ] Marcin Kromer even attributed the victory at Orsha to her Catholic piety and devotion, while Justus Ludwik Decjusz did not doubt that Barbara would join ranks of saints in the heaven.

[ 11 ] Despite her husband's affection and public support, Barbara did not have a strong political influence. For example, her mother and brother urged her to prevent Piotr Tomicki , a known sympathizer with the Habsburgs, from becoming Bishop of Przemyśl and Vice-Chancellor of the Crown .

[ 12 ] Tomicki was promoted to the posts regardless and, after learning of Zápolyas' interference, became an even stronger supporter of the Habsburgs.

[ 12 ] Marriage to Barbara also did not stop Sigismund from supporting the wedding between Louis II of Hungary and Maria of Austria , granddaughter of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor .

[ 13 ] Sigismund's shift to pro-Habsburg policies was caused by the war with the Grand Duchy of Moscow – Sigismund did not feel confident enough to fight two strong enemies and sought an alliance with the Emperor.

[ 14 ] Their second daughter Anna was born on 1 July 1515.

[ 9 ] After the childbirth, Barbara became ill. It is unclear if it was childbed fever or some other disease.

[ 9 ] On 1 October 1515, Barbara suffered what was described as apoplexy , though it is impossible to determine the actual cause.

[ 15 ] She died the next day and was buried at Wawel Cathedral . In 1517, Sigismund ordered the construction of the Sigismund's Chapel at the cathedral. Barbara and her daughter Anna, who died at the age of 5, were reburied in the completed chapel on 13 June 1533.

[ 12 ] Ancestors [ edit ] Ancestors of Barbara Zápolya 4.

László Zápolya 2.

Stephen Zápolya [ 1 ] 5. Dorothea 1.

Barbara Zápolya 24.

Przemyslaus I Noszak, Duke of Cieszyn 12.

Boleslaus I, Duke of Cieszyn 25.

Elisabeth of Bytom 6.

Przemyslaus II, Duke of Cieszyn [ 1 ] 26.

Siemowit IV, Duke of Masovia 13.

Euphemia of Masovia 27.

Alexandra of Lithuania [ 1 ] 3.

Hedwig of Cieszyn [ 1 ] 28.

Bolesław III of Warsaw 14.

Bolesław IV of Warsaw 29.

Anna of Halshany [ 1 ] 7.

Anna of Warsaw 15.

Barbara of Ruthenia References [ edit ] Notes ^ a b c d e f g Duczmal 2012 , p. 79.

^ a b c Duczmal 2012 , p. 81.

^ a b c Duczmal 2012 , p. 80.

^ a b c d Duczmal 2012 , p. 82.

^ "International Exhibition "Portraits of the Rulers and Magnates of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania from Museums in Ukraine" " . National Museum – Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania. 2012-09-03 . Retrieved 2014-11-11 .

^ Duczmal 2012 , pp. 82–83.

^ a b c d e f g h Duczmal 2012 , p. 83.

^ a b c d Duczmal 2012 , p. 84.

^ a b c d e Duczmal 2012 , p. 85.

^ Duczmal 2012 , pp. 85, 87.

^ a b Duczmal 2012 , p. 87.

^ a b c Duczmal 2012 , p. 86.

^ Duczmal 2012 , pp. 86–87.

^ Duczmal 2012 , pp. 550–551.

^ Duczmal 2012 , pp. 85–86.

Bibliography Duczmal, Małgorzata (2012).

Jogailaičiai (in Lithuanian). Translated by Birutė Mikalonienė; Vyturys Jarutis. Vilnius: Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidybos centras .

ISBN 978-5-420-01703-6 .

Barbara Zápolya House of Zápolya Born: 1495 Died: 2 October 1515 Royal titles Preceded by Helena of Moscow Queen consort of Poland Grand Duchess consort of Lithuania 1512–1515 Succeeded by Bona Sforza v t e Royal consorts of Poland Piast dynasty Doubravka of Bohemia Oda of Haldensleben Emnilda Oda of Meissen Richeza of Lotharingia Maria Dobroniega of Kiev Wyszesława of Kiev Judith of Bohemia Judith of Swabia Zbyslava of Kiev Salomea of Berg Fragmentation period Agnes of Babenberg Viacheslava of Novgorod Maria Eudoxia of Kiev Helena of Znojmo Lucia of Rügen Grzymisława of Łuck Ludmila Agafia of Rus Hedwig of Silesia Anne of Bohemia Kinga of Poland Gryfina of Halych Matilda of Brandenburg Richeza of Sweden Margaret of Brandenburg Přemyslid dynasty Judith of Habsburg Elizabeth Richeza of Poland Viola of Teschen Restored Piast dynasty Jadwiga of Kalisz Aldona of Lithuania Adelaide of Hesse Hedwig of Sagan Capet-Anjou dynasty Elizabeth of Bosnia Jagiellonian dynasty Anna of Cilli Elizabeth Granowska Sophia of Halshany Elizabeth of Austria Helena of Moscow Barbara Zápolya Bona Sforza Elizabeth of Austria Barbara Radziwiłł Catherine of Austria Elective monarchy Louise of Lorraine Anne of Austria Constance of Austria Cecilia Renata of Austria Marie Louise Gonzaga Eleonore of Austria Marie Casimire Louise de La Grange d'Arquien Christiane Eberhardine of Brandenburg-Bayreuth Catherine Opalińska Maria Josepha of Austria First Lady of Poland v t e Royal consorts of Lithuania Kingdom of Lithuania House of Mindaugas (1236–1263) Morta Grand Duchy of Lithuania House of Gediminids (1285–1440) Jaunė Maria of Vitebsk Uliana of Tver Jadwiga of Poland Birutė Anna Uliana Olshanska Anna of Tver House of Jagiellon (1440–1569) Elizabeth of Austria Helena of Moscow Barbara Zápolya Bona Sforza Elizabeth of Austria Barbara Radziwiłł Catherine of Austria Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Elected (1569–1795) Louise of Lorraine Anne of Austria Constance of Austria Cecilia Renata of Austria Marie Louise Gonzaga Eleonore of Austria Marie Casimire Louise de La Grange d'Arquien Christiane Eberhardine of Brandenburg-Bayreuth Catherine Opalińska Maria Josepha of Austria Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Poland People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Barbara_Zápolya&oldid=1280021827 " Categories : 1495 births 1515 deaths 16th-century Polish women 16th-century Hungarian women 16th-century Polish people 16th-century Hungarian people Zápolya family Queens consort of Poland Grand duchesses of Lithuania Hungarian people of Polish descent Polish people of Hungarian descent People from Trenčín Burials at Wawel Cathedral Polish Roman Catholics Sigismund I the Old Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Lithuanian-language text CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) This page was last edited on 12 March 2025, at 00:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Barbara Zápolya 22 languages Add topic

