Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Context 2 Stability of strange matter only at high pressure 3 Stability of strange matter at zero pressure 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Strange matter 17 languages Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Simple English Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Degenerate matter made from strange quarks This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Strange matter" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Strange matter (or strange quark matter ) is quark matter containing strange quarks . In extreme environments, strange matter is hypothesized to occur in the core of neutron stars , or, more speculatively, as isolated droplets that may vary in size from femtometers ( strangelets ) to kilometers, as in the hypothetical strange stars . At high enough density, strange matter is expected to be color superconducting .

[ citation needed ] Ordinary matter , also referred to as atomic matter, is composed of atoms, with nearly all matter concentrated in the atomic nuclei.

Nuclear matter is a liquid composed of neutrons and protons , and they are themselves composed of up and down quarks . Quark matter is a condensed form of matter composed entirely of quarks . When quark matter does not contain strange quarks, it is sometimes referred to as non-strange quark matter.

Context [ edit ] In particle physics and astrophysics , the term 'strange matter' is used in two different contexts, one broader and the other more specific and hypothetical: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] In the broader context, our current understanding of the laws of nature predicts that strange matter could be created when nuclear matter (made of protons and neutrons ) is compressed beyond a critical density. At this critical pressure and density, the protons and neutrons dissociate into quarks, yielding quark matter and potentially strange matter.

A more specific hypothesis is that quark matter is the true ground state of all matter, and thus more stable than ordinary nuclear matter. This idea is known as the "strange matter hypothesis", or the Bodmer – Witten assumption.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Under this hypothesis, the nuclei of the atoms we see around us are only metastable , even when the external critical pressure is zero, and given enough time (or the right stimulus) the nuclei would decay into stable droplets of strange matter. Droplets of strange matter are also referred to as strangelets.

Stability of strange matter only at high pressure [ edit ] In the general context, strange matter might occur inside neutron stars, if the pressure at their core is high enough to provide a sufficient gravitational force (i.e. above the critical pressure). At the sort of densities and high pressures we expect in the center of a neutron star, the quark matter would probably be strange matter. It could conceivably be non-strange quark matter, if the effective mass of the strange quark were too high.

Charm quarks and heavier quarks would only occur at much higher densities.

Strange matter comes about as a way to relieve degeneracy pressure .  The Pauli exclusion principle forbids fermions such as quarks from occupying the same position and energy level.  When the particle density is high enough that all energy levels below the available thermal energy are already occupied, increasing the density further requires raising some to higher, unoccupied energy levels.  This need for energy to cause compression manifests as a pressure.  Neutrons consist of twice as many down quarks (charge − ⁠ 1 / 3 ⁠ e ) as up quarks (charge + ⁠ 2 / 3 ⁠ e ), so the degeneracy pressure of down quarks usually dominates electrically neutral quark matter.  However, when the required energy level is high enough, an alternative becomes available: half of the down quarks can be transmuted to strange quarks (charge − ⁠ 1 / 3 ⁠ e ).  The higher rest mass of the strange quark costs some energy, but by opening up an additional set of energy levels, the average energy per particle can be lower, [ 1 ] : 5 making strange matter more stable than non-strange quark matter.

A neutron star with a quark matter core is often [ 1 ] [ 2 ] called a hybrid star. However, it is difficult to know whether hybrid stars really exist in nature because physicists currently have little idea of the likely value of the critical pressure or density. It seems plausible that the transition to quark matter will already have occurred when the separation between the nucleons becomes much smaller than their size, so the critical density must be less than about 100 times nuclear saturation density. But a more precise estimate is not yet available, because the strong interaction that governs the behavior of quarks is mathematically intractable, and numerical calculations using lattice QCD are currently blocked by the fermion sign problem .

One major area of activity in neutron star physics is the attempt to find observable signatures by which we could tell whether neutron stars have quark matter (probably strange matter) in their core.

During the merger of two neutron stars, strange matter may be ejected out into the space around the stars, which may allow for the studying of strange matter. However, the rate at which strange matter decays is unknown, and there are very few binary pairs of neutron stars nearby to the Solar System, which could make the official discovery of strange matter very difficult.

Stability of strange matter at zero pressure [ edit ] If the " strange matter hypothesis " is true, then nuclear matter is metastable against decaying into strange matter. The lifetime for spontaneous decay is very long, so we do not see this decay process happening around us.

[ 4 ] However, under this hypothesis there should be strange matter in the universe: Quark stars (often called "strange stars") consist of quark matter from their core to their surface. They would be several kilometers across, and may have a very thin crust of nuclear matter.

[ 2 ] Strangelets are small pieces of strange matter, perhaps as small as nuclei. They would be produced when strange stars are formed or collide, or when a nucleus decays.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Exotic matter – Physics term for multiple concepts Quark star – Compact exotic star which forms matter consisting mostly of quarks Strangeness and quark–gluon plasma – subatomic signature Strangelet – Type of hypothetical particle Quark – Elementary particle, main constituent of matter QCD matter – Hypothetical phases of matter References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Madsen, Jes (1999). "Physics and astrophysics of strange quark matter".

Hadrons in Dense Matter and Hadrosynthesis . Lecture Notes in Physics. Vol. 516. pp.

162– 203.

arXiv : astro-ph/9809032 .

doi : 10.1007/BFb0107314 .

ISBN 978-3-540-65209-0 .

S2CID 16566509 .

^ a b c Weber, F. (2005). "Strange quark matter and compact stars".

Progress in Particle and Nuclear Physics .

54 (1): 193– 288.

arXiv : astro-ph/0407155 .

Bibcode : 2005PrPNP..54..193W .

doi : 10.1016/j.ppnp.2004.07.001 .

S2CID 15002134 .

.

^ Bodmer, A. R. (September 1971).

"Collapsed Nuclei" .

Physical Review D .

4 (6): 1601– 1606.

Bibcode : 1971PhRvD...4.1601B .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.4.1601 .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-20 . Retrieved 2022-03-22 .

^ a b Witten, Edward (July 1984).

"Cosmic separation of phases" .

Physical Review D .

30 (2): 272– 285.

Bibcode : 1984PhRvD..30..272W .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.30.272 .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-25 . Retrieved 2022-03-22 .

v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect v t e Stellar core collapse Stars Formation Evolution Structure Core Metallicity Stellar physics Stellar plasma Supergiant Variable star Cataclysmic variable star Binary star X-ray binary Super soft X-ray source Stellar processes Nuclear fusion Surface fusion Nucleosynthesis R-process RP-process Supernova nucleosynthesis Accretion ( Bondi accretion ) Electron capture Carbon detonation / deflagration Gamma-ray burst Helium flash Orbital decay Collapse Gravitational collapse Chandrasekhar limit Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit Supernovae Type Ia Type Ib and Ic Type II Pair instability Hypernova Quark-nova Nebula Remnant More...

Compact and exotic objects Neutron star Pulsar Quasar Magnetar Radio-quiet White dwarf Black hole Collapsar Shell collapsar Exotic star Quark star Electroweak star Observational timeline Particles, forces, and interactions Elementary particles Proton Neutron Electron Neutrino Fundamental interactions Strong interaction Weak interaction Gravitation Pair production Inverse beta decay (electron capture) Electron degeneracy pressure Pauli exclusion principle More...

Quantum theory Quantum mechanics Introduction Basic concepts Quantum electrodynamics Quantum hydrodynamics Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) Lattice QCD Color confinement Deconfinement Degenerate matter Neutron matter QCD matter Quark matter Quark–gluon plasma Preon matter Strangelet Strange matter Related topics Astronomy Astrophysics Nuclear astrophysics Physical cosmology Physics of shock waves Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strange_matter&oldid=1296258366 " Categories : Exotic matter Phases of matter Quark matter Unsolved problems in physics Strange quark Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 22:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Strange matter 17 languages Add topic

