Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Understory structure 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Understory 29 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaelg 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Layer of plant life growing above the shrub layer and below the canopy For the 2007 novel by Pamela Erens, see The Understory .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Understory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lesser celandine ( Ficaria verna ) on forest floor in spring In forestry and ecology , understory ( American English ), or understorey ( Commonwealth English ), also known as underbrush or undergrowth , includes plant life growing beneath the forest canopy without penetrating it to any great extent, but above the forest floor . Only a small percentage of light penetrates the canopy, so understory vegetation is generally shade-tolerant . The understory typically consists of trees stunted through lack of light, other small trees with low light requirements, saplings, shrubs, vines, and undergrowth. Small trees such as holly and dogwood are understory specialists.

In temperate deciduous forests , many understory plants start into growth earlier in the year than the canopy trees, to make use of the greater availability of light at that particular time of year. A gap in the canopy caused by the death of a tree stimulates the potential emergent trees into competitive growth as they grow upward to fill the gap. These trees tend to have straight trunks and few lower branches. At the same time, the bushes, undergrowth, and plant life on the forest floor become denser. The understory experiences greater humidity than the canopy, and the shaded ground does not vary in temperature as much as open ground. This causes a proliferation of ferns , mosses , and fungi and encourages nutrient recycling , which provides favorable habitats for many animals and plants.

Understory structure [ edit ] Tree base showing moss understory limit Summer understory growing near the Angel Springs Trailhead of Myra-Bellevue Provincial Park The understory is the underlying layer of vegetation in a forest or wooded area, especially the trees and shrubs growing between the forest canopy and the forest floor.

Plants in the understory comprise an assortment of seedlings and saplings of canopy trees together with specialist understory shrubs and herbs. Young canopy trees often persist in the understory for decades as suppressed juveniles until an opening in the forest overstory permits their growth into the canopy. In contrast understory shrubs complete their life cycles in the shade of the forest canopy. Some smaller tree species, such as dogwood and holly , rarely grow tall and generally are understory trees.

The canopy of a tropical forest is typically about 10 m (33 ft) thick, and intercepts around 95% of the sunlight.

[ 1 ] The understory therefore receives less intense light than plants in the canopy and such light as does penetrate is impoverished in wavelengths of light that are most effective for photosynthesis. Understory plants therefore must be shade tolerant —they must be able to photosynthesize adequately using such light as does reach their leaves. They often are able to use wavelengths that canopy plants cannot. In temperate deciduous forests towards the end of the leafless season, understory plants take advantage of the shelter of the still leafless canopy plants to "leaf out" before the canopy trees do. This is important because it provides the understory plants with a window in which to photosynthesize without the canopy shading them. This brief period (usually 1–2 weeks) is often a crucial period in which the plant can maintain a net positive carbon balance over the course of the year.

As a rule forest understories also experience higher humidity than exposed areas. The forest canopy reduces solar radiation, so the ground does not heat up or cool down as rapidly as open ground. Consequently, the understory dries out more slowly than more exposed areas do. The greater humidity encourages epiphytes such as ferns and mosses, and allows fungi and other decomposers to flourish. This drives nutrient cycling , and provides favorable microclimates for many animals and plants , such as the pygmy marmoset .

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Fire-stick farming Layers of rainforests Overgrazing References [ edit ] ^ "Light in the Rain Forest" .

garden.org . Archived from the original on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2016 .

^ Kramer, David M.

; Johnson, Giles; Kiirats, Olavi; Edwards, Gerald E. (February 2004). "New Fluorescence Parameters for the Determination of Q A Redox State and Excitation Energy Fluxes".

Photosynthesis Research .

79 (2): 209.

Bibcode : 2004PhoRe..79..209K .

doi : 10.1023/B:PRES.0000015391.99477.0d .

PMID 16228395 .

S2CID 15860339 .

External links [ edit ] Look up understory in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

https://www.eolss.net/sample-chapters/C10/E5-03-01-08.pdf Media related to underbrush at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Understory&oldid=1282165727 " Categories : Biology terminology Forest ecology Forests Habitat Plants Plants by habitat Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2013 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from February 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 19:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Understory 29 languages Add topic

