Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Classification 3 Methodologies 4 Substantive theories Toggle Substantive theories subsection 4.1 Evolutionary theories 4.2 Edward Burnett Tylor 4.3 James George Frazer 4.4 Rudolf Otto 4.5 Mircea Eliade 4.6 E. E. Evans-Pritchard 4.7 Clifford Geertz 5 Functional theories Toggle Functional theories subsection 5.1 Karl Marx 5.2 Sigmund Freud 5.3 Émile Durkheim 5.4 Bronisław Malinowski 5.5 Max Weber 5.6 Rational choice theory 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Theories about religion 11 languages العربية Español فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Polski Português Русский Shqip Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Theories about religions ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( January 2017 ) Part of a series on Anthropology of religion Basic concepts Afterlife Animism Augury Communitas Comparative religion Divination Divine language Evolutionary origin of religion Fetishism Great Spirit Henotheism Initiation Laying on of hands Liminality Magic Mana Monotheism Nympholepsy Oracle Pilgrimage Polytheism Rite of passage Ritual Sacred language Sacred–profane dichotomy Sacred site Shamanism Soul dualism Superstition Theories about religion Totem Transtheism Veneration of the dead Case studies Magic Coral Gardens and Their Magic Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants Neo-Paganism Ritual Angakkuq Babaylan Bobohizan Bomoh Bora Dukun Miko Jhākri Pawang Slametan Wu Revitalization movements Cargo cult Ghost Dance Handsome Lake Related articles The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life Purity and Danger Myth and ritual Archaeology of religion and ritual Poles in mythology Lived religion Elite religion Major theorists Augustin Calmet Akbar S. Ahmed Talal Asad Joseph Campbell Mary Douglas Émile Durkheim Mircea Eliade Arnold van Gennep René Girard E. E. Evans-Pritchard James Frazer Fustel de Coulanges Clifford Geertz Robin Horton Claude Lévi-Strauss Robert Marett Steven Ozment Roy Rappaport Saba Mahmood Marshall Sahlins Melford Spiro Stanley Tambiah Victor Turner Edward Burnett Tylor Daniel Martin Varisco Anthony F. C. Wallace Journals Folklore The Hibbert Journal The Journal of Religion Oceania Religions Ethnic and folk religions Afro-American religion Alaska Native religion Anito Atua Böö mörgöl Chinese folk religion Hanitu Hausa Kejawèn Native American religion Noaidi Shindo Shamanism in Siberia Shinto Tengrism African traditional religions Buddhism Mahayana Nichiren Pure Land Shingon Theravada Tiantai Tibetan Vajrayana Zen Christianity Adventism Anglicanism Armenian Apostolic Church Baptists Calvinism Catholic Church Coptic Orthodoxy Eastern Orthodoxy Ethiopian Orthodoxy Greek Orthodoxy Lutheranism Methodism Nestorianism Oriental Orthodoxy Pentecostalism Protestantism Quakers Russian Orthodoxy Hinduism Hindu denominations Shaivism Shaktism Smartism Vaishnavism Ayyavazhi Islam Ahmadiyya Ibadi Mahdavia Non-denominational Quranists Shia Sufism Sunni Yazdânism Judaism Conservative Haredi Hasidic Haymanot Karaite Orthodox Reform Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sikhism Social and cultural anthropology v t e Sociological , psychological , and anthropological theories about religion generally attempt to explain the origin and function of religion .

[ 1 ] These theories define what they present as universal characteristics of religious belief and practice .

History [ edit ] From presocratic times, ancient authors advanced prescientific theories about religion.

[ 2 ] Herodotus (484–425 BCE ) saw the gods of Greece as the same as the gods of Egypt.

[ 3 ] Euhemerus (about 330–264 BCE) regarded gods as excellent historical persons whom admirers eventually came to worship .

[ 3 ] Scientific theories, inferred and tested by the comparative method , emerged after data from tribes and peoples all over the world became available in the 18th and 19th centuries.

[ 2 ] Max Müller (1823–1900) has the reputation of having founded the scientific study of religion; he advocated a comparative method that developed into comparative religion .

[ 4 ] Subsequently, Clifford Geertz (1926–2006) and others questioned the validity of abstracting a general theory of all religions.

[ 5 ] Classification [ edit ] Theories of religion can be classified into: [ 6 ] Substantive (or essentialist ) theories that focus on the contents of religions and the meaning the contents have for people. This approach asserts that people have faith because beliefs make sense insofar as they hold value and are comprehensible. The theories by Tylor and Frazer (focusing on the explanatory value of religion for its adherents), by Rudolf Otto (focusing on the importance of religious experience , more specifically experiences that are both fascinating and terrifying) and by Mircea Eliade (focusing on the longing for otherworldly perfection, the quest for meaning, and the search for patterns in mythology in various religions) offer examples of substantive theories.

Functional theories that focus on the social or psychological functions that religion has for a group or a person. In simple terms, the functional approach sees religion as "performing certain functions for society" [ 7 ] Theories by Karl Marx (role of religion in capitalist and pre-capitalist societies), Sigmund Freud ( psychological origin of religious beliefs), Émile Durkheim (social function of religions), and the theory by Stark and Bainbridge exemplify functional theories.

[ 8 ] This approach tends to be static, with the exception of Marx' theory, and unlike e.g. Weber's approach, which treats of the interaction and dynamic processes between religions and the rest of societies.

[ 9 ] Social relational theories of religion that focus on the nature or social form of the beliefs and practices. Here, Charles Taylor's book The Secular Age is exemplary, [ 10 ] as is the work of Clifford Geertz . The approach is expressed in Paul James's argument that religion is a "relatively bounded system of beliefs, symbols and practices that addresses the nature of existence through communion with others and Otherness, lived as both taking in and spiritually transcending socially grounded ontologies of time, space, embodiment and knowing".

[ 11 ] This avoids the dichotomy between the immanent and transcendental.

Other dichotomies according to which theories or descriptions of religions can be classified include: [ 12 ] "insider" versus "outsider" perspectives (roughly corresponding to emic versus etic descriptions) individualist versus social views evolutionist versus relativist views Methodologies [ edit ] Early essentialists , such as Tylor and Frazer, looked for similar beliefs and practices in all societies, especially the more primitive ones, more or less regardless of time and place.

[ 13 ] They relied heavily on reports made by missionaries, discoverers, and colonial civil servants. These were all investigators who had a religious background themselves, thus they looked at religion from the inside. Typically they did not practice investigative field work, but used the accidental reports of others. This method left them open to criticism for lack of universality, which many freely admitted. The theories could be updated, however, by considering new reports, which Robert Ranulph Marett (1866–1943) did for Tylor's theory of the evolution of religion.

Field workers deliberately sent out by universities and other institutions to collect specific cultural data made available a much greater database than random reports. For example, the anthropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchard (1902–1973) preferred detailed ethnographical study of tribal religion as more reliable. He criticised the work of his predecessors, Müller , Tylor , and Durkheim , as untestable speculation. He called them "armchair anthropologists".

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] A second methodology, functionalism , seeks explanations of religion that are outside of religion; i.e., the theorists are generally (but not necessarily) atheists or agnostics themselves. As did the essentialists, the functionalists proceeded from reports to investigative studies. Their fundamental assumptions, however, are quite different; notably, they apply methodological naturalism . When explaining religion they reject divine or supernatural explanations for the status or origins of religions because they are not scientifically testable.

[ 16 ] In fact, theorists such as Marett (an Anglican) excluded scientific results altogether, defining religion as the domain of the unpredictable and unexplainable; that is, comparative religion is the rational (and scientific) study of the irrational. The dichotomy between the two classifications is not bridgeable, even though they have the same methods, because each excludes the data of the other.

[ citation needed ] The functionalists and some of the later essentialists (among others E. E. Evans-Pritchard) have criticized the substantive view as neglecting social aspects of religion.

[ 17 ] Such critics go so far as to brand Tylor's and Frazer's views on the origin of religion as unverifiable speculation.

[ 18 ] The view of monotheism as more evolved than polytheism represents a mere preconception, they assert. There is evidence that monotheism is more prevalent in hunter societies than in agricultural societies.

[ citation needed ] The view of a uniform progression in folkways is criticized as unverifiable, as the writer Andrew Lang (1844–1912) and E. E. Evans-Pritchard assert.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The latter criticism presumes that the evolutionary views of the early cultural anthropologists envisaged a uniform cultural evolution. Another criticism supposes that Tylor and Frazer were individualists (unscientific). However, some support that supposed approach as worthwhile, among others the anthropologist Robin Horton .

[ 21 ] The dichotomy between the two fundamental presumptions - and the question of what data can be considered valid - continues.

[ citation needed ] Substantive theories [ edit ] J. M. W. Turner 's painting The Golden Bough , based on the Golden Bough incident in the Aeneid Evolutionary theories [ edit ] Main articles: Evolutionary origin of religions and Evolutionary psychology of religion Evolutionary theories view religion as either an adaptation or a byproduct.

Adaptationist theories view religion as being of adaptive value to the survival of Pleistocene humans. Byproduct theories view religion as a spandrel .

Edward Burnett Tylor [ edit ] Edward Burnett Tylor The anthropologist Edward Burnett Tylor (1832–1917) defined religion as belief in spiritual beings and stated that this belief originated as explanations of natural phenomena. Belief in spirits grew out of attempts to explain life and death. Primitive people used human dreams in which spirits seemed to appear as an indication that the human mind could exist independent of a body. They used this by extension to explain life and death, and belief in the after life.

Myths and deities to explain natural phenomena originated by analogy and an extension of these explanations. His theory assumed that the psyches of all peoples of all times are more or less the same and that explanations in cultures and religions tend to grow more sophisticated via monotheist religions, such as Christianity and eventually to science . Tylor saw practices and beliefs in modern societies that were similar to those of primitive societies as survivals , but he did not explain why they survived.

James George Frazer [ edit ] James George Frazer (1854–1941) followed Tylor's theories to a great extent in his book The Golden Bough , but he distinguished between magic and religion .

Magic is used to influence the natural world in the primitive man's struggle for survival. He asserted that magic relied on an uncritical belief of primitive people in contact and imitation . For example, precipitation may be invoked by the primitive man by sprinkling water on the ground. He asserted that according to them magic worked through laws. In contrast religion is faith that the natural world is ruled by one or more deities with personal characteristics with whom can be pleaded, not by laws.

Rudolf Otto [ edit ] The theologian Rudolf Otto (1869–1937) focused on religious experience , more specifically moments that he called numinous which means "Wholly Other". He described it as mysterium tremendum (terrifying mystery) and mysterium fascinans (awe inspiring, fascinating mystery). He saw religion as emerging from these experiences.

[ 8 ] He asserted that these experiences arise from a special, non-rational faculty of the human mind, largely unrelated to other faculties, so religion cannot be reduced to culture or society. Some of his views, among others that the experience of the numinous was caused by a transcendental reality, are untestable and hence unscientific.

[ 12 ] His ideas strongly influenced phenomenologists and Mircea Eliade .

[ 22 ] See also: Psychology of religion § Rudolf Otto , and Religious experience § The numinous Mircea Eliade [ edit ] Mircea Eliade Main articles: Eternal return (Eliade) and Hierophany Mircea Eliade 's (1907–1986) approach grew out of the phenomenology of religion . Like Otto, he saw religion as something special and autonomous, that cannot be reduced to the social, economical or psychological alone.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Like Durkheim, he saw the sacred as central to religion, but differing from Durkheim, he views the sacred as often dealing with the supernatural , not with the clan or society.

[ 25 ] The daily life of an ordinary person is connected to the sacred by the appearance of the sacred, called hierophany .

Theophany (an appearance of a god) is a special case of it.

[ 26 ] In The Myth of the Eternal Return Eliade wrote that archaic men wish to participate in the sacred, and that they long to return to lost paradise outside the historic time to escape meaninglessness.

[ 27 ] The primitive man could not endure that his struggle to survive had no meaning.

[ 28 ] According to Eliade, man had a nostalgia (longing) for an otherworldly perfection. Archaic man wishes to escape the terror of time and saw time as cyclic .

[ 28 ] Historical religions like Christianity and Judaism revolted against this older concept of cyclic time. They provided meaning and contact with the sacred in history through the god of Israel.

[ 29 ] Eliade sought and found patterns in myth in various cultures, e.g.

sky gods such as Zeus .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Eliade's methodology was studying comparative religion of various cultures and societies more or less regardless of other aspects of these societies, often relying on second hand reports. He also used some personal knowledge of other societies and cultures for his theories, among others his knowledge of Hindu folk religion .

He has been criticized for vagueness in defining his key concepts. Like Frazer and Tylor he has also been accused of out-of-context comparisons of religious beliefs of very different societies and cultures.
He has also been accused of having a pro-religious bias (Christian and Hindu), though this bias does not seem essential for his theory.

See also: Sacred-profane dichotomy E. E. Evans-Pritchard [ edit ] Bust of E. E. Evans-Pritchard in the Social and Cultural Anthropology Library, Oxford The anthropologist Edward Evan Evans-Pritchard (1902–1973) did extensive ethnographic studies among the Azande and Nuer peoples who were considered "primitive" by society and earlier scholars. Evans-Pritchard saw these people as different, but not primitive.

Unlike the previous scholars, Evans-Pritchard did not propose a grand universal theory and he did extensive long-term fieldwork among "primitive" peoples, studying their culture and religion, among other among the Azande . Not just passing contact, like Eliade.

He argued that the religion of the Azande ( witchcraft and oracles ) can not be understood without the social context and its social function. Witchcraft and oracles played a great role in solving disputes among the Azande. In this respect he agreed with Durkheim, though he acknowledged that Frazer and Tylor were right that their religion also had an intellectual explanatory aspect. The Azande's faith in witchcraft and oracles was quite logical and consistent once some fundamental tenets were accepted. Loss of faith in the fundamental tenets could not be endured because of its social importance and hence they had an elaborate system of explanations (or excuses) against disproving evidence. Besides an alternative system of terms or school of thought did not exist.

[ 32 ] He was heavily critical about earlier theorists of primitive religion with the exception of Lucien Lévy-Bruhl , asserting that they made statements about primitive people without having enough inside knowledge to make more than a guess. In spite of his praise of Bruhl's works, Evans-Pritchard disagreed with Bruhl's statement that a member of a "primitive" tribe saying "I am the moon" is prelogical, but that this statement makes perfect sense within their culture if understood metaphorically.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Apart from the Azande, Evans-Pritchard, also studied the neighbouring, but very different Nuer people. The Nuer had had an abstract monotheistic faith, somewhat similar to Christianity and Judaism , though it included lesser spirits. They had also totemism , but this was a minor aspect of their religion and hence a corrective to Durkheim's generalizations should be made. Evans-Pritchard did not propose a theory of religion s , but only a theory of the Nuer religion.

Clifford Geertz [ edit ] The anthropologist Clifford Geertz (1926–2006) made several studies in Javanese villages. He avoided the subjective and vague concept of group attitude as used by Ruth Benedict by using the analysis of society as proposed by Talcott Parsons who in turn had adapted it from Max Weber .

[ 35 ] Parsons' adaptation distinguished all human groups on three levels i.e.

1.

an individual level that is controlled by 2.

a social system that is in turn controlled by 3.

a cultural system .

[ 35 ] Geertz followed Weber when he wrote that "man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has spun and the analysis of it to be therefore not an experimental science in search of law but an interpretive one in search of meaning".

[ 36 ] Geertz held the view that mere explanations to describe religions and cultures are not sufficient: interpretations are needed too. He advocated what he called thick descriptions to interpret symbols by observing them in use, and for this work, he was known as a founder of symbolic anthropology.

Geertz saw religion as one of the cultural systems of a society. He defined religion as: (1) a system of symbols (2) which acts to establish powerful, pervasive and long-lasting moods and motivations in men (3) by formulating conceptions of a general order of existence and (4) clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality that (5) the moods and motivations seem uniquely realistic.

[ 37 ] With symbols Geertz meant a carrier that embodies a conception, because he saw religion and culture as systems of communication.

[ 37 ] This definition emphasizes the mutual reinforcement between world view and ethos .

Though he used more or less the same methodology as Evans-Pritchard, he did not share Evans-Pritchard's hope that a theory of religion could ever be found. Geertz proposed methodology was not the scientific method of the natural science , but the method of historians studying history .

See also: Thick description Functional theories [ edit ] Karl Marx [ edit ] Karl Marx (1818–1883) Main article: Marxism and religion The social philosopher Karl Marx (1818–1883) held a materialist worldview.
According to Marx, the dynamics of society were determined by the relations of production , that is, the relations that its members needed to enter into to produce their means of survival.

[ 38 ] Developing on the ideas of Ludwig Feuerbach , he saw religion as a product of alienation that was functional to relieving people's immediate suffering , and as an ideology that masked the real nature of social relations.
He deemed it a contingent part of human culture, that would have disappeared after the abolition of class society.

These claims were limited, however, to his analysis of the historical relationship between European cultures, political institutions, and their Christian religious traditions.

Marxist views strongly influenced individuals' comprehension and conclusions about society, among others the anthropological school of cultural materialism .

Marx' explanations for all religions, always, in all forms, and everywhere have never been taken seriously by many experts in the field, though a substantial fraction accept that Marx' views possibly explain some aspects of religions.

[ 39 ] Some recent work has suggested that, while the standard account of Marx's analysis of religion is true, it is also only one side of a dialectical account, which takes seriously the disruptive, as well as the pacifying moments of religion [ 40 ] See also: Sociology of religion § Karl Marx , Marx's theory of alienation , and Opium of the People Sigmund Freud [ edit ] Sigmund Freud, 1885 Main articles: Freud and religion , The Future of an Illusion , Totem and Taboo , Moses and Monotheism , and Oedipus complex Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) saw religion as an illusion , a belief that people very much wanted to be true. Unlike Tylor and Frazer, Freud attempted to explain why religion persists in spite of the lack of evidence for its tenets. Freud asserted that religion is a largely unconscious neurotic response to repression . By repression Freud meant that civilized society demands that we not fulfill all our desires immediately, but that they have to be repressed. Rational arguments to a person holding a religious conviction will not change the neurotic response of a person. This is in contrast to Tylor and Frazer, who saw religion as a rational and conscious, though primitive and mistaken, attempt to explain the natural world.

In his 1913 book Totem and Taboo he developed a speculative story about how all monotheist religions originated and developed.

[ 41 ] In the book he asserted that monotheistic religions grew out of a homicide in a clan of a father by his sons. This incident was subconsciously remembered in human societies.

In Moses and Monotheism , Freud proposed that Moses had been a priest of Akhenaten who fled Egypt after the pharaoh's death and perpetuated monotheism through a different religion.

[ 42 ] Freud's view on religion was embedded in his larger theory of psychoanalysis , which has been criticized as unscientific .

[ 43 ] Although Freud's attempt to explain the historical origins of religions have not been accepted, his generalized view that all religions originate from unfulfilled psychological needs is still seen as offering a credible explanation in some cases.

[ 44 ] See also: Psychology of religion § Sigmund Freud Émile Durkheim [ edit ] Émile Durkheim (1858–1917) Émile Durkheim (1858–1917) saw the concept of the sacred as the defining characteristic of religion, not faith in the supernatural.

[ 45 ] He saw religion as a reflection of the concern for society. He based his view on recent research regarding totemism among the Australian aboriginals . With totemism he meant that each of the many clans had a different object, plant, or animal that they held sacred and that symbolizes the clan. Durkheim saw totemism as the original and simplest form of religion.

[ 46 ] According to Durkheim, the analysis of this simple form of religion could provide the building blocks for more complex religions. He asserted that moralism cannot be separated from religion. The sacred i.e. religion reinforces group interest that clash very often with individual interests. Durkheim held the view that the function of religion is group cohesion often performed by collectively attended rituals. He asserted that these group meeting provided a special kind of energy, [ 47 ] which he called effervescence , that made group members lose their individuality and to feel united with the gods and thus with the group.

[ 48 ] Differing from Tylor and Frazer, he saw magic not as religious, but as an individual instrument to achieve something.

Durkheim's proposed method for progress and refinement is first to carefully study religion in its simplest form in one contemporary society and then the same in another society and compare the religions then and only between societies that are the same.

[ 49 ] The empirical basis for Durkheim's view has been severely criticized when more detailed studies of the Australian aboriginals surfaced. More specifically, the definition of religion as dealing with the sacred only, regardless of the supernatural, is not supported by studies of these aboriginals. The view that religion has a social aspect, at the very least, introduced in a generalized very strong form by Durkheim has become influential and uncontested.

[ 50 ] Durkheim's approach gave rise to functionalist school in sociology and anthropology .

[ 51 ] Functionalism is a sociological paradigm that originally attempted to explain social institutions as collective means to fill individual biological needs, focusing on the ways in which social institutions fill social needs, especially social stability. Thus because Durkheim viewed society as an "organismic analogy of the body, wherein all the parts work together to maintain the equilibrium of the whole, religion was understood to be the glue that held society together.".

[ 52 ] See also: Sacred-profane dichotomy and Collective effervescence Bronisław Malinowski [ edit ] The anthropologist Bronisław Malinowski (1884–1942) was strongly influenced by the functionalist school and argued that religion originated from coping with death .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] He saw science as practical knowledge that every society needs abundantly to survive and magic as related to this practical knowledge, but generally dealing with phenomena that humans cannot control.

Max Weber [ edit ] Max Weber Main articles: Sociology of Religion (book) , Charismatic authority , The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism , The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism , and Three-component theory of stratification Max Weber (1864–1920) thought that the truth claims of religious movement were irrelevant for the scientific study of the movements.

[ 8 ] He portrayed each religion as rational and consistent in their respective societies.

[ 55 ] Weber acknowledged that religion had a strong social component, but diverged from Durkheim by arguing, for example in his book The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism that religion can be a force of change in society. In the book Weber wrote that modern capitalism spread quickly partially due to the Protestant worldly ascetic morale.

[ 8 ] Weber's main focus was not on developing a theory of religion but on the interaction between society and religion, while introducing concepts that are still widely used in the sociology of religion . These concept include Church sect typology , Weber distinguished between sects and churches by stating that membership of a sect is a personal choice and church membership is determined by birth. The typology later developed more extensively by his friend Ernst Troeltsch and others.

[ 56 ] According to the typology, churches, ecclesia , denomination , and sects form a continuum with decreasing influence on society. Sects are protest break away groups and tend to be in tension with society.

Ideal type , a hypothetical "pure" or "clear" form, used in typologies Charismatic authority Weber saw charisma as a volatile form or authority that depends on the acceptance of unique quality of a person by this person's followers. Charisma can be a revolutionary force and the authority can either be routinized (change into other forms of authority ) or disappear upon the death of the charismatic person.

[ 8 ] Somewhat differing from Marx, Weber dealt with status groups , not with class . In status groups the primary motivation is prestige and social cohesion .

[ 57 ] Status groups have differing levels of access to power and prestige and indirectly to economic resources. In his 1920 treatment of the religion in China he saw Confucianism as helping a certain status group, i.e. the educated elite to maintain access to prestige and power. He asserted that Confucianism opposition against both extravagance and thrift made it unlikely that capitalism could have originated in China.

He used the concept of Verstehen (German for "understanding") to describe his method of interpretation of the intention and context of human action.

[ 35 ] See also: Sociological classifications of religious movements § The church-sect typology , and Sociology of religion § Max_Weber Rational choice theory [ edit ] Main article: Theory of religious economy The rational choice theory has been applied to religions, among others by the sociologists Rodney Stark (1934–2022) and William Sims Bainbridge (born 1940).

[ 58 ] They see religions as systems of "compensators", and view human beings as "rational actors, making choices that she or he thinks best, calculating costs and benefits".

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Compensators are a body of language and practices that compensate for some physical lack or frustrated goal. They can be divided into specific compensators (compensators for the failure to achieve specific goals), and general compensators (compensators for failure to achieve any goal).

[ 60 ] They define religion as a system of compensation that relies on the supernatural.

[ 61 ] The main reasoning behind this theory is that the compensation is what controls the choice, or in other words the choices which the "rational actors" make are "rational in the sense that they are centered on the satisfaction of wants".

[ 62 ] It has been observed that social or political movements that fail to achieve their goals will often transform into religions. As it becomes clear that the goals of the movement will not be achieved by natural means (at least within their lifetimes), members of the movement will look to the supernatural to achieve what cannot be achieved naturally. The new religious beliefs are compensators for the failure to achieve the original goals. Examples of this include the counterculture movement in America: the early counterculture movement was intent on changing society and removing its injustice and boredom; but as members of the movement proved unable to achieve these goals they turned to Eastern and new religions as compensators.

Most religions start out their lives as cults or sects, i.e. groups in high tension with the surrounding society, containing different views and beliefs contrary to the societal norm. Over time, they tend to either die out, or become more established, mainstream and in less tension with society. Cults are new groups with a new novel theology , while sects are attempts to return mainstream religions to (what the sect views as) their original purity. Mainstream established groups are called denominations . The comments below about cult formation apply equally well to sect formation.

There are four models of cult formation: the Psychopathological Model, the Entrepreneurial Model, the Social Model and the Normal Revelations model.

Psychopathological model : religions are founded during a period of severe stress in the life of the founder. The founder suffers from psychological problems, which they resolve through the founding of the religion. (The development of the religion is for them a form of self-therapy, or self-medication.) Entrepreneurial model : founders of religions act like entrepreneurs, developing new products (religions) to sell to consumers (to convert people to). According to this model, most founders of new religions already have experience in several religious groups before they begin their own. They take ideas from the pre-existing religions, and try to improve on them to make them more popular.

Social model: religions are founded by means of social implosions . Members of the religious group spend less and less time with people outside the group, and more and more time with each other within it. The level of affection and emotional bonding between members of a group increases, and their emotional bonds to members outside the group diminish. According to the social model, when a social implosion occurs, the group will naturally develop a new theology and rituals to accompany it.

Normal revelations : religions are founded when the founder interprets ordinary natural phenomena as supernatural; for instance, ascribing his or her own creativity in inventing the religion to that of the deity.

Some religions are better described by one model than another, though all apply to differing degrees to all religions.

Once a cult or sect has been founded, the next problem for the founder is to convert new members to it. Prime candidates for religious conversion are those with an openness to religion, but who do not belong or fit well in any existing religious group. Those with no religion or no interest in religion are difficult to convert, especially since the cult and sect beliefs are so extreme by the standards of the surrounding society. But those already happy members of a religious group are difficult to convert as well, since they have strong social links to their preexisting religion and are unlikely to want to sever them in order to join a new one. The best candidates for religious conversion are those who are members of or have been associated with religious groups (thereby showing an interest or openness to religion), yet exist on the fringe of these groups, without strong social ties to prevent them from joining a new group.

Potential converts vary in their level of social connection.

New religions best spread through pre-existing friendship networks. Converts who are marginal with few friends are easy to convert, but having few friends to convert they cannot add much to the further growth of the organization. Converts with a large social network are harder to convert, since they tend to have more invested in mainstream society; but once converted they yield many new followers through their friendship network.

Cults initially can have quite high growth rates; but as the social networks that initially feed them are exhausted, their growth rate falls quickly. On the other hand, the rate of growth is exponential (ignoring the limited supply of potential converts): the more converts you have, the more missionaries you can have out looking for new converts. But nonetheless it can take a very long time for religions to grow to a large size by natural growth. This often leads to cult leaders giving up after several decades, and withdrawing the cult from the world.

It is difficult for cults and sects to maintain their initial enthusiasm for more than about a generation. As children are born into the cult or sect, members begin to demand a more stable life. When this happens, cults tend to lose or de-emphasise many of their more radical beliefs, and become more open to the surrounding society; they then become denominations .

The theory of religious economy sees different religious organizations competing for followers in a religious economy, much like the way businesses compete for consumers in a commercial economy . Theorists assert that a true religious economy is the result of religious pluralism , giving the population a wider variety of choices in religion. According to the theory, the more religions there are, the more likely the population is to be religious and hereby contradicting the secularization thesis .

See also [ edit ] Religion portal Anthropology of religion – Study of religion in relation to other social institutions Archaeology of religion and ritual Definition of religion Elite religion – Form of a religion the leaders deem official Emic and etic – Two kinds of anthropologic field research Evolutionary origins of religion – Emergence of religious behavior discussed in terms of natural evolution Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets History of religion Jungian interpretation of religion Lived religion – Religion as practiced in everyday life Magic and religion Magical thinking – Belief in the connection of unrelated events Philosophy of religion – Branch of philosophy Psychology of religion – Analytic approach to religion Religious studies – Objective study of religion Sociology of religion Terror management theory – Social and evolutionary psychology theory The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life – 1912 book by Emile Durkheim The Idea of the Holy – 1917 book by Rudolf Otto The Varieties of Religious Experience – 1902 book by William James Notes [ edit ] ^ Segal 2005 , p. 49 ^ a b Segal 2005, p. 49 ^ a b Pals 1996 , p. 4 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 3 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 9 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 12 ^ Christiano, Swatos & Kivisto 2008 , pp. 6–7 ^ a b c d e Nielsen 1998 , Theory ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 40 ^ Charles Taylor, A Secular Age, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 2007, ^ James, Paul (2018). "What Does It Mean Ontologically to Be Religious?". In Stephen Ames; Ian Barns; John Hinkson; Paul James; Gordon Preece; Geoff Sharp (eds.).

Religion in a Secular Age: The Struggle for Meaning in an Abstracted World . Arena Publications. p. 70.

^ a b Kunin 2003 , p. 66 ^ Pals 1996 , Emile Durkheim ^ Evans-Pritchard 1965 , p. 101 ^ Evans-Pritchard 1965 , p. 108 ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 74 ^ Pals 1996 , pp. 47, 200 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 47 ^ Sharpe 2005 , p. 29 ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 9 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 273, Conclusion ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 62 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 158 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 162 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 164 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 177 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 168 ^ a b Pals 1996 , p. 180 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 181 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 169 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 171 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 208 ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 122 ^ Pals 1996 , Evans-Pritchard ^ a b c Pals 1996 , p. 239 ^ Yarrow, Andrew L. (November 1, 2006).

"Clifford Geertz, Cultural Anthropologist, Is Dead at 80" .

New York Times: Obituaries . Retrieved 2008-03-14 .

^ a b Kunin 2003 , p. 153 ^ Kunin 2003 , pp. 6–7 ^ Pals 1996 , Conclusion ^ McKinnon, AM (2005).

"Reading 'Opium of the People': Expression, Protest and the Dialectics of Religion" (PDF) .

Critical Sociology .

31 ( 1– 2): 15– 38.

doi : 10.1163/1569163053084360 .

hdl : 2164/3074 .

S2CID 143119316 .

^ Pals 1996 , p. 81 ^ Freud, S (1964). "Moses and monotheism".

The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud . Vol. XXIII (1937–1939). London: Hogarth Press .

^ Pals 1996 , p. 82 ^ Pals 1996 , pp. 280–281, Conclusion.

^ Pals 1996 , p. 99 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 102 ^ McKinnon, A (2014).

"Elementary Forms of the Metaphorical Life: Tropes at Work in Durkheim's Theory of the Religious" (PDF) .

Journal of Classical Sociology .

14 (2): 203– 221.

doi : 10.1177/1468795x13494130 .

hdl : 2164/3284 .

S2CID 144074274 .

^ Kunin 2003 , pp. 20–21 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 101 ^ Pals 1996 , p. 281 ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 23 ^ Christiano, Swatos & Kivisto 2008 , p. 36 ^ Kunin 2003 , pp. 24–25 ^ Strenski 2006 , p. 269 ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 38 ^ Bendix 1977 , pp. 49–50 ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 35 ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 84 ^ The quote is from Christiano, Swatos & Kivisto 2008 , p. 40 ^ a b Nauta 1998 , Stark, Rodney ^ Kunin 2003 , p. 85 ^ Christiano, Swatos & Kivisto 2008 , p. 41 References [ edit ] Bendix, Reinhard (1977) [1960].

Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait . Berkeley: University of California Press. p.

49 .

ISBN 0-520-03194-6 .

Christiano, Kevin J.; Swatos, William H.; Kivisto, Peter (2008).

Sociology of Religion: Contemporary Developments (2nd ed.). Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7425-6111-3 .

Evans-Pritchard, Edward Evan (1965).

Theories of Primitive Religion . Sir D. Owen Evans lectures, 1962. Oxford: Clarendon Press .

ISBN 0-19-823131-8 .

Nauta, André (1998).

"Stark, Rodney" . In Swatos, William H. Jr (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion and Society . AltaMira Press.

Nielsen, Donald A (1998).

"Theory" . In Swatos, William H. Jr (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion and Society . AltaMira Press.

Kunin, Seth D (2003).

Religion: The Modern Theories . Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh.

ISBN 0-7486-1522-9 .

Pals, Daniel L (1996).

Seven Theories of Religion . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-508725-9 .

Segal, Robert A (2005). "Theories of Religion". In Hinnells, John R.

(ed.).

The Routledge Companion to the Study of Religion . London; New York: Routledge . pp.

49– 60.

Sharpe, Eric J (2005). "The Study of Religion in Historical Perspective". In Hinnells, John R.

(ed.).

The Routledge Companion to the Study of Religion . London; New York: Routledge. pp.

21– 48.

Strenski, Ivan (2006).

Thinking about Religion: An Historical Introduction to Theories of Religion . Malden, MA; Oxford, UK; Carlton, Victoria: Blackwell Publishing, Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-4051-2012-8 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bloesch, Sarah J. & Meredith Minister, eds.

Cultural approaches to studying religion: an introduction to theories and methods . London/NY: Bloomsbury Academic, 2019.

Geertz, Clifford (1976) [1960].

The Religion of Java . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-28510-3 .

Geertz, Clifford (1968) [1963].

Peddlers and Princes: Social Development and Economic Change in Two Indonesian Towns . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-28514-6 .

Geertz, Clifford (1971) [1968].

Islam Observed, Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-28511-1 .

Geertz, Clifford (2000) [1973].

The Interpretation of Cultures . New York: Basic Books .

ISBN 0-465-09719-7 .

Hedges, Paul.

Understanding religion: theories and methods for studying religiously diverse societies . Oakland, Cal.: University of California Press, 2021.

Jensen, Tim ; Rothstein, Mikael , eds. (2000).

Secular Theories on Religion . Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum press, University of Copenhagen.

ISBN 87-7289-572-1 .

Luhmann, Niklas.

A systems theory of religion . Trans. by David A. Brenner & Adrian Hermann. Stanford, Cal.: Stanford University Press, 2013.

Stark, Rodney ; Bainbridge, William Sims (1996) [1987].

A Theory of Religion . New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 0-8135-2330-3 .

Tylor, Edward Burnett (1871).

Primitive culture .

Vásquez, Manuel A.

More than belief: a materialist theory of religion . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.

External links [ edit ] Tuggy, Dale.

"Theories of Religious Diversity" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved July 9, 2017 .

Links to related articles v t e Social science and religion Anthropology Psychology Religious literacy Sociology Theories about religions v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐fmfpg
Cached time: 20250818100108
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.993 seconds
Real time usage: 1.261 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7418/1000000
Revision size: 47443/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 457128/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 116508/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 129866/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.568/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16200887/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  923.849      1 -total
 20.15%  186.162     19 Template:Annotated_link
 19.54%  180.563      1 Template:Reflist
 18.89%  174.552     14 Template:Cite_book
 10.85%  100.273      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.35%   77.111      1 Template:Anthropology_of_religion
  8.15%   75.264      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.86%   63.362      1 Template:Short_description
  5.51%   50.944      1 Template:Religion_topics
  5.18%   47.839      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16349122:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818100108 and revision id 1297749752. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theories_about_religion&oldid=1297749752 " Categories : Anthropology of religion Sociology of religion Religious studies Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from January 2017 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 07:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theories about religion 11 languages Add topic

