Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Argument Toggle Argument subsection 1.1 Marxist theory 2 Style 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Discourse on Colonialism 6 languages Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Português 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Essay by Aimé Césaire Discourse on Colonialism ( French : Discours sur le colonialisme ) is an essay by Aimé Césaire , a poet and politician from Martinique who helped found the négritude movement in Francophone literature . Césaire first published the essay in 1950 in Paris with Éditions Réclame, a small publisher associated with the French Communist Party . Five years later, he then edited and republished it with the anticolonial publisher Présence africaine (Paris and Dakar ).

[ 1 ] It serves as a foundational text of postcolonial literature that discusses what Césaire described as the appalling affair of the European civilizing mission .

[ failed verification ] Rather than elevating the non-Western world, the colonizers de-civilize the colonized .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ failed verification ] Argument [ edit ] Aimé Césaire 's Discourse on Colonialism argues that colonialism has never been a benevolent movement whose goal was to improve the lives of the colonized; instead, colonists' motives were entirely self-centered, economic exploitation. According to Césaire, by establishing colonies and then exploiting them, the European colonial powers have created two main problems: the problem of the proletariat and the colonial problem.

[ 4 ] In describing the colonial problem that European civilization has created, he calls Europe "indefensible", whose colonizers cannot be misconstrued as positive. Césaire discusses the relationship between civilization and savagery and points out the hypocrisy of colonialism . He asserts that it is ironic that colonizers hoped to rid the countries they colonized of "savages", but in reality, by killing, raping, and destroying the land in which those "savages" lived on, they were themselves savages. His interpretation flips the common narrative to point out the autonomy that existed in colonized lands.

He bases his argument on the claim that "no one colonizes innocently, that no one colonizes with impunity either; that a nation which colonizes, that a civilization which justifies colonization—and therefore force—is already a sick civilization, a civilization which is morally diseased, which irresistibly, progressing from one consequence to another, one denial to another, calls for its Hitler , I mean its punishment".

[ 5 ] : 42 He labels the colonizers as barbaric for their treatment of those in the colonies. He defines the relationship as one limited to " forced labor , intimidation, pressure, the police, taxation, theft, rape, compulsory crops, contempt, mistrust, arrogance, self-complacency, swinishness, brainless elites, degraded masses".

[ 5 ] : 42 In addition, Césaire also acknowledges the racial construction of the relationship. By identifying the colonial relationship as one based on race, he draws comparisons between his home of Martinique with the colonies in Africa. By equating racism , barbarism and colonialism, he claims colonization to be a form of dehumanization that results from Europe's racism against black populations in Africa and the Caribbean . He writes that Hitler differed in the eyes of the Europeans because he "applied to Europe colonialist procedures which until then had been reserved exclusively for the Arabs of Algeria , the ' coolies ' of India and the ' niggers ' of Africa'. He means that by persecuting white Europeans, Hitler produced violence most commonly reserved for non-white populations.

[ 5 ] : 36 Césaire argues, "they tolerated that Nazism before it was inflicted on them, they absolved it, shut their eyes to it, legitimized it, because, until then, it had been applied only to non-European peoples".

[ 6 ] Marxist theory [ edit ] Césaire criticizes the " humanist " interpretation of colonialism because it continues to deny the humanity of the colonized peoples, the very antithesis of humanism, which emphasizes the value and agency of human beings. Additionally, he referred to Marxist theory and criticized the " bourgeois , capitalistic European culture and said that capitalism would always disintegrate into Nazism ".

[ 7 ] The most notable allusion to Marxism appears towards the end of the text when he writes, "it is a new society that we must create, with the help of all our brother slaves, a society rich with all the productive power of modern times, warm with all the fraternity of olden days. For some examples showing that this is possible, we can look to the Soviet Union ".

[ 5 ] : 52 Style [ edit ] Césaire writes his book in a poetic style and discussed the negative effects of colonization on colonies. He writes in poetic prose as, "a method of achieving clairvoyance, of obtaining the knowledge we need to move forward".

[ 2 ] His unique style of writing sets him apart from other postcolonial academics who published works alongside him during the same era.

Reception [ edit ] Due to its "harsh tone and radical statements", [ 7 ] the essay been compared to "a declaration of war" on colonialism.

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] Discourse on Colonialism added to the themes developed in his 1939 poem Cahier d'un retour au pays natal ("Notebook of a Return to the Native Land"), which he wrote in response to leaving Metropolitan France and returning to Martinique. In Cahier , Césaire notes the relationship between Martinique and his African heritage and confirms bond between colonies in Africa and colonies elsewhere as one based on race. In identifying the racism problem associated with the colonial relationship, he claims that Hitler and the Nazi Party 's persecution of Jews during the Second World War and the Holocaust was not an aberration but rather the norm in Europe.

See also [ edit ] Eurocentrism Imperial boomerang References [ edit ] ^ Ndiaye, Pap (September 2013).

"« Discours sur le colonialisme » d'Aimé Césaire" ["Discourse on Colonialism" by Aimé Césaire].

L'Histoire .

Les Classiques [The Classics] (in French). No. 391.

Archived from the original on 2020-09-30.

^ a b c Kelley, Robin D. G.

(1 November 1999).

"A Poetics of Anticolonialism" .

Monthly Review . Review of the Month. Vol. 51, no. 6.

Archived from the original on 2022-08-08.

^ Walsh, John Patrick (2013).

Free and French in the Caribbean: Toussaint Louverture, Aimé Césaire, and Narratives of Loyal Opposition . Blacks in the Diaspora. Bloomington & Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. p. 161.

ISBN 9780253008107 .

^ Frutkin, Susan (1973).

Aimé Césaire; Black Between Worlds . Monographs in International Affairs. Coral Gables, FL: Center for Advanced International Studies, University of Miami. p. 29.

LCCN 73-85305 .

OCLC 724654 .

^ a b c d Césaire, Aimé (2000) [1st pub. 1972:Monthly Review Press; from Discours sur le colonialisme (in French), 1955: Présence Africaine ].

Discourse on Colonialism . Translated by Pinkham, Joan. New York: Monthly Review Press.

ISBN 978-1-58367-025-5 .

OCLC 826660189 .

^ Heiskanen, Jaakko (December 2021).

"In the Shadow of Genocide: Ethnocide, Ethnic Cleansing, and International Order" .

Global Studies Quarterly .

1 (4) ksab030: 3.

doi : 10.1093/isagsq/ksab030 .

^ a b Daw, Emily (3 September 2022).

"What Is the Discourse on Colonialism?" .

LanguageHumanities . wiseGEEK.

Archived from the original on 2022-09-12.

^ "Discourse on Colonialism by Aimé Fernand David Césaire" .

Monthly Review . 31 December 1996 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 .

v t e Aimé Césaire Bibliography Works Cahier d'un retour au pays natal (1939) Discourse on Colonialism (1950) Une saison au Congo (1966) Une Tempête (1969) Concepts Négritude Imperial boomerang People Suzanne Césaire (ex-wife) Ina Césaire (daughter) Related Martinican Progressive Party Law on Departmentalization Authority control databases : National France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discourse_on_Colonialism&oldid=1304171585 " Categories : 1955 non-fiction books Works by Aimé Césaire French non-fiction books History books about colonialism Marxist books Philosophy books Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2025 Articles with failed verification from September 2022 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 11:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Discourse on Colonialism 6 languages Add topic

