Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Life 3 Family 4 Historical works 5 Musical works 6 Istanbul Museum 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Dimitrie Cantemir 42 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Moldavian statesman and prince (1673–1723) For other uses, see Dimitrie Cantemir (disambiguation) .

Dimitrie Cantemir Portrait from the first edition of the Descriptio Moldaviae , 1716 Prince of Moldavia Reign March 1693 – April 1693 Predecessor Constantin Cantemir Successor Constantin Duca Reign January 1710 – August 1711 Predecessor Nicholas Mavrocordatos Successor Lupu Costachi Born 26 October 1673 Silișteni (now Dimitrie Cantemir), Vaslui County , Principality of Moldavia Died 21 August 1723 (aged 49) Dmitrovsk , Oryol Oblast , Russian Empire Burial Trei Ierarhi Monastery , Iași Spouse Casandra Cantacuzino Anastasiya Trubetskaya Issue Matei Șerban Maria Cantemir Constantin Antiochus Kantemir Ekaterina Golitsyna House Cantemirești Father Constantin Cantemir Dimitrie or Demetrius [ 1 ] Cantemir ( Romanian pronunciation: [diˈmitri.e kanteˈmir] ⓘ ; Russian : Дмитрий Кантемир , romanized : Dmitry Kantemir ; 26 October 1673 – 21 August 1723), also known by other spellings , was a Moldavian prince, statesman, and man of letters.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He twice served as voivode of Moldavia (March–April 1693 and 1710–1711). During his second term, he allied his state with Russia in a war against Moldavia's Ottoman overlords; Russia's defeat forced Cantemir's family into exile and the replacement of the native voivodes by Greek phanariots . Cantemir was also a prolific writer, variously a: philosopher , historian , composer , musicologist , linguist , ethnographer and geographer . His son, Antioch , Russia's ambassador to Great Britain and France and a friend of Montesquieu and Voltaire , would become known as "the father of Russian poetry ".

Name [ edit ] Dimitrie is the Romanian form of the name Latinized as Demetrius and, less often, anglicized as Demeter .

[ 1 ] The Russian form of his name was Dmitri Konstantinovich Kantemir ( Дми́трий Константи́нович Кантеми́р ). He is also known as Dimitri Kantemiroğlu in Turkish contexts, Dymitr Kantemir in Polish , and Dēmētrios Kantimērēs ( Δημήτριος Καντιμήρης ) in Greek . His surname Cantemir (Kantemir) is of Turkic/Tatar origin, "kan" meaning "blood" and "temir" meaning "iron".

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] In Ottoman dress Portrait engraving, about 1710 On the 100 Transnistrian ruble note Dimitrie was born in Silişteni , Moldavia (now Vaslui County , Romania ) on 26 October 1673 [ 1 ] to Constantin Cantemir and Ana Bantăș.

[ 4 ] His mother was a learned daughter of a local noble family. In 1685, Constantin was named voivode of Moldavia by its Turkish overlords.

[ 1 ] Although Constantin himself was illiterate, he educated his sons Dimitrie and Antioh thoroughly. Dimitrie learned Greek and Latin to read the classics as a child. One of his tutors was the scholar John Komnenos Molyvdos . Between 1687 and 1710, Dimitrie spent most of his time as a hostage or envoy in Constantinople , living in the palace he owned, where he learned Turkish and studied Ottoman history at the Patriarchate 's Greek Academy .

[ citation needed ] While there, he also composed Ottoman music .

[ 5 ] Upon Constantin's death in 1693, Dimitrie briefly succeeded him to the voivodeship but was passed over within three weeks in favour of Constantin Duca , whose candidacy was supported by his father-in-law, the Wallachian voivode Constantin Brâncoveanu .

[ 6 ] When his brother Antioh eventually succeeded to the control of Moldavia, Dimitrie served as his envoy to the Porte.

[ citation needed ] During these years, he also served with distinction in the Turkish army on its campaigns.

[ 1 ] In 1710, Dimitrie was appointed voivode in his own right. Believing Ottoman Turkey to be collapsing, [ 1 ] he placed Moldavia under Russian control through a secret agreement signed at Lutsk ( Treaty of Lutsk ). Then he joined Peter the Great in his war against the Turks . This ended in failure at Stănilești (18–22 July 1711) and the Cantemirs were forced into Russian exile.

[ 7 ] In 1712, Peter I presented Bogorodskoye District (Black Mud) to the former Moldavian ruler.

He travelled to Russia along with many other noble families, most important and close being Septilici family and Abaza, who were also made princely/noble in russian ranks. Dimitrie was made both a Russian prince ( knyaz ) by Peter and a prince of the Holy Roman Empire by Charles VI . He lived on an estate at Dmitrovka near Oryol , with a sizable boyar retinue (including the chronicler Ion Neculce ). There he died on 21 August 1723, on the very day he was awarded his German title. In 1935, his remains were returned to Iași .

Family [ edit ] Cantemir was married twice: to Princess Cassandra Cantacuzino (1682–1713), daughter of Prince Șerban Cantacuzino and supposed descendant of the Byzantine Kantakouzenoi , in 1699, and to Princess Anastasiya Trubetskaya (1700–1755) in 1717. Cantemir's children were rather prominent in Russian history. His elder daughter Maria Cantemir (1700–1754) so attracted Peter the Great that he allegedly planned to divorce his wife Catherine to be with her. Upon Catherine's own ascension to the throne, however, Maria was forced to enter a convent. Cantemir's son Antioch (1708–1744) was the Russian ambassador at London and Paris, a friend of Voltaire and Montesquieu , and so influential a poet, satirist, and essayist as to be considered "the father of Russian poetry ". Another son Constantin (1703–1747) was implicated in the Golitsyn conspiracy against the empress Anna and was exiled to Siberia . Dimitrie's younger daughter Smaragda (1720–1761), reckoned one of the great beauties of her time, was the wife of Prince Dmitriy Mikhailovich Golitsyn and a friend of the empress Elizabeth .

Historical works [ edit ] Cantemir was a polyglot known as one of the greatest linguists of his time, speaking and writing eleven languages. Well-versed in Oriental scholarship, his oeuvre is voluminous, diverse, and original, although some of his scientific writings contain unconfirmed theories or simple inaccuracies. Between 1711 and 1719 he wrote his most important creations. In 1714, [ 8 ] he was named a member of the Royal Academy of Berlin .

Cantemir's best-known history work was his History of the Growth and Decay of the Ottoman Empire [ 1 ] (the original title was in Latin , Historia incrementorum atque decrementorum Aulae Othomanicae [ 9 ] ). This volume circulated throughout Europe in manuscript for a number of years. It was finally printed in 1734 in London [ 10 ] and was later translated and printed in Germany [ 11 ] and France.

[ 12 ] It remained the seminal work on the Ottoman Empire up to the middle of the 19th century; notably, it was used as a reference for Edward Gibbon 's own Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire . Later scholarship contests many points owing to the dubiousness of some of Cantemir's sources.

He also published the first critical history of Romania as a whole, [ 1 ] the Chronicle of the Antiquity of the Romano-Moldavo-Wallachians ( Hronicul vechimei a romano-moldo-vlahilor ), from 1719 to 1722. It asserted the Latin origin of the Romanian language and the Roman origin of the people living within the former land of Dacia .

[ 13 ] Cantemir wrote his Descriptio Moldaviae ("Description of Moldavia" in Latin) in 1714 [ 1 ] at the request of the Royal Academy in Berlin. Covering geographical, ethnographical, and economic aspects of Moldavia, it was similarly circulated in manuscript and only published much later. It appeared in a German geographical magazine in 1769 and was published as a book in 1771.

[ 14 ] His c.

1714 manuscript map of Moldova was the first real map of the country, containing geographical detail as well as administrative information. Printed in 1737 in the Netherlands , it formed the basis of most European maps of the country for decades.

His 1705 roman à clef A Hieroglyphic History [ 15 ] was the first Romanian novel, representing the history of the Wallachian Brâncoveanu and Cantacuzino dynasties through allegorical and mythological animals.

He also wrote an introduction to Islam for Europeans, a biography of Jan Baptist van Helmont , [ 16 ] a philosophical treatise in Romanian and Greek, [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] and an unfinished second treatise on the Undepictable Image of Sacred Science .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Due to his many esteemed works, he won great renown at the high courts of Europe. His name is among those who were considered to be the brightest minds of the world on a plaque at the Library of Sainte-Genevieve in Paris , next to those of Leibniz , Newton , Piron , and other great thinkers.

Musical works [ edit ] A few of Cantemir's roughly forty Ottoman compositions are still performed today as part of the Turkish repertoire, but his greatest service was in preserving 350 traditional instrumental pieces by publishing them in a musical notation he developed from the Ottoman Turkish alphabet in his work Edvar-i Musiki , offered as a present to Sultan Ahmed III in 1703 or 1704 and recently reprinted with modern explanations.

[ 22 ] In 1999, the Bezmara ensemble recorded Yitik Sesin Peşinde ("In Search of the Lost Sound") from the Cantemir transcriptions using period instruments.

[ 23 ] His compositions, those of his European contemporaries and Moldavian folk music of the period were explored on Cantemir (Golden Horn Records, 2000) performed by İhsan Özgen and the Lux Musica ensemble under Linda Burman-Hall 's direction.

[ 24 ] Seven of Cantemir's compositions were also featured on Hespèrion XXI 's 2009 Istanbul , under the direction of Jordi Savall , with focus on Cantemir's “Book of the Science of Music”.

[ 25 ] Istanbul Museum [ edit ] One of the houses inhabited by Dimitrie Cantemir during his exile in Constantinople was restored and opened as a museum in 2007.

[ 26 ] It lies in the Fener quarter of the walled city between Phanar College and the Golden Horn .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Baynes, T. S., ed. (1878), "Demetrius Cantemir" , Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 5 (9th ed.), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, p. 28 ; Gaster, Moses (1911), "Cantemir" , in Chisholm, Hugh (ed.), Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 5 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, p. 209 ^ The Great Cauldron: A History of Southeastern Europe – Marie–Janine Calic . Harvard University Press. 2019. pp.

146– 149.

ISBN 9780674983922 . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

^ Ciulei, Tomiţă (2014).

"Profile of an East-European Thinker. Dimitrie Cantemir's Humanism" .

Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences .

149 : 189– 194.

doi : 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.08.186 .

^ Panaitescu, Petre P. (1958) Dimitrie Cantemir. Viaţa şi opera . (In Romanian) ^ Popescu-Judetz, Eugenia (1999), Prince Dimitrie Cantemir, Theorist and Composer of Turkish Music , Istanbul: Pan Yayıncılık, ISBN 975-7652-82-2 ^ Lemny, Stefan (2009), Les Cantemirs: L'Aventure Européene d'une Famille Princière au XVIIIe Siecle [ The Cantemirs: The European Adventure of a Princely Family in the 18th Century ] (in French), Paris: Editions Complexes, p. 51 ^ Stoica, Vasile (1919), The Roumanian Question: The Roumanians and their Lands , Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh Printing Co., p. 19 ^ Cantemir, Demetrius (1714) Moldaviae .

^ Ottoman Historians . University of Chicago ^ Cantemir, Demetrius (1734) History of Othman Empire . London ^ Cantemir, Demetrius (1745) Geschichte des osmanischen Reichs nach seinem Anwachsen und Abnehmen . Hamburg.

^ Cantemir, Demetrius (1743) Histoire de l'Empire Ottoman . Paris ^ Moldavian description prefaced by club Măciuca Constantine, Ed. Ion Creanga, Bucharest 1978.

[ clarification needed ] ^ Cantemir, Demetrius (1771) Beschreibung der Moldau . Frankfurt and Lepzig ^ Cantemir, Dimitrie, Istoria ieroglifică (in Romanian) ^ Cantemir, Demetrius (1709), Ioannis Baptistae Van Helmont Physices Universalis Doctrine et Christianae Fidei Congrua et Necessaria Philosophia (in Latin), Wallachia ^ Cantemir, Dimitrie (1698), Divanul sau Gâlceava Înțeleptului cu lumea sau Giudețul sufletului cu trupul (in Romanian), Iași ^ Cantemir, Demetrius, Le Divan ou La Dispute du Sage avec le Monde ou Le Jugement de l'Âme avec le Corps (in French) ^ Cantemir, Demetrius, The Divan or The Wise Man's Parley with the World or The Judgement of the Soul with the Body ^ Cantemir, Dimitrie (1700), Imaginea științei sacre, care nu se poate zugrăvi (in Romanian), Constantinople ^ Cantemir, Dimitrie, Sacrosantae Scientiae Indepingibilis Imago (in Latin) ^ Kantemiroğlu, Kitâbu 'İlmi'l-Mûsiki alâ Vechi'l-Hurûfât, Mûsikiyi Harflerle Tesbit ve İcrâ İlminin Kitabı , Yalçın Tura , Yapı Kredi Yayınları, Istanbul 2001, ISBN 975-08-0167-9 .

(in Turkish) ^ Bezmara (1999).

In Search of the Lost Sound (album booklet). Istanbul: Kalan Müzik . EAN 8691834003576.

^ Lux Musica (2000).

Cantemir: Music in Istanbul and Ottoman Europe around 1700 (album booklet). Santa Cruz, CA: Golden Horn .

^ Hespèrion XXI (2009).

Istanbul – Dimitrie Cantemir (album booklet).

Bellaterra : Alia Vox .

^ Simina, Stan.

"Dimitrie Cantemir are un muzeu în Istanbul" .

jurnalul.ro (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 26 October 2014 . Retrieved 29 July 2014 .

Further reading [ edit ] Gusterin, Pavel (2008), Первый российский востоковед Дмитрий Кантемир / First Russian Orientalist Dmitri Kantemir , Moscow, ISBN 978-5-7873-0436-7 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dimitrie Cantemir .

Greek Turkish friendship through music Marek, Miroslav.

"Genealogy of the Cantemir family" . Genealogy.EU.

Preceded by Constantin Cantemir Prince/Voivode of Moldavia 1693 Succeeded by Constantin Duca Preceded by Nicolae Mavrocordat Prince/Voivode of Moldavia 1710–1711 Succeeded by Caimacam Lupu Costachi v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dimitrie_Cantemir&oldid=1297655332 " Categories : 1673 births 1723 deaths Monarchs of Moldavia Princes of the Holy Roman Empire Politicians from the Russian Empire Privy Councillor (Russian Empire) 18th-century writers in Latin 18th-century male writers Romanian philosophers Enlightenment philosophers Moldavian chroniclers 18th-century Romanian historians Romanian cartographers Linguists from Romania Romanian orientalists Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Romanian composers Composers from the Ottoman Empire Composers of Ottoman classical music Composers of Turkish makam music Cantemirești family People from Vaslui County 18th-century Moldavian writers Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2016 CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Pages with Romanian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Articles containing Romanian-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 16:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dimitrie Cantemir 42 languages Add topic

