Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Geographical knowledge Toggle Geographical knowledge subsection 2.1 Descriptive method 3 Editions 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Pomponius Mela 38 languages Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1st century AD Roman geographer "De situ orbis" redirects here. For the work of Strabo, see Geographica . For the Carolingian treatise, see Anonymus Leidensis .

Reconstruction of Pomponius Mela's world map by Konrad Miller [ de ] (1898) Pomponius Mela , who wrote around AD 43, was the earliest known Roman geographer . He was born at the end of the 1st century BC in Tingentera (now Algeciras ) and died c.

AD 45.

His short work ( De situ orbis libri III.

) remained in use nearly to the year 1500.

[ 1 ] It occupies less than one hundred pages of ordinary print, and is described by the Encyclopædia Britannica (1911) as "dry in style and deficient in method, but of pure Latinity , and occasionally relieved by pleasing word-pictures." [ 2 ] Except for the geographical parts of Pliny 's Historia naturalis (where Mela is cited as an important authority), the De situ orbis is the only formal treatise on the subject in Classical Latin .

Biography [ edit ] Pomponius Mela's description of Europe (F. Nansen, 1911) Little is known of Pomponius except his name and birthplace—the small town of Tingentera or Cingentera (identified as Iulia Traducta ) in southern Spain , on Algeciras Bay (Mela ii. 6, § 96; but the text is here corrupt).

[ 3 ] The date of his writing may be approximately fixed by his allusion (iii. 6 § 49) to a proposed British expedition of the reigning emperor, almost certainly that of Claudius in AD 43. That this passage cannot refer to Julius Caesar is evidenced by several references to events of Augustus 's reign; especially to certain new names given to Spanish towns. Mela, like the two Senecas , Lucan , Martial , Quintilian , Trajan , Hadrian , were all part of Italic communities settled in various parts of Spain that eventually relocated in Rome.

[ 4 ] It has been conjectured that Pomponius Mela may have been related in some way to Marcus Annaeus Mela , son of Seneca the Elder and father of Lucan .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Geographical knowledge [ edit ] The general views of the De situ orbis mainly agree with those current among Greek writers from Eratosthenes to Strabo , though the latter was probably unknown to Mela. But Pomponius is unique among ancient geographers in that, after dividing the Earth into five zones, of which two only were habitable, he asserts the existence of antichthones , inhabiting the southern temperate zone inaccessible to the folk of the northern temperate regions due to the unbearable heat of the intervening torrid zone . On the divisions and boundaries of Europe , Asia and Africa , he repeats Eratosthenes; like all classical geographers from Alexander the Great (except Ptolemy ) he regards the Caspian Sea as an inlet of the Northern Ocean, corresponding to the Persian and Arabian ( Red Sea ) gulfs on the south.

The shores of Codanus sinus (southwestern Baltic Sea ) in red with its many islands in green His Indian conceptions are inferior to those of some earlier Greek writers; he follows Eratosthenes in supposing that country to occupy the south-eastern angle of Asia, whence the coast trended northwards to Scythia, and then swept round westward to the Caspian Sea. As usual, he places the Riphean Mountains and the Hyperboreans near the Scythian Ocean. In western Europe his knowledge (as was natural in a Spanish subject of Imperial Rome) was somewhat in advance of the Greek geographers. He defines the western coastline of Spain and Gaul and its indentation by the Bay of Biscay more accurately than Eratosthenes or Strabo, and his ideas of the British Isles and their position are also clearer than his predecessors. He is the first to name the Orcades or Orkney Islands , which he defines and locates fairly correctly. Of northern Europe his knowledge was imperfect, but he speaks of a great bay (" Codanus sinus ") to the north of Germany, among whose many islands was one, "Codanovia", of pre-eminent size; this name reappears in Pliny the Elder 's work as Scatinavia .

Codanovia and Scatinavia were both Latin renderings of the Proto-Germanic * Skaðinawio , the Germanic name for Scandinavia .

[ citation needed ] Descriptive method [ edit ] Mela's descriptive method follows ocean coasts, in the manner of a periplus , probably because it was derived from the accounts of navigators. He begins at the Straits of Gibraltar , and describes the countries adjoining the south coast of the Mediterranean ; then he moves round by Syria and Asia Minor to the Black Sea , and so returns to Spain along the north shore of the Euxine, Propontis , etc. After treating the Mediterranean islands, he next takes the ocean littoral —to west, north, east and south successively—from Spain and Gaul round to India, from India to Persia , Arabia and Ethiopia ; and so again works back to Spain. Like most classical geographers he conceives of the continent of Africa as surrounded by sea and not extending very far south.

Editions [ edit ] Title page of 1518 Vadian's first edition The editio princeps of Mela was published at Milan in 1471; the first critical edition was by Joachim Vadian (Wien, 1518), superseded by those of Johann Heinrich Voss (1658), Johann Friedrich Gronovius (1685 and 1696), A. Gronovius (1722 and 1728), and Tzschucke (1806–1807), in seven parts (Leipzig; the most elaborate of all); G. Paithey's (Berlin, 1867) for its text. The English translation by Arthur Golding (1585) was celebrated.

[ 8 ] A recent English translation is that of F. E. Romer, originally published in 1998.

I tre libri di Pomponio Mela del sito, forma, e misura del mondo , 1557 I tre libri di Pomponio Mela del sito, forma, e misura del mondo (in Italian). Venezia: Gabriele Giolito de Ferrari. 1557.

References [ edit ] ^ Kish, George (1978).

A Source Book in Geography . Harvard University Press. p. 128.

ISBN 9780674822702 . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Bunbury, Edward Herbert ; Beazley, Charles Raymond (1911). " Mela, Pomponius ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). p. 87.

^ Tegg, Thomas (1824).

Chronology, or The historian's companion (3rd ed.). London: Thomas Tegg. p. 284.

^ Pomponius Mela's description of the world . De chorographia.English. University of Michigan Press. 1998.

ISBN 9780472107735 .

^ Walter C. A. Ker (1919).

Martial's Epigrams . London: William Heinemann.

[By 'Seneca's house illustrious for its triple names'] M.

means Seneca, the philosopher and tutor of Nero, his brother Gallio, and Annaeus Pomponius Mela, the writer on geography.

J. Wight Duff characterizes this as "a serious confusion between Annaeus Mela , who was Seneca's brother, and Pomponius Mela, the geographer." ^ J. Wight Duff (November–December 1920).

"Martial: Epigrams (review)" .

The Classical Review .

34 ( 7– 8). London: John Murray: 177.

^ Romer 1998, "Introduction", p. 4.

^ See also Edward Bunbury , Ancient Geography , ii. 352–368, and D. Detlefsen, Quellen und Forschungen zur alten Gesch. und Geog.

(1908).

Sources [ edit ] Romer, Frank E. (1998).

Pomponius Mela's Description of the World . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 9780472084524 .

Editions in the original Latin in the Internet Archive Books I , II and III in Latin, digitised at The Latin Library Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Bunbury, Edward Herbert ; Beazley, Charles Raymond (1911). " Mela, Pomponius ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). p. 87.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pomponius_Mela&oldid=1298663051 " Categories : 40s deaths Ancient Roman geographers 1st-century Romans Romans from Hispania 1st-century geographers Silver Age Latin writers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 21:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pomponius Mela 38 languages Add topic

