Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discovery and naming 2 Characteristics 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Mayda Insula 9 languages Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Русский Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Island on Kraken Mare on Titan Radar image of Mayda Insula (just right and below center) in Kraken Mare Mayda Insula is an island in the Kraken Mare , a body of liquid composed primarily of methane, on Saturn's largest moon Titan . Mayda Insula is the first island (insula) to be named on a planet or moon other than Earth.

Discovery and naming [ edit ] Mayda Insula was discovered by the Cassini–Huygens mission to Saturn. Its name was approved by the International Astronomical Union Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature on April 11, 2008, [ 1 ] becoming the first named island on a planetary body other than earth, and the largest.

[ 2 ] NASA notes, however, that the possibility Mayda Insula is actually peninsular (i.e., connected to the mainland by a strip of land) cannot be conclusively ruled out.

[ 3 ] All of the insulae on Titan have been named for legendary islands and "Mayda Insula" was derived from the legendary island Mayda which was thought to exist in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean .

[ 2 ] Its name was approved the same day as the names of Kraken Mare and Ligeia Mare .

[ 1 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Mayda Insula lies in the northern end of the Kraken Mare near Titan's north pole.

[ 4 ] The island has a northernmost latitude of 80.3 degrees north and a southernmost latitude of 77.4 degrees north; it has a westernmost longitude of approximately 321.2 degrees west and an easternmost longitude of 302.7 degrees west.

[ 5 ] The island is 168 kilometres (104 mi) wide at its widest point.

[ 5 ] Its dimensions are approximately 90 by 150 kilometres (56 by 93 mi), about the same size as the Big Island of Hawaii .

[ 3 ] The highest point of the interior of Mayda Insula is approximately 1,200 metres (3,900 ft) above its shoreline.

[ 6 ] Slopes are relatively mild at approximately 1.5 degrees on average, though they can approach 5 degrees in some locations.

[ 6 ] Radar images of Titan's surface show that Mayda Insula's coasts display evidence of being changed by fluvial and lacustrine processes.

[ 7 ] Analyses of these fluvial features suggested that approximately 2 km 3 of material has been eroded from Mayda Insula and deposited elsewhere in the Kraken Mare basin.

[ 7 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Mayda Insula features in Michael Carroll 's novel On the Shores of Titan's Farthest Sea: A Scientific Novel . The 39th chapter of the book is titled "The Hunchback of Mayda Insula".

[ 8 ] The extreme metal band, High Priest of Saturn released an eponymous album in 2013 which has a song titled On Mayda Insula . Regarding the song, they said "drowning in Kraken Mare is a metaphor for being overcome by fear and anxiety while Mayda Insula is a safe haven where you can find peace".

[ 9 ] Kraken Mare is also a song on the album.

See also [ edit ] Lakes of Titan List of geological features on Titan References [ edit ] ^ a b "Titan Mare and Insula Names" .

Astrogeology Science Center . USGS. April 11, 2008 . Retrieved June 28, 2017 .

^ a b "Nomenclature Search Results, Feature Type: Insula, insulae" .

Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature . International Astronomical Union (IAU) Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature (WGPSN) . Retrieved June 28, 2017 .

^ a b "PIA09180: Titan: Larger and Larger Lakes" .

Photojournal . NASA/JPL-Caltech. February 27, 2007 . Retrieved June 28, 2017 .

^ Jaumann, R.; Kirk, R. L.; Lorenz, R. D.; Lopes, R. M. C.

; Stofan, E.; Turtle, E. P.; Keller, H. U.; Wood, C. A.; Sotin, C.; Soderblom, L. A.; Tomasko, M. (2009). "Geology and Surface Processes on Titan". In Brown, R.; Lebreton, J. P.; Waite, J. (eds.).

Titan from Cassini–Huygens . Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. pp.

75– 140.

ISBN 978-1402092152 .

^ a b "Mayda Insula" .

Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature . International Astronomical Union (IAU) Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature (WGPSN). April 11, 2008 . Retrieved June 28, 2017 .

^ a b Kirk, R. L.; Howington-Kraus, E. (2008).

"Radargrammetry on three planets" (PDF) .

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences .

37 (B4): 973– 980.

^ a b Aharonson, O; Hayes, A. G.; Hayne, P. O.; Lopes, R. M.; Lucas, A.; Perron, J. T. (2014). "Titan's surface geology". In Müller-Wodarg, I.; Griffith, C. A.; Lellouch, E.; Cravens, T. E. (eds.).

Titan: Interior, Surface, Atmosphere, and Space Environment . Cambridge Planetary Science. Vol. 14. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press . pp.

63– 101.

ISBN 978-1139618960 .

^ Carroll, Michael (2015).

On the Shores of Titan's Farthest Sea: A Scientific Novel . Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.

ISBN 978-3319177595 .

^ "INTO BATTLE: HIGH PRIEST OF SATURN – Iron Fist Magazine" . 2013-03-02 . Retrieved 2024-05-07 .

v t e Titan Atmosphere Climate Life Lakes and seas Seas Kraken Mare Ligeia Mare Punga Mare Lakes Abaya Lacus Bolsena Lacus Feia Lacus Hammar Lacus Jingpo Lacus Kivu Lacus Koitere Lacus Ladoga Lacus Mackay Lacus Müggel Lacus Neagh Lacus Ontario Lacus Sionascaig Lacus Sotonera Lacus Albano Lacus Rivers Elivagar Flumina Vid Flumina Dry lakes Eyre Lacuna Ngami Lacuna Woytchugga Lacuna Features Adiri Arrakis Planitia Dilmun Doom Mons Erebor Mons Ganesa Macula Guabonito Irensaga Montes Mayda Insula Menrva Mezzoramia Mindolluin Montes Misty Montes Mithrim Montes Perkunas Virgae Selk Shangri-La Shikoku Facula Sinlap Sotra Patera Taniquetil Montes Tsegihi Tui Regio Xanadu Exploration Past Pioneer program Pioneer 11 Voyager program Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Cassini–Huygens Huygens Planned and proposed Dragonfly (2028) AVIATR Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Journey to Enceladus and Titan TALISE Titan Mare Explorer Titan Submarine Titan Saturn System Mission Titan Winged Aerobot Oceanus Related Colonization of Titan In fiction In mythology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mayda_Insula&oldid=1243278718 " Category : Surface features of Titan (moon) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 August 2024, at 15:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mayda Insula 9 languages Add topic

