Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Administration 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Geologic 2.2 Early settlers 2.3 Wildlife refuge formation 3 Description 4 Related organizations 5 Gallery 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge 2 languages Cebuano Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°42′30″N 74°28′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.70833°N 74.46667°W ﻿ / 40.70833; -74.46667 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Protected area in New Jersey, United States Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge IUCN category IV (habitat/species management area) Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge in New Jersey (March 2008) Map of Morris County with State of New Jersey inset and Great Swamp highlighted Location Morris County, New Jersey , U.S.

Nearest city Morristown, New Jersey Coordinates 40°42′30″N 74°28′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.70833°N 74.46667°W ﻿ / 40.70833; -74.46667 Area 7,800 acres (32 km 2 ) Established 1960 Governing body U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Website Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge U.S. National Natural Landmark Designated May 1966 The Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge is located in Morris County , New Jersey , United States. Established in 1960, it is among what has grown to be 806 refuges in the United States National Wildlife Refuge System .

The first part of what was known in New Jersey as "The Great Swamp" that had been assembled in 1959 and was donated for perpetual preservation by the park service of the federal government in 1960, was declared a National Natural Landmark in May 1966.

[ 1 ] More land has been added several times. Its eastern half 3,660 acres (14.8 km 2 ) was designated as a wilderness area by Congress in 1968, [ 2 ] making it the first wilderness area within the Fish and Wildlife Service. By 2010, the refuge included more than twelve square miles (7,800 acres or 32 square kilometers).

Administration [ edit ] The refuge is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service , an agency within the United States Department of the Interior . Refuge lands lie within the townships of Chatham , Harding , and Long Hill .

History [ edit ] Geologic [ edit ] The Great Swamp is the remnant of the bottom of the once-mighty Glacial Lake Passaic that approximately 15,000 to 11,000 years ago stretched across 30 by 10 miles (48 by 16 km) in what is presently northern New Jersey. The lake was formed by the melting waters of the retreating Wisconsin Glacier at the end of the last ice age . The glacier had pushed a moraine ahead of its advance, a rubble of soil and rocks that plugged the existing outlet for the waters that drained into the area of the watershed. As the retreating glacier melted, the waters rose to create the lake before a new outlet began to allow the water to exit at a much higher elevation.

[ 2 ] The plug altered the course of the Passaic River , which had drained a swamp that predated the lake. A range of mountains to the west of Morristown formed the western boundary of the new lake and the most easterly line of the Watchung Mountains became the eastern boundary. The tops of some of the Watchung range became islands in the great lake. Water that had vented through the Watchung range, or to its south, found a new path that altered the old drainage paths. When the plug collapsed, the river still was forced to travel north through the range before finding a new outlet near present-day Paterson where it could manage the eastern turn toward the sea.

Early settlers [ edit ] Some ten thousand years ago, Amerindians arrived in the area and established settlements shortly after the retreat of the glacier, hunting, fishing, and farming. In 1614, Dutch colonists claimed part of the area as New Netherlands and they traded with the natives. Later, British settlers came, establishing dominion over what they called the Province of New Jersey .

The refuge includes about one-quarter of the Great Swamp 55-square-mile (140 km 2 ) watershed that gives rise to the Passaic River . The watershed touches ten modern communities, many of which were settled by European colonists long before the American Revolution.

Wildlife refuge formation [ edit ] Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, December The land that would become the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge was established by an Act of Congress on November 3, 1960, after a multi-year legal battle that pitted local residents against Port Authority of New York and New Jersey officials wishing to turn the Great Swamp into a major regional airport to supplement Newark Airport's ability to accommodate large jet aircraft.

[ 3 ] The Jersey Jetport Site Association was the first to form in opposition. Their efforts to prevent the development of an airport in the swamp became public knowledge on December 3, 1959, when four of its members ( Kafi Benz , Joan Kelly, Esty Weiss, and Betty White) were expelled from a meeting at the Essex House in Newark that had been organized to generate support for its construction.

[ 4 ] The JJSA activity was followed closely by a national and influential sister organization, when (because of connections with Marcellus Hartley Dodge, Sr.

, a major donor to and participant in JJSA) the North American Wildlife Foundation established its Great Swamp Committee in 1960.

[ 5 ] Between the two organizations and, in less than a year, enough property in the core of the swamp was quickly purchased, assembled, and donated to the federal government to qualify for perpetual protection as a national wildlife refuge.

[ 6 ] As the representative from Arizona , Stewart Udall immediately championed the efforts of these residents, whom he described as having mounted the greatest effort ever made by residents in America to protect a natural habitat, and later, on May 29, 1964, as the Secretary of the Interior , he oversaw its dedication as a refuge. The initial donation was 2,600 acres (11 km 2 ), which assured its protection as a refuge and the acquisition of additional lands continued. In 1960, Representative Peter Frelinghuysen, Jr.

, whose estate was in the area targeted for development also joined the effort.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Description [ edit ] Map of the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge By the end of 2010, the extent of the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge had grown to nearly 7,800 acres (32 km 2 ) of varied habitats . It lies within the Northeastern coastal forests ecoregion .

[ 10 ] When the remainder of the area donated was dedicated on September 9, 1968, it was the first refuge to receive wilderness designation.

[ 11 ] The Great Swamp is a migration-resting and feeding area or a permanent habitat for more than 244 species of birds. The major routes of birds migrating along the eastern portion of the United States follow the corridor that includes the Great Swamp as an important stopping place for rest and nutrition.

Many species of birds reside permanently in the watershed. Deer, fish, fox, frogs, muskrat, raccoons, snakes, turtles, as well as many insects and a wide variety of wildflowers and plants call the refuge home. Some of the animals hunted by the prehistoric native inhabitants and colonists, such as bear and beaver, are encountered occasionally. Its role in draining the region and absorbing flood water for gradual release can be critical during extreme weather conditions. The refuge also plays an important role in improving water quality by acting as a natural ecological filter trapping sediments and contaminants.

Related organizations [ edit ] Numerous nonprofit organizations have arisen from the communities within the Great Swamp watershed and work closely in partnership with the refuge. The Great Swamp Watershed Association , founded in 1981, works to protect the entire 55-square-mile (140 km 2 ) watershed that surrounds the swamp.

[ 12 ] Within the Great Swamp there also is a nonprofit bird-rehabilitation center founded in 1977, called The Raptor Trust , mainly specializing in birds of prey , such as eagles , hawks , and owls .

Lord Stirling Park is part of the Somerset County Park System. The park is entered from the community of Stirling that is named after a military officer of the American Revolution who lived in the community, William Alexander . The park is located immediately adjacent to the southwestern boundary of the refuge on the western side of the Passaic River. The park offers excellent hiking facilities that include trails, boardwalks, observation blinds, and naturalist exhibits displayed in its park office that are related to the swamp and its wildlife.

The Morris County Park Commission manages parks in the vicinity of the Great Swamp National Wildlife Reserve, including the Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center.

[ 13 ] Gallery [ edit ] Winter scene Winter scene Barns in winter Fall scene An adult female wood turtle in the refuge on April 28, 2022.

References [ edit ] ^ "National Natural Landmarks in New Jersey" .

NPS . February 5, 2004. Archived from the original on January 16, 2009 . Retrieved March 8, 2009 .

^ a b "Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge: History" .

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . Retrieved April 6, 2020 .

^ Plotch, Philip M.; Nelles, Jen (2023).

Mobilizing the Metropolis: How the Port Authority Built New York . University of Michigan Press. pp.

54– 69.

ISBN 978-0472056132 .

^ St. John, Kate, 55 Years Ago Today: A Victory For Birds , Outside My Window, November 3, 2015 ^ Hamilton, Leonard W., Ph.D., Keynote Address to the Tenth Anniversary Celebration Archived September 7, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , Ten Towns Committee, Sustainable Stewardship, June 24, 2005 ^ GREAT SWAMP IN NEW JERSEY, DONATED TO GOVERNMENT AS WILDLIFE AREA, TO BE DEDICATED (press release) Fish and Wildlife Service. May 25, 1964.

^ Dean, Clarence (January 14, 1960).

"Plan for Airport Argued in New Jersey" (PDF) .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 5, 2013 .

^ Honig, Milton (December 17, 1961).

"Jetport Enemies Say They've Won" (PDF) .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 5, 2013 .

^ Doig, Jameson W. (2001).

Empire on the Hudson: Entrepreneurial Vision and Political Power at the Port of New York Authority . Columbia University Press. pp.

385 –6.

^ Olson, D.M.; Dinerstein, E.; et al. (2001).

"Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life on Earth" .

BioScience .

51 (11): 933– 938.

doi : 10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0933:TEOTWA]2.0.CO;2 .

^ "Friends of Great Swamp" .

^ "Great Swamp Watershed Association" .

^ Senate, United States Congress (1968).

Hearings . U.S. Government Printing Office. pp.

40– 41.

This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service .

Further reading [ edit ] Plotch, Philip M.; Nelles, Jen (2023).

Mobilizing the Metropolis: How the Port Authority Built New York . University of Michigan Press. pp.

54– 69.

doi : 10.3998/mpub.12009801 .

ISBN 9780472903481 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge .

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service: Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge Friends of the Great Swamp Great Swamp Watershed Association New Jersey's Great Northwest Skylands: The Great Swamp Ten Towns Great Swamp Watershed Management Committee Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge Trail Details and Info Saving The Great Swamp Archived March 4, 2020, at the Wayback Machine — a documentary about the struggle to preserve the refuge from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey 's attempts to build an airport on the site between 1959 and 1968.

v t e Protected areas of New Jersey Federal National Estuarine Research Reserves Jacques Cousteau National Historical Parks Morristown Paterson Great Falls Thomas Edison National Monuments Statue of Liberty National Recreation Areas Delaware Water Gap Gateway National Reserves Pinelands National Trails Appalachian Washington-Rochambeau Revolutionary Route National Wild and Scenic Rivers Great Egg Harbor River Lower Delaware River Maurice River Musconetcong River National Wildlife Refuges Cape May Edwin B. Forsythe Great Swamp Supawna Meadows Wallkill River Other National Historic Landmarks National Natural Landmarks National Register of Historic Places Wilderness Areas State State parks Allaire Allamuchy Mountain Barnegat Lighthouse Cape May Point Cheesequake Corson's Inlet Delaware and Raritan Canal Double Trouble Edison Farny Fort Mott Hacklebarney High Point Hopatcong Island Beach Kittatinny Valley Liberty Long Pond Ironworks Monmouth Battlefield Parvin Pigeon Swamp Princeton Battlefield Rancocas Ringwood Stephens Swartswood Voorhees Washington Crossing Washington Rock Wawayanda State forests Abram S. Hewitt Bass River Belleplain Brendan T. Byrne Green Bank Jenny Jump Norvin Green Penn Ramapo Mountain Stokes Wharton Worthington Recreation areas Atsion Bull's Island Round Valley Spruce Run Wildlife management areas List of New Jersey wildlife management areas County Nature parks Eagle Rock Reservation Garret Mountain Reservation Sourland Mountain Preserve South Mountain Reservation Watchung Reservation New Jersey Coastal Heritage Trail Route Other Nature centers List of nature centers in New Jersey Category Essex County Hudson County Union County New Jersey Division of Parks and Forestry Commons v t e National Wildlife Refuges of the United States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa Guam Puerto Rico U.S. Minor Outlying Islands U.S. Virgin Islands v t e National Natural Landmarks in New Jersey Great Falls of Paterson-Garret Mountain Great Swamp Manahawkin Bottomland Hardwood Forest Moggy Hollow Natural Area Palisades of the Hudson Pigeon Swamp Riker Hill Fossil Site Stone Harbor Bird Sanctuary Sunfish Pond Troy Meadows William L. Hutcheson Memorial Forest List of National Natural Landmarks in New Jersey v t e Passaic River watershed Tributaries Black Brook Canoe Brook Cory's Brook Dead River Diamond Brook First River Foulerton's Brook Great Brook Goffle Brook Little Diamond Brook Loantaka Brook McDonalds Brook Molly Ann Brook Peckman River Pompton River Pequannock River Wanaque River Ramapo River Mahwah River Primrose Brook Rockaway River Whippany River Saddle River Ho-Ho-Kus Brook Salt Brook Second River Slippery Rock Brook Slough Brook Spring Garden Brook Stevenson Brook Deep Voll Brook Third River Weasel Brook Lakes Boonton Reservoir Butler Reservoir Canoe Brook Reservoir Cedar Lake DeForest Lake Estling Lake Franklin Lake Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge Greenwood Lake Indian Lake Lake Kinnelon Lake Tappan Monksville Reservoir Mountain Lake Oradell Reservoir Point View Reservoir Pompton Lake Ramapo Lake Rainbow Lake Splitrock Reservoir Sterling Lake Verona Lake Wanaque Reservoir White Meadow Lake Woodcliff Lake Reservoir Towns New Jersey Allendale Belleville Berkeley Heights Bernards Bernardsville Bloomfield Bloomingdale Boonton Borough Boonton Township Bridgewater Butler The Caldwells Caldwell North Caldwell West Caldwell Carlstadt Cedar Grove The Chathams Chatham Borough Chatham Township Clifton Denville Dover East Hanover East Newark East Rutherford Elmwood Park Essex Fells Fair Lawn Fairfield Township Far Hills Florham Park Franklin Lakes Garfield Glen Ridge Glen Rock Hackensack Haledon Hanover Harding Hardyston Harrison Hasbrouck Heights Hawthorne Hillsdale Hohokus Jefferson Kearny Kinnelon Lincoln Park Little Falls Livingston Lodi Long Hill Lyndhurst Madison Mahwah Maywood Mendham Borough Mendham Township Midland Park Millburn Mine Hill Montclair Montvale Montville Morris Plains Morris Township Morristown Mount Arlington Mountain Lakes New Providence Newark North Arlington North Haledon Nutley Oakland The Oranges East Orange Orange South Orange West Orange Paramus Parsippany–Troy Hills Passaic Paterson Pequannock Pompton Lakes Prospect Park Ramsey Randolph Ridgewood Village Ringwood Riverdale Rochelle Park Rockaway Borough Rockaway Township Roseland Roxbury Rutherford Saddle Brook Township Saddle River South Hackensack Sparta Summit Totowa Upper Saddle River Vernon Verona Victory Gardens Waldwick Wallington Wanaque Warren Washington Wayne West Milford Wharton Woodcliff Lake Woodland Park Wood-Ridge Wyckoff New York Hillburn Monroe Ramapo Suffern Tuxedo Tuxedo Park Crossings Lower Passaic River Avondale Bridge Belleville Turnpike Bridge Bridge Street Bridge Clay Street Bridge Dock Bridge Eighth Street Bridge Gregory Avenue Bridge Harry Laderman Bridge Jackson Street Bridge Lincoln Highway Passaic River Bridge Lyndhurst Draw Market Street Bridge Monroe Street Bridge Newark Drawbridge Passaic Street Bridge Pulaski Skyway PD Draw Union Avenue Bridge William A. Stickel Memorial Bridge Upper Passaic River Arch Street Bridge Gladstone Branch Hillery Street Bridge Main Line Montclair-Boonton Line Morristown and Erie Railway Morristown Line Newark-Pompton Turnpike Passaic River Bridge Patriots' Path Footbridge Sixth Avenue Bridge Straight Street Bridge West Broadway Bridge West Park Footbridge Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_Swamp_National_Wildlife_Refuge&oldid=1299861122 " Categories : IUCN Category IV Long Hill Township, New Jersey National Wildlife Refuges in New Jersey Protected areas of Morris County, New Jersey Passaic River Swamps of New Jersey National Natural Landmarks in New Jersey Protected areas established in 1960 Watchung Mountains Wetlands of New Jersey Landforms of Morris County, New Jersey Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2012 Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 21:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge 2 languages Add topic

