Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Technique 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 Single beam 3.2 Multibeam 4 Common use 5 Hydrography Toggle Hydrography subsection 5.1 Standards for hydrographic echo sounding 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Echo sounding 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Gaeilge 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measuring the depth of water by transmitting sound waves into water and timing the return Not to be confused with echography .

Illustration of echo sounding using a multibeam echosounder .

The MTVZA sounder received from the Meteor M2-2 satellite by an amateur station Echo sounding or depth sounding is the use of sonar for ranging , normally to determine the depth of water ( bathymetry ). It involves transmitting acoustic waves into water and recording the time interval between emission and return of a pulse; the resulting time of flight , along with knowledge of the speed of sound in water, allows determining the distance between sonar and target. This information is then typically used for navigation purposes or in order to obtain depths for charting purposes.

Echo sounding can also be used for ranging to other targets, such as fish schools . Hydroacoustic assessments have traditionally employed mobile surveys from boats to evaluate fish biomass and spatial distributions. Conversely, fixed-location techniques use stationary transducers to monitor passing fish.

The word sounding is used for all types of depth measurements, including those that don't use sound , and is unrelated in origin to the word sound in the sense of noise or tones. Echo sounding is a more rapid method of measuring depth than the previous technique of lowering a sounding line until it touched bottom.

History [ edit ] German inventor Alexander Behm was granted German patent No. 282009 for the invention of echo sounding (device for measuring depths of the sea and distances and headings of ships or obstacles by means of reflected sound waves) on 22 July 1913.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Meanwhile, in France, physicist Paul Langevin (connected with Marie Curie and better known for his research work in nuclear physics ) was recruited by French Navy laboratories at the beginning of World War 1 and conducted (then secret) research on active sonars for anti-submarine warfare (using a piezoelectric transmitter ). His work was developed and implemented by other scientists and technicians such as Chilowski, Florisson and Pierre Marti.

[ These don't have their own articles. Are they notable?

] Though a fully operational échosondeur (sonar) was not ready for use in wartime, there were successful trials both off Toulon and in the English Channel as early as 1920, and French patents taken for civilian uses. Oceanographic ships and French high-sea fishing assistance vessels were equipped with Langevin-Florisson and Langevin Marti recording sonars as early as the mid/late 1920s.

[ 4 ] One of the first commercial echo sounding units was the Fessenden Fathometer, which used the Fessenden oscillator to generate sound waves. This was first installed by the Submarine Signal Company in 1924 on the M&M [ clarification needed ] liner SS Berkshire.

[ 5 ] Technique [ edit ] Further information: Sound speed profile Diagram showing the basic principle of echo sounding Distance is measured by multiplying half the time from the signal's outgoing pulse to its return by the speed of sound in water, which is approximately 1.5 kilometres per second. The speed of sound will vary slightly depending on temperature, pressure and salinity; and for precise applications of echosounding, such as hydrography , the speed of sound must also be measured, typically by deploying a sound velocity probe in the water. Echo sounding is a special purpose application of sonar used to locate the bottom. Since a historical pre- SI unit of water depth was the fathom , an instrument used for determining water depth is sometimes called a fathometer .

Most charted ocean depths are based on an average or standard sound speed. Where greater accuracy is required, average and even seasonal standards may be applied to ocean regions. For high accuracy depths, usually restricted to special purpose or scientific surveys, a sensor may be lowered to measure the temperature, pressure and salinity. These factors are used to estimate more accurately the actual sound speed in the local water column. This technique is often used by the US Office of Coast Survey for navigational surveys of US coastal waters.

[ 6 ] Types [ edit ] Single beam [ edit ] beam shape of a single-beam echosounder on a USV A single-beam echo sounder is one of the simplest and most fundamental types of underwater sonar. They are ubiquitous in the boating world and used on a number of different marine robotic vehicles. It operates by using a transducer to emit a pulse through the water and listen for echos to return. Using that data, it's able to determine the distance from the strongest echo, which can be the seafloor, a concrete structure, or other larger obstacle.

[ 7 ] A fishfinder is an echo sounding device used by both recreational and commercial fishers.

Multibeam [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Multibeam echosounder .

[ edit ] Multibeam sonar is used to map the ocean floor A multibeam echosounder (MBES) is a type of sonar that is used to map the seabed . It emits acoustic waves in a fan shape beneath its transceiver . The time it takes for the sound waves to reflect off the seabed and return to the receiver is used to calculate the water depth. Unlike other sonars and echo sounders , MBES uses beamforming to extract directional information from the returning soundwaves, producing a swathe of depth soundings from a single ping.

Common use [ edit ] As well as an aid to navigation (most larger vessels will have at least a simple depth sounder), echo sounding is commonly used for fishing .  Variations in elevation often represent places where fish congregate.  Schools of fish will also register.

[ 8 ] Hydrography [ edit ] In areas where detailed bathymetry is required, a precise echo sounder may be used for the work of hydrography.  There are many considerations when evaluating such a system, not limited to the vertical accuracy, resolution, acoustic beamwidth of the transmit/receive beam and the acoustic frequency of the transducer .

An example of a precision dual frequency echosounder, the Teledyne Odom MkIII The majority of hydrographic echosounders are dual frequency, meaning that a low frequency pulse (typically around 24 kHz) can be transmitted at the same time as a high frequency pulse (typically around 200 kHz). As the two frequencies are discrete, [ clarification needed ] the two return signals do not typically interfere with each other. Dual frequency echosounding has many advantages, including the ability to identify a vegetation layer or a layer of soft mud on top of a layer of rock.

A screen grab of the difference between single and dual frequency echograms Most hydrographic operations use a 200 kHz transducer, which is suitable for inshore work up to 100 metres in depth.  Deeper water requires a lower frequency transducer as the acoustic signal of lower frequencies is less susceptible to attenuation in the water column.  Commonly used frequencies for deep water sounding are 33 kHz and 24 kHz.

The beamwidth of the transducer is also a consideration for the hydrographer, as to obtain the best resolution of the data gathered a narrow beamwidth is preferable.  The higher the operating frequency, the narrower the beamwidth.  Therefore, it is especially important when sounding in deep water, as the resulting footprint of the acoustic pulse can be very large once it reaches a distant sea floor.

A multispectral multibeam echosounder is an extension of a dual frequency vertical beam echosounder in that, as well as measuring two soundings directly below the sonar at two different frequencies; it measures multiple soundings at multiple frequencies, at multiple different grazing angles, and multiple different locations on the seabed. These systems are detailed further in the section called multibeam echosounder .

Echo sounders are used in laboratory applications to monitor sediment transport, scour and erosion processes in scale models (hydraulic models, flumes etc.). These can also be used to create plots of 3D contours.

Standards for hydrographic echo sounding [ edit ] The required precision and accuracy of the hydrographic echo sounder is defined by the requirements of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) for surveys that are to be undertaken to IHO standards.

[ 9 ] These values are contained within IHO publication S44.

In order to meet these standards, the surveyor must consider not only the vertical and horizontal accuracy of the echo sounder and transducer, but the survey system as a whole.  A motion sensor may be used, specifically the heave component (in single beam echosounding) to reduce soundings for the motion of the vessel experienced on the water's surface.  Once all of the uncertainties of each sensor are established, the hydrographer will create an uncertainty budget to determine whether the survey system meets the requirements laid down by IHO.

Different hydrographic organisations will have their own set of field procedures and manuals to guide their surveyors to meet the required standards.  Two examples are the US Army Corps of Engineers publication EM110-2-1003, [ 10 ] and the NOAA 'Field Procedures Manual'.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Acoustical oceanography Alexander Behm – inventor AUV Bathymeter Depth gauge Fessenden oscillator Fisheries acoustics Hydroacoustics Hydrographic survey Sonar Depth sounding Underwater acoustics References [ edit ] ^ Salous, Sana (2013).

Radio Propagation Measurement and Channel Modelling .

John Wiley & Sons . p. 424.

ISBN 9781118502327 .

^ Xu, Guochang (2010).

Sciences of Geodesy - I: Advances and Future Directions .

Springer Publishing . p. 281.

ISBN 9783642117411 .

^ Werner Schneider.

"Alexander Behm - Der Erfinder des Echolots" . Retrieved 9 April 2014 .

^ Lelong, Benoit.

"Paul Langevin et la detection sous-marine, 1914-1929. Un physicien acteur de l'innovation industrielle et militaire (Epistemologiques, 2001)" .

^ "Fessenden Fathometer amplifier - Submarine Signal Company" .

The Subchaser Archives . 20 March 2007 . Retrieved 12 April 2018 .

^ NOAA Field Procedures Manual, Office of Coast Survey website ( http://www.nauticalcharts.noaa.gov/hsd/fpm/fpm.htm Archived 10 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine ) ^ "A Smooth Operator's Guide to Underwater Sonars and Acoustic Devices" .

Blue Robotics . Retrieved 12 January 2024 .

^ "Fishfinders Guide" (in German). Archived from the original on 17 February 2017 . Retrieved 16 February 2017 .

^ International Hydrographic Bureau (February 2008).

"IHO Standards for Hydrographic Surveys" (PDF) (5th Edition). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 October 2011.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "EM 1110-2-1003 (01 Jan 02)" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

, USACE publication EM 1110-2-1003.

^ [1] Archived 16 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine , NOAA Field Procedures Manual.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Echo sounding at Wikimedia Commons "How Echoes Tell Depth of Water Under Ship" Popular Mechanics Monthly , July 1930 – drawing of details of early depth finders using echoes ELAC (1982) An Introduction to Echosounding . Honeywell-ELAC-Nautik GmbH, Kiel, 88 pp, (pdf 27.5 MB) v t e Hydroacoustics Sonar Active acoustics Baffles (submarine) Bistatic sonar Echo sounding Fessenden oscillator GLORIA sidescan sonar Multibeam echosounder Passive acoustics Scientific echosounder Side-scan sonar Sonar beamforming Sonobuoy Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System Synthetic aperture sonar Towed array sonar Upward looking sonar Ocean acoustics Acoustic release Acoustic Doppler current profiler Acoustic seabed classification Acoustical oceanography Hydrophone Long baseline acoustic positioning system Ocean acoustic tomography Short baseline acoustic positioning system Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Sound speed gradient Sound velocity probe Ultra-short baseline acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustics Underwater acoustic communication Underwater acoustic positioning system Acoustic ecology Acoustic survey in fishing Acoustic tag Animal echolocation Beached whale Deep scattering layer Fishfinder Fisheries acoustics Hearing range of marine mammals Marine mammals and sonar Whale song Related topics Acoustic signature Bioacoustics Biophony Geophysical MASINT Hydrographic survey Noise map Soundscape v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐rn2vf
Cached time: 20250812003723
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.391 seconds
Real time usage: 0.522 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1654/1000000
Revision size: 13265/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 66301/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2395/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55675/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.238/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6736462/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  421.458      1 -total
 28.30%  119.270      1 Template:Reflist
 19.48%   82.117      2 Template:Navbox
 15.48%   65.239      2 Template:Cite_book
 15.06%   63.481      1 Template:Hydroacoustics
 13.76%   58.001      1 Template:Short_description
 10.46%   44.102      1 Template:Excerpt
  7.25%   30.546      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.99%   25.243      6 Template:Cite_web
  5.52%   23.269      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:167506:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003723 and revision id 1296353316. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Echo_sounding&oldid=1296353316 " Categories : Surveying Oceanographic instrumentation Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2024 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 13:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Echo sounding 31 languages Add topic

