Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Effect 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ice storm 20 languages العربية Čeština Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Polski Simple English Svenska తెలుగు Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Weather event characterized by freezing rain For other uses, see Ice storm (disambiguation) .

Devastation caused by an ice storm Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e An ice storm , also known as a glaze event or a silver storm , is a type of winter storm characterized by freezing rain .

[ 1 ] The U.S. National Weather Service defines an ice storm as a storm which results in the accumulation of at least 0.25-inch (6.4 mm) of ice on exposed surfaces.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] They are generally not violent storms but instead are commonly perceived as gentle rains occurring at temperatures just below freezing.

Formation [ edit ] A graph showing the formation of different kinds of precipitation.

The formation of ice begins with a layer of above-freezing air above a layer of sub-freezing temperatures closer to the surface. Frozen precipitation melts to rain while falling into the warm air layer, and then begins to refreeze in the cold layer below. If the precipitate refreezes while still in the air, it will land on the ground as sleet . Alternatively, the liquid droplets can continue to fall without freezing, passing through the cold air just above the surface. This thin layer of air then cools the rain to a temperature below freezing (0 °C or 32 °F). However, the drops themselves do not freeze, a phenomenon called supercooling (or forming " supercooled drops "). When the supercooled drops strike ground or anything else below 0 °C (32 °F) (e.g. power lines, tree branches, aircraft), a layer of ice accumulates as the cold water drips off, forming a slowly thickening film of ice, hence freezing rain.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] While meteorologists can predict when and where an ice storm will occur, some storms still occur with little or no warning.

[ 5 ] In the United States, most ice storms occur in the northeastern region , but damaging storms have occurred farther south; an ice storm in February 1994 resulted in tremendous ice accumulation as far south as Mississippi, and caused reported damage in nine states.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Effect [ edit ] Power lines and groups pulled down after an ice storm. Besides disrupting transportation, ice storms can disrupt utilities by snapping lines and poles.

The freezing rain from an ice storm covers everything with heavy, smooth glaze ice .

[ 9 ] In addition to hazardous driving or walking conditions, branches or even whole trees may break from the weight of ice. Falling branches can block roads, tear down power and telephone lines, and cause other damage. Even without falling trees and tree branches, the weight of the ice itself can easily snap power lines and also break and bring down power/utility poles; even electricity pylons with steel frames. This can leave people without power for anywhere from several days to a month. According to most meteorologists , just 0.25-inch (6.4 mm)  of ice accumulation can add about 500 pounds (230 kg) of weight per line span. Damage from ice storms is easily capable of shutting down entire metropolitan areas.

Additionally, the loss of power during ice storms has indirectly caused numerous illnesses and deaths due to unintentional carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning . At lower levels, CO poisoning causes symptoms such as nausea , dizziness , fatigue , and headache , but high levels can cause unconsciousness , heart failure , and death.

[ 10 ] The relatively high incidence of CO poisoning during ice storms occurs due to the use of alternative methods of heating and cooking during prolonged power outages, common after severe ice storms.

[ 11 ] Gas generators, charcoal and propane barbecues, and kerosene heaters contribute to CO poisoning when they operate in confined locations.

[ 10 ] CO is produced when appliances burn fuel without enough oxygen present, [ 12 ] such as basements and other indoor locations.

Loss of electricity during ice storms can indirectly lead to hypothermia and result in death. It can also lead to ruptured pipes due to water freezing inside the pipes.

Gallery [ edit ] A tree covered in ice Detail of a pinecone covered in ice A buildup of ice on a branch after an ice storm Car after an ice storm A weeping willow tree damaged by an ice storm See also [ edit ] Freezing rain Ice pruning List of ice storms Power outage Sperry–Piltz Ice Accumulation Index References [ edit ] ^ "NASA Earth Data" . NASA. 2022. Archived from the original on 2022-10-13 . Retrieved 2022-07-25 .

^ Hauer, Richard J.; Dawson, Jeffrey O.; Werner, Les P. (2006).

Trees and Ice Storms - The Development of Ice Storm-Resistant Urban Tree Populations (2 ed.). College of Natural Resources, University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point, and the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences and the Office of Continuing Education, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 21, 2007.

^ "NOAA Weather Glossary" . National Weather Service. 2022.

^ Gay, David A.; Robert E. Davis (1993-12-30).

"Freezing rain and sleet climatology of the southeastern USA" .

Climate Research .

3 (1): 209– 220.

Bibcode : 1993ClRes...3..209G .

doi : 10.3354/cr003209 .

^ a b "Ice Storms" . City of Savannah, Georgia. Archived from the original on 2007-07-28 . Retrieved 2009-01-08 .

^ University of Illinois.

"Cyclones and Fronts: the definition of freezing rain" . Retrieved 2009-01-09 .

^ Irland, Lloyd C. (2000-11-15). "Ice Storms and forest impacts".

The Science of the Total Environment .

262 (1): 231– 242.

Bibcode : 2000ScTEn.262..231I .

doi : 10.1016/S0048-9697(00)00525-8 .

ISSN 0048-9697 .

PMID 11087029 .

^ "WS Jackson, MS--February 1994 Delta Ice Storm" . National Weather Service. 2022.

^ "Ice Storm Facts for Kids" . Fast Facts for Kids. 2022. Archived from the original on 2022-10-07 . Retrieved 2022-07-25 .

^ a b Hartling, L.; Brison, R.J.; Pickett, W. (November 1998).

"Cluster of Unintentional Carbon Monoxide Poisonings Presenting to the Emergency Departments of Kingston, Ontario during 'Ice Storm 98' " .

Canadian Journal of Public Health .

89 (3): 388– 390.

doi : 10.1007/BF03404080 .

PMC 6990320 .

PMID 9926497 . Archived from the original on 2011-07-06 . Retrieved 2009-11-28 .

^ Wrenn, K.; Conners, G.P. (1997).

Carbon monoxide poisoning during ice storms: A tale of two cities (4 ed.). Journal of Emergency Medicine.

^ Griefe, A.L.; Goldenhar, L.M.; Freund, E. (1997).

Carbon monoxide poisoning from gasoline-powered engines: Risk perception among midwest flood victims (3 ed.). American Journal of Public Health.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ice storms .

Ice Storms at The Weather Channel U.S. Billion-dollar Weather and Climate Events v t e Natural disasters – list by death toll Geological Mass wasting Landslide Avalanche Mudflow Debris flow Earthquake ( List ) Seismic hazard Seismic risk Soil liquefaction Volcano eruption Pyroclastic flow Lahar Volcanic ash Natural erosion Sinkhole Hydrological Flood ( List ) Coastal flood Flash flood Storm surge Other Tsunami Megatsunami Limnic eruption Meteorological Temperature Blizzard Cold wave Ice storm Heat wave Drought Megadrought Cyclonic storms Bomb cyclone Thunderstorm ( Hail ) Tornado ( Tornado outbreak ) Tropical cyclone Other Derecho Wildfire Firestorm ARkStorm Astronomical Potentially hazardous object Impact event Meteor shower Geomagnetic storm Solar flare Supernova Hypernova v t e Ice The solid state of water Major phases Amorphous solid Crystalline phases Superionic Formations Anchor Cap Cave Dune Field Glacier Iceberg ( calving ) Icicle Jam Sea Sheet Spike Stalactites Volcano Phenomena Albedo feedback Black Circle or disc Clear Crystals Firn Fog Frazil Frost Frost heave Frost flower ( sea ice ) Glaze Hail Hair ice Jacking Névé Needle Nucleus Rime Shove Shuga Slurry Slush Snow Storm Ice-related activities Bathing Blasting Blocking Climbing Fishing Rafting Sculpture Skating Sports Bandy Iceboating Cricket Curling Cycling Figure skating Ice hockey Ice racing Speed skating Short-track speed skating Tour skating Constructions Bar Bridge Hotel Igloo Palace Pier Pykrete Rink Road Work Cutting Icebox Icehouse Iceman (occupation) Pick Trade Yakhchāl Other uses Chips Core Cream Cube Pack Ice ages Glaciology Little Ice Age Pleistocene Snowball Earth Category Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Authority control databases National Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ice_storm&oldid=1303398249 " Categories : Ice storms Road hazards Snow or ice weather phenomena Water ice Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 19:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ice storm 20 languages Add topic

