Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 CLAW hypothesis 2 Anti-CLAW hypothesis 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents CLAW hypothesis 4 languages Deutsch Français Hausa Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "CLAW" redirects here. For the trade union in New Zealand, see Clothing, Laundry and Allied Workers Union of Aotearoa .

A hypothesised negative feedback loop connecting the marine biota and the climate Part of a series on Plankton By habitat Aeroplankton Geoplankton Marine plankton prokaryotes protists Freshwater plankton By taxon Algae diatoms coccolithophores dinoflagellates Protozoans radiolarians foraminiferans amoebae ciliates Bacteria cyanobacteria Archaea Viruses By size Heterotrophic picoplankton Microalgae Microzooplankton Nanophytoplankton calcareous Photosynthetic picoplankton Picoeukaryote Picoplankton Marine microplankton By trophic mode Phytoplankton Zooplankton Mixoplankton Decomposition microbial loop mycoloop viral shunt Other types Gelatinous zooplankton Holoplankton Ichthyoplankton Meroplankton Pseudoplankton Tychoplankton Blooms Algal bloom Critical depth Cyanobacterial bloom Harmful algal bloom Spring bloom Eutrophication Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt Great Calcite Belt Milky seas effect Related topics Algaculture CLAW hypothesis CPR Diel vertical migration f-ratio Marine primary production Ocean fertilization iron Paradox of the plankton Planktivore Planktology Thin layers NAAMES Category v t e The CLAW hypothesis proposes a negative feedback loop that operates between ocean ecosystems and the Earth's climate .

[ 1 ] The hypothesis specifically proposes that particular phytoplankton that produce dimethyl sulfide are responsive to variations in climate forcing , and that these responses act to stabilise the temperature of the Earth's atmosphere .  The CLAW hypothesis was originally proposed by Robert Jay Charlson , James Lovelock , Meinrat Andreae and Stephen G. Warren, and takes its acronym from the first letter of their surnames.

[ 2 ] CLAW hypothesis [ edit ] Schematic diagram of the CLAW hypothesis (Charlson et al.

, 1987) [ 1 ] Schematic diagram of the anti-CLAW hypothesis (Lovelock, 2006) [ 3 ] The hypothesis describes a feedback loop that begins with an increase in the available energy from the sun acting to increase the growth rates of phytoplankton by either a physiological effect (due to elevated temperature) or enhanced photosynthesis (due to increased irradiance ).  Certain phytoplankton, such as coccolithophorids , synthesise dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), and their enhanced growth increases the production of this osmolyte .  In turn, this leads to an increase in the concentration of its breakdown product, dimethyl sulfide (DMS), first in seawater, and then in the atmosphere.  DMS is oxidised in the atmosphere to form sulfur dioxide , and this leads to the production of sulfate aerosols .  These aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and increase cloud droplet number, which in turn elevate the liquid water content of clouds and cloud area.  This acts to increase cloud albedo , leading to greater reflection of incident sunlight , and a decrease in the forcing that initiated this chain of events.  The figure to the right shows a summarising schematic diagram .  Note that the feedback loop can operate in the reverse direction, such that a decline in solar energy leads to reduced cloud cover and thus to an increase in the amount of solar energy reaching the Earth's surface.

A significant feature of the chain of interactions described above is that it creates a negative feedback loop, whereby a change to the climate system (increased/decreased solar input) is ultimately counteracted and damped by the loop.  As such, the CLAW hypothesis posits an example of planetary-scale homeostasis or complex adaptive system , consistent with the Gaia hypothesis framed by one of the original authors of the CLAW hypothesis, James Lovelock.

[ 4 ] Some subsequent studies of the CLAW hypothesis have uncovered evidence to support its mechanism, [ 2 ] [ 5 ] although this is not unequivocal.

[ 6 ] Other researchers have suggested that a CLAW-like mechanism may operate in the Earth's sulfur cycle without the requirement of an active biological component.

[ 7 ] A 2014 review article criticised the hypothesis for being an oversimplification and that the effect might be much weaker than proposed.

[ 8 ] Anti-CLAW hypothesis [ edit ] In his 2006 book The Revenge of Gaia , Lovelock proposed that instead of providing negative feedback in the climate system, the components of the CLAW hypothesis may act to create a positive feedback loop .

[ 3 ] Under future global warming , increasing temperature may stratify the world ocean , decreasing the supply of nutrients from the deep ocean to its productive euphotic zone . Consequently, phytoplankton activity will decline with a concomitant fall in the production of DMS. In a reverse of the CLAW hypothesis, this decline in DMS production will lead to a decrease in cloud condensation nuclei and a fall in cloud albedo .  The consequence of this will be further climate warming which may lead to even less DMS production (and further climate warming). The figure to the right shows a summarising schematic diagram.

Evidence for the anti-CLAW hypothesis is constrained by similar uncertainties as those of the sulfur cycle feedback loop of the CLAW hypothesis.  However, researchers simulating future oceanic primary production have found evidence of declining production with increasing ocean stratification, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] leaving open the possibility that such a mechanism may exist.

See also [ edit ] Earth science Geophysiology Iron fertilization References [ edit ] ^ a b Charlson, R. J., Lovelock, J. E.

, Andreae, M. O. and Warren, S. G. (1987). "Oceanic phytoplankton, atmospheric sulphur, cloud albedo and climate".

Nature .

326 (6114): 655– 661.

Bibcode : 1987Natur.326..655C .

doi : 10.1038/326655a0 .

S2CID 4321239 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Andreae, M. O., Elbert, W. and Demora, S. J. (1995).

"Biogenic sulfur emissions and aerosols over the tropical South Atlantic, 3. Atmospheric dimethylsulfide, aerosols and cloud condensation nuclei" .

J. Geophys. Res .

100 (D6): 11335– 56.

Bibcode : 1995JGR...10011335A .

doi : 10.1029/94JD02828 . Archived from the original on 2007-09-30 . Retrieved 2007-08-30 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Lovelock, James (2007).

The Revenge of Gaia . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-102597-1 .

^ Lovelock, J.E. (2000) [1979].

Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth (3rd ed.).

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-286218-9 .

^ Cropp, R.A., Gabric, A.J., McTainsh, G.H., Braddock, R.D. and Tindale, N. (2005).

"Coupling between ocean biota and atmospheric aerosols: Dust, dimethylsulphide, or artifact?" .

Global Biogeochemical Cycles .

19 (4): GB4002.

Bibcode : 2005GBioC..19.4002C .

doi : 10.1029/2004GB002436 .

hdl : 10072/4405 .

S2CID 13631729 . Archived from the original on 2007-08-31 . Retrieved 2007-08-30 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Vallina, S. M., Simo, R., Gasso, S., De Boyer-Montegut, C., del Rio, E., Jurado, E. and Dachs, J. (2007).

"Analysis of a potential "solar radiation dose-dimethylsulfide-cloud condensation nuclei" link from globally mapped seasonal correlations" .

Global Biogeochemical Cycles .

21 (2): GB2004.

Bibcode : 2007GBioC..21.2004V .

doi : 10.1029/2006GB002787 .

hdl : 10261/11184 .

S2CID 128377799 . Archived from the original on 2007-09-30 . Retrieved 2007-08-30 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Shaw, G.E.

; Benner, R.L.; Cantrell, W.; Clarke, A.D. (1998). "The regulation of climate: A sulfate particle feedback loop involving deep convection — An editorial essay".

Climate Change .

39 : 23– 33.

doi : 10.1023/A:1005341506115 .

S2CID 150898991 .

^ Green, Tamara; Hatton, Angela (1 September 2014).

"The CLAW hypothesis: a new perspective on the role of biogenic sulphur in the regulation of global climate" .

Oceanography and Marine Biology .

52 : 315– 336.

doi : 10.1201/b17143-7 .

ISBN 9780429161391 .

^ Cox, P. M., Betts, R. A., Jones, C. D., Spall, S. A. and Totterdell, I. J. (2000). "Acceleration of global warming due to carbon-cycle feedbacks in a coupled climate model".

Nature .

408 (6809): 184– 7.

Bibcode : 2000Natur.408..184C .

doi : 10.1038/35041539 .

PMID 11089968 .

S2CID 2689847 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Steinacher, M.; Joos, F.; Fr ¨ olicher, T. L.; Bopp, L.; Cadule, P.; Cocco, V.; Doney, S. C.; Gehlen, M.; Lindsay, K.; Moore, J. K.; Schneider, B. & Segschneider, J. (2010).

"Projected 21st century decrease in marine productivity: a multi-model analysis" .

Biogeosciences .

7 (3): 979– 1005.

Bibcode : 2010BGeo....7..979S .

doi : 10.5194/bg-7-979-2010 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0011-F69E-5 .

External links [ edit ] Gaia and CLAW , Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, Mainz DMS and climate , Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, Seattle v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index v t e Plankton About plankton Algal bloom CLAW hypothesis High lipid content microalgae Holoplankton Marine microorganisms Meroplankton Mycoplankton Milky seas effect Paradox of the plankton Planktivore Planktology Red tide Spring bloom Thin layers More...

By size Eukaryotic picoplankton Heterotrophic picoplankton Marine microplankton Microphyte (microalgae) Nanophytoplankton Photosynthetic picoplankton Picobiliphyte Picoeukaryote Picoplankton Bacterioplankton Aeromonas salmonicida Cyanobacteria Cyanobiont Cyanotoxin Enteric redmouth disease Flavobacterium Flavobacterium columnare Pelagibacter ubique Marine bacteriophage SAR11 clade Streptococcus iniae Phytoplankton Auxospore Axodine Bacteriastrum Chaetoceros Chaetocerotaceae Coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi Eustigmatophyte Frustule Stramenopile Nannochloropsis Navicula Prasinophyceae Raphidophyte Thalassiosira pseudonana Diatom orders Centrales Pennales Classes: Coscinodiscophyceae Fragilariophyceae Bacillariophyceae Flagellates Brevetoxin Choanoflagellates Dinoflagellates Flagellum Pfiesteria piscicida Saxitoxin Symbiodinium Velvet (fish disease) Zooplankton Chaetognatha Ciguatera Ctenophora Gelatinous zooplankton Ichthyoplankton Jellyfish Marine larvae Crustacean larvae Salmon louse Sea louse Copepod orders Calanoida Canuelloida Cyclopoida Gelyelloida Harpacticoida Misophrioida Monstrilloida Mormonilloida Platycopioida Siphonostomatoida More...

Related topics Aeroplankton Algaculture Algal mat Algal nutrient solutions Artificial seawater Autotrophs Biological pump Diel vertical migration Dimethylsulfoniopropionate f-ratio Fish diseases and parasites Heterotroph HNLC Macroalgae Manta trawl Marine mucilage Microbial mat Ocean acidification Marine microorganisms Marine primary production Pseudoplankton Stromatolite Tychoplankton Zoid C-MORE CPR AusCPR MOCNESS SCAR Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CLAW_hypothesis&oldid=1301610556 " Categories : Atmospheric radiation Climate change feedbacks Particulates Satellite meteorology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 19:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents CLAW hypothesis 4 languages Add topic

