Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Greco-Roman tradition Toggle Greco-Roman tradition subsection 2.1 Early Greece 2.2 Classical Greece 2.3 Roman tradition 3 Old Testament studies 4 Gnosticism 5 Hermeticism and alchemy 6 Hawaiian tradition 7 Modern usage 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Works cited 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Chaos (cosmogony) 9 languages العربية Čeština فارسی Français Հայերեն ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių Português Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Void state preceding creation This article is about the cosmological void. For other uses, see Chaos (disambiguation) .

George Frederic Watts – Chaos In the context of religious cosmologony, Chaos ( Ancient Greek : χάος , romanized : kháos ) refers to the division of reality outside or in contrast to the ordered cosmos. As such it refers to a state, place, or time, beyond the known, familiar, and reliable world, often said to be inhabited by strange, ominous, or demonic beings.

[ 1 ] According to the creation of the universe (the cosmos) in early Greek cosmology , Chaos was the first being to exist.

Etymology [ edit ] Greek kháos ( χάος ) means ' emptiness , vast void, chasm , abyss ', [ a ] related to the verbs kháskō ( χάσκω ) and khaínō ( χαίνω ) 'gape, be wide open', from Proto-Indo-European *ǵʰeh₂n- , [ 2 ] cognate to Old English geanian , 'to gape', whence English yawn .

[ 3 ] It may also mean space, the expanse of air, the nether abyss, or infinite darkness .

[ 4 ] Pherecydes of Syros (fl. 6th century BC) interprets chaos as water, like something formless that can be differentiated.

[ 5 ] Greco-Roman tradition [ edit ] Greek deities series Titans and Olympians Water deities Chthonic deities Personified concepts Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Ourea Phanes Pontus Tartarus Uranus v t e Hesiod and the pre-Socratics use the Greek term in the context of cosmogony . Hesiod's Chaos has been interpreted as either "the gaping void above the Earth created when Earth and Sky are separated from their primordial unity" or "the gaping space below the Earth on which Earth rests".

[ 6 ] Passages in Hesiod's Theogony suggest that Chaos was located below Earth but above Tartarus .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Primal Chaos was sometimes said to be the true foundation of reality, particularly by philosophers such as Heraclitus .

Early Greece [ edit ] Main article: Early Greek cosmology In Hesiod 's Theogony , Chaos was the first thing to exist: "at first Chaos came to be" (or was), [ 9 ] but next (possibly out of Chaos) came Gaia , Tartarus , and Eros (elsewhere the name Eros is used for a son of Aphrodite ).

[ b ] Unambiguously "born" from Chaos were Erebus and Nyx .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] For Hesiod, Chaos, like Tartarus, though personified enough to have borne children, was also a place, far away, underground and "gloomy", beyond which lived the Titans ; [ 12 ] and, like the earth, the ocean, and the upper air, it was also capable of being affected by Zeus's thunderbolts.

[ 13 ] The notion of the temporal infinity was familiar to the Greek mind from remote antiquity in the religious conception of immortality .

[ 14 ] The main object of the first efforts to explain the world remained the description of its growth, from a beginning. They believed that the world arose out from a primal unity, and that this substance was the permanent base of all its being.

Anaximander claims that the origin is apeiron (the unlimited), a divine and perpetual substance less definite than the common elements ( water , air , fire , and earth ) as they were understood to the early Greek philosophers. Everything is generated from apeiron , and must return there according to necessity.

[ 15 ] A conception of the nature of the world was that the earth below its surface stretches down indefinitely and has its roots on or above Tartarus , the lower part of the underworld.

[ 16 ] In a phrase of Xenophanes , "The upper limit of the earth borders on air, near our feet. The lower limit reaches down to the "apeiron" (i.e. the unlimited)." [ 16 ] The sources and limits of the earth, the sea, the sky, Tartarus , and all things are located in a great windy-gap, which seems to be infinite, and is a later specification of "chaos".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Classical Greece [ edit ] In Aristophanes 's comedy Birds , first there was Chaos, Night, Erebus, and Tartarus, from Night came Eros, and from Eros and Chaos came the race of birds.

At the beginning there was only Chaos, Night, dark Erebus, and deep Tartarus. Earth, the air and heaven had no existence. Firstly, blackwinged Night laid a germless egg in the bosom of the infinite deeps of Erebus, and from this, after the revolution of long ages, sprang the graceful Eros with his glittering golden wings, swift as the whirlwinds of the tempest. He mated in deep Tartarus with dark Chaos, winged like himself, and thus hatched forth our race, which was the first to see the light. That of the Immortals did not exist until Eros had brought together all the ingredients of the world, and from their marriage Heaven, Ocean, Earth, and the imperishable race of blessed gods sprang into being. Thus our origin is very much older than that of the dwellers in Olympus. We [birds] are the offspring of Eros; there are a thousand proofs to show it. We have wings and we lend assistance to lovers. How many handsome youths, who had sworn to remain insensible, have opened their thighs because of our power and have yielded themselves to their lovers when almost at the end of their youth, being led away by the gift of a quail, a waterfowl, a goose, or a cock.

[ 18 ] In Plato 's Timaeus , the main work of Platonic cosmology, the concept of chaos finds its equivalent in the Greek expression chôra , which is interpreted, for instance, as shapeless space ( chôra ) in which material traces ( ichnê ) of the elements are in disordered motion (Timaeus 53a–b). However, the Platonic chôra is not a variation of the atomistic interpretation of the origin of the world, as is made clear by Plato's statement that the most appropriate definition of the chôra is "a receptacle of all becoming – its wetnurse, as it were" (Timaeus 49a), notabene a receptacle for the creative act of the demiurge, the world-maker.

[ 19 ] Aristotle , in the context of his investigation of the concept of space in physics, "problematizes the interpretation of Hesiod's chaos as 'void' or 'place without anything in it'.

[ 20 ] Aristotle understands chaos as something that exists independently of bodies and without which no perceptible bodies can exist. 'Chaos' is thus brought within the framework of an explicitly physical investigation. It has now outgrown the mythological understanding to a great extent and, in Aristotle's work, serves above all to challenge the atomists who assert the existence of empty space." [ 19 ] Roman tradition [ edit ] For Ovid , (43 BC – 17/18 AD), in his Metamorphoses , Chaos was an unformed mass, where all the elements were jumbled up together in a "shapeless heap".

[ 21 ] Before the ocean and the earth appeared—before the skies  had overspread them all— the face of Nature in a vast expanse was naught but Chaos uniformly waste.

It was a rude and undeveloped mass, that nothing made except a ponderous weight; and all discordant elements confused, were there congested in a shapeless heap.

[ 22 ] According to the Fabulae (c. 2nd century AD), attributed to Hyginus : "From Mist ( Caligo ) came Chaos. From Chaos and Mist, came Night ( Nox ), Day ( Dies ), Darkness ( Erebus ), and Aether ." [ 23 ] [ c ] An Orphic tradition apparently had Chaos as the son of Chronus and Ananke .

[ 24 ] Old Testament studies [ edit ] Further information: Chaoskampf Chaos by Wenceslaus Hollar (1607–1677).

Since the classic 1895 German work Schöpfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit by Hermann Gunkel , various historians in the field of modern biblical studies have associated the theme of chaos in the earlier Babylonian cosmology with the Genesis creation narrative .

[ 25 ] One locus of focus has been with respect to the term abyss / tohu wa-bohu in Genesis 1:2 . The term may refer to a state of non-being before creation [ 26 ] or to a formless state. In the Book of Genesis , the spirit of God is moving upon the face of the waters, displacing the earlier state of the universe that is likened to a "watery chaos" upon which there is choshek (which translated from the Hebrew is darkness/confusion).

[ 14 ] This model of a primordial state of matter has been opposed by the Church Fathers from the 2nd century, who posited a creation ex nihilo by an omnipotent God .

[ 27 ] Some scholars, however, reject the association between biblical creation and notions of chaos from Babylonian myths. The basis is that the terms themselves in Genesis 1:2 are not semantically related to chaos, and that the entire cosmos exists in a state of chaos in Babylonian myth, whereas at most this can be said of the earth in Genesis.

[ 28 ] The Septuagint makes no use of χάος in the context of creation, instead using the term for גיא , "cleft, gorge, chasm", in Micah 1:6 and Zachariah 14:4.

[ 29 ] The Vulgate , however, renders the χάσμα μέγα or "great gulf" between heaven and hell in Luke 16:26 as chaos magnum .

Gnosticism [ edit ] According to the Gnostic On the Origin of the World , Chaos was not the first thing to exist. When the nature of the immortal aeons was completed, Sophia desired something like the light which first existed to come into being. Her desire appears as a likeness with incomprehensible greatness that covers the heavenly universe, diminishing its inner darkness while a shadow appears on the outside which causes Chaos to be formed. From Chaos, every deity including the Demiurge is born.

[ 30 ] Hermeticism and alchemy [ edit ] Further information: Prima materia Magnum Chaos , wood-inlay by Giovan Francesco Capoferri at the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore in Bergamo , based on a design by Lorenzo Lotto The Greco-Roman tradition of prima materia , notably including the 5th- and 6th-century Orphic cosmogony, was merged with biblical notions ( Tehom ) in Christianity and inherited by alchemy and Renaissance magic .

[ citation needed ] The cosmic egg of Orphism was taken as the raw material for the alchemical magnum opus in early Greek alchemy. The first stage of the process of producing the philosopher's stone , i.e., nigredo , was identified with chaos. Because of association with the Genesis creation narrative , where "the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters" (Gen. 1:2), Chaos was further identified with the classical element of Water .

Ramon Llull (1232–1315) wrote a Liber Chaos , in which he identifies Chaos as the primal form or matter created by God. Swiss alchemist Paracelsus (1493–1541) uses chaos synonymously with "classical element" (because the primeval chaos is imagined as a formless congestion of all elements). Paracelsus thus identifies Earth as "the chaos of the gnomi ", i.e., the element of the gnomes , through which these spirits move unobstructed as fish do through water, or birds through air.

[ 31 ] An alchemical treatise by Heinrich Khunrath , printed in Frankfurt in 1708, was entitled Chaos .

[ 32 ] The 1708 introduction states that the treatise was written in 1597 in Magdeburg, in the author's 23rd year of practicing alchemy.

[ 33 ] The treatise purports to quote Paracelsus on the point that "[t]he light of the soul, by the will of the Triune God, made all earthly things appear from the primal Chaos".

[ 34 ] Martin Ruland the Younger , in his 1612 Lexicon Alchemiae , states, "A crude mixture of matter or another name for Materia Prima is Chaos , as it is in the Beginning." The term gas in chemistry was coined by Dutch chemist Jan Baptist van Helmont in the 17th century directly based on the Paracelsian notion of chaos. The g in gas is due to the Dutch pronunciation of this letter as a spirant , also employed to pronounce Greek χ .

[ 35 ] Hawaiian tradition [ edit ] In Hawaiian folklore , a triad of deities known as the "Ku-Kaua-Kahi" (a.k.a. "Fundamental Supreme Unity") were said to have existed before and during Chaos ever since eternity, or put in Hawaiian terms, mai ka po mai , meaning "from the time of night, darkness, Chaos". They eventually broke the surrounding Po ("night"), and light entered the universe. Next the group created three heavens for dwelling areas together with the Earth, Sun, Moon, stars, and assistant spirits.

[ 36 ] Modern usage [ edit ] The term chaos has been adopted in modern comparative mythology and religious studies as referring to the primordial state before creation, strictly combining two separate notions of primordial waters or a primordial darkness from which a new order emerges and a primordial state as a merging of opposites, such as heaven and earth, which must be separated by a creator deity in an act of cosmogony .

[ 37 ] In both cases, chaos referring to a notion of a primordial state contains the cosmos in potentia but needs to be formed by a demiurge before the world can begin its existence.

The use of chaos in the derived sense of "complete disorder or confusion" first appears in Elizabethan Early Modern English , originally implying satirical exaggeration.

[ 38 ] " Chaos " in the well-defined sense of chaotic complex system is in turn derived from this usage.

See also [ edit ] Abzu – Primeval sea in Mesopotamian mythology Ginnungagap – Primordial void mentioned in the Gylfaginning Greek primordial deities – First generation of deities in Greek mythology Hundun – Primordial and central chaos in Chinese cosmogony Nu – Ancient Egyptian personification of the primordial watery abyss Śūnya and śūnyatā in Hindu and Buddhist religions Tiamat – Primordial goddess of ancient Babylon religion Tohu va bohu – In the Genesis creation narrative, the earth's condition immediately before light's creation Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets The Void – Philosophical concept of emptiness Notes [ edit ] ^ West 1966 , p. 192 line 116, Χάος , "best translated Chasm"; English chasm is a loan from Greek χάσμα , which is root-cognate with χάος.

Most 2006 , p. 13, translates Χάος as "Chasm", and notes: (n. 7): "Usually translated as 'Chaos'; but that suggests to us, misleadingly, a jumble of disordered matter, whereas Hesiod's term indicates instead a gap or opening".

^ According to Gantz 1996 , pp. 4–5: "With regard to all three of these figures – Gaia, Tartaros, and Eros – we should note that Hesiod does not say they arose from (as opposed to after ) Chaos, although this is often assumed." For example, Morford & Lenardon 2007 , p. 57, makes these three descendants of Chaos saying they came "presumably out of Chaos, just as Hesiod actually states that 'from Chaos' came Erebus and dark Night".

Tripp 1970 , p. 159, says simply that Gaia, Tartarus and Eros, came "out of Chaos, or together with it" .

Caldwell 1987 , pp. 33, n. 116–122, however, interprets Hesiod as saying that Chaos, Gaia, Tartarus, and Eros, all "are spontaneously generated without source or cause". Later writers commonly make Eros the son of Aphrodite and Ares , though several other parentages are also given.

^ Bremmer 2008 , p.

p. 5 translates Caligo as 'Darkness'; according to him: "Hyginus ... started his Fabulae with a strange hodgepodge of Greek and Roman cosmogonies and early genealogies. It begins as follows: Ex Caligine Chaos. Ex Chao et Caligine Nox Dies Erebus Aether . — (Praefatio 1) His genealogy looks like a derivation from Hesiod, but it starts with the un-Hesiodic and un-Roman Caligo , 'Darkness'. Darkness probably did occur in a cosmogonic poem of Alcman, but it seems only fair to say that it was not prominent in Greek cosmogonies." References [ edit ] ^ Chaos , doi : 10.1163/1872-5287_bdr_COM_00075 , retrieved 2025-06-19 ^ R. S. P. Beekes , Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, pp. 1614 and 1616–7.

^ "chaos" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Lidell-Scott, A Greek–English Lexicon chaos ^ Kirk, Raven & Schofield 2003 , p. 57 ^ Moorton, Richard F. Jr. (2001).

"Hesiod as Precursor to the Presocratic Philosophers: A Voeglinian View" . Louisiana State University. Archived from the original on 2008-12-11 . Retrieved 2008-12-04 .

^ Gantz 1996 , p. 3.

^ Hesiod .

Theogony .

813–814 , 700 , 740 – via Perseus, Tufts University .

^ Gantz 1996 , p. 3 says "the Greek will allow both".

^ Gantz 1996 , pp. 4–5.

^ Hesiod .

Theogony .

123 – via Persius, Tufts University .

^ Hesiod .

Theogony .

814 – via Persius, Tufts University .

And beyond, away from all the gods, live the Titans, beyond gloomy Chaos ^ Hesiod .

Theogony .

740 – via Perseus, Tufts University .

^ a b Guthrie 2000 , pp. 59, 60, 83.

^ Nilsson, Vol.I, p.743 [ full citation needed ] ; Guthrie 1952 , p. 87.

^ a b c Kirk, Raven & Schofield 2003 , pp. 9, 10, 20.

^ Hesiod .

Theogony .

740–765 – via Perseus, Tufts University .

^ Aristophanes 1938 , 693–699 ; Morford & Lenardon 2007 , pp. 57–58.

Caldwell 1987 , p. 2, describes this avian-declared theogony as "comedic parody".

^ a b Lobenhofer 2020 .

^ Aristotle .

Physics . IV 1 208b27–209a2 [...] ^ Ovid .

Metamorphoses .

1.5 ff.

– via Perseus, Tufts University .

^ Ovid & More 1922 , 1.5ff .

^ Gaius Julius Hyginus .

Fabulae . Translated by Smith; Trzaskoma.

Preface .

^ Ogden 2013 , pp. 36–37.

^ Gunkel 1910 , HKAT I.1; Tsumura 2022 , p. 254.

^ Westermann 1983 ; Tsumura 2005 .

^ Gerhard May, Schöpfung aus dem Nichts. Die Entstehung der Lehre von der creatio ex nihilo , AKG 48, Berlin / New York, 1978, 151f.

^ Tsumura 2022 , p. 255, 281.

^ "Lexicon :: Strong's H1516 – gay' " .

www.blueletterbible.org .

^ Marvin Meyer ; Willis Barnstone (2009). "On the Origin of the World".

The Gnostic Bible .

Shambhala . Retrieved 2021-10-14 .

^ De Nymphis etc. Wks. 1658 II. 391 [ full citation needed ] ^ Khunrath, Heinrich (1708).

Vom Hylealischen, das ist Pri-materialischen Catholischen oder Allgemeinen Natürlichen Chaos der naturgemässen Alchymiae und Alchymisten: Confessio .

^ Szulakowska 2000 , p. 79.

^ Szulakowska 2000 , p. 91, quoting Khunrath 1708 , p. 68.

^ "halitum illum Gas vocavi, non longe a Chao veterum secretum." Ortus Medicinæ, ed. 1652, p. 59a, cited after the Oxford English Dictionary .

^ Thrum, Thomas (1907).

Hawaiian Folk Tales .

A. C. McClurg . p. 15.

^ Mircea Eliade , article "Chaos" in Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3rd ed. vol. 1, Tübingen, 1957, 1640f.

^ Stephen Gosson , The schoole of abuse, containing a plesaunt inuectiue against poets, pipers, plaiers, iesters and such like caterpillers of a commonwelth (1579), p. 53 (cited after OED ): "They make their volumes no better than [...] a huge Chaos of foule disorder." Works cited [ edit ] Aristophanes (1938).

"Birds" . In O'Neill, Jr, Eugene (ed.).

The Complete Greek Drama . Vol. 2. New York: Random House – via Perseus Digital Library.

Bremmer, Jan N. (2008).

Greek Religion and Culture, the Bible and the Ancient Near East . Jerusalem Studies in Religion and Culture. Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-16473-4 .

LCCN 2008005742 .

Caldwell, Richard (1987).

Hesiod's Theogony . Focus Publishing/R. Pullins Company.

ISBN 978-0-941051-00-2 .

Gantz, Timothy (1996).

Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-5360-9 .

Gunkel, H.

(1910).

Genesis . Göttinger Handkommentar zum Alten Testament (in German). Göttingen.

Guthrie, W. K. (April 1952). "The Presocratic World-picture".

The Harvard Theological Review .

45 (2): 87– 104.

doi : 10.1017/S0017816000020745 .

S2CID 162375625 .

Guthrie, W. K. C. (2000).

A History of Greek Philosophy: Volume 1, The Earlier Presocratics and the Pythagoreans . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-29420-1 .

Kirk, G. S.; Raven, J. E.; Schofield, M. (2003).

The Presocratic philosophers . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-27455-9 .

Lobenhofer, Stefan (2020).

"Chaos" . In Kirchhoff, Thomas (ed.).

Online Lexikon Naturphilosophie [ Online Encyclopedia Philosophy of Nature ].

Online Encyclopedia Philosophy of Nature .

University of Heidelberg .

doi : 10.11588/oepn.2019.0.68092 .

Morford, Mark P. O.; Lenardon, Robert J. (2007).

Classical Mythology (8th ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530805-1 .

Most, G. W. (2006).

Hesiod: Theogony, Works and Days, Testimonia .

Loeb Classical Library . Vol. 57. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-99622-9 .

Ogden, Daniel (2013).

Dragons, Serpents, and Slayers in the Classical and early Christian Worlds: A sourcebook . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-992509-4 .

Publius Ovidius Naso (1922).

Metamorphoses . Translated by More, Brookes. Boston: Cornhill Publishing Co – via Perseus Digital Library.

Szulakowska, Urszula (2000).

The alchemy of light: geometry and optics in late Renaissance alchemical illustration . Symbola et Emblemata – Studies in Renaissance and Baroque Symbolism. Vol. 10. BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-11690-0 .

Tripp, Edward (1970).

Crowell's Handbook of Classical Mythology (1st ed.). Thomas Y. Crowell Co.

ISBN 0-690-22608-X .

Tsumura, D. (2005) [1989].

Creation and Destruction. A Reappraisal of the Chaoskampf Theory in the Old Testament (2nd ed.). Winona Lake, IN: Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 978-1-57506-106-1 .

Tsumura, David Toshio (2022).

"Chaos and Chaoskampf in the Bible: Is "Chaos" a Suitable Term to Describe Creation or Conflict in the Bible?" . In Watson, Rebecca S.; Curtis, Adrian H. W. (eds.).

Conversations on Canaanite and Biblical Themes Creation, Chaos and Monotheism . De Gruyter. pp.

253– 281.

West, M. L.

(1966).

Hesiod: Theogony . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-814169-6 .

Westermann, C. (1983) [1974].

Genesis, Kapitel 1–11 . Biblischer Kommentar Altes Testament (in German). Vol. I/1 (3rd ed.). Neukirchen-Vluyn.

Further reading [ edit ] Aristophanes (1907). Hall, F.W.; Geldart, W.M. (eds.).

Aristophanes Comoediae (in Greek). Vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press – via Perseus Digital Library.

Day, John (1985).

God's conflict with the dragon and the sea: echoes of a Canaanite myth in the Old Testament . Cambridge Oriental Publications.

ISBN 978-0-521-25600-1 .

Hesiod (1914). "Theogony".

The Homeric Hymns and Homerica (in English and Greek). Translated by Evelyn-White, Hugh G. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press – via Perseus Digital Library.

Greek text available from the same website .

Hyginus . Grant, Mary (ed.).

Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus . Translated by Grant, Mary. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies – via Topos Text Project.

Jaeger, Werner (1952).

The theology of the early Greek philosophers: the Gifford lectures 1936 . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

OCLC 891905501 .

Miller, Robert D. (2014). "Tracking the Dragon across the Ancient Near East".

Archiv Orientální .

82 (2): 225– 45.

doi : 10.47979/aror.j.82.2.225-245 .

hdl : 2263/58405 .

Publius Ovidius Naso (1892). Magnus, Hugo (ed.).

Metamorphoses (in Latin). Gotha, Germany: Friedr. Andr. Perthes – via Perseus Digital Library.

Smith, William (1873).

"Chaos" .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . London – via Perseus Digital Library.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Watson, Rebecca S. (2005).

Chaos Uncreated: A Reassessment of the Theme of "Chaos" in the Hebrew Bible . De Gruyter.

doi : 10.1515/9783110900866 .

ISBN 978-3-11-017993-4 .

Wyatt, Nicolas (2022).

"Distinguishing Wood and Trees in the Waters: Creation in Biblical Thought" . In Watson, Rebecca S.; Curtis, Adrian H.W. (eds.).

Conversations on Canaanite and Biblical Themes Creation, Chaos and Monotheism . De Gruyter. pp.

203– 252.

v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Thelema Organizations A∴A∴ Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica Fraternitas Saturni O∴A∴A∴ Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn Ordo Templi Orientis Society Ordo Templi Orientis Thelemic Order of the Golden Dawn Typhonian Order Personalities List of Thelemites Ankh-af-na-khonsu Aleister Crowley Kenneth Anger Allan Bennett William Breeze Mary Butts Marjorie Cameron Lon Milo DuQuette Jeanne Robert Foster J. F. C. Fuller Karl Germer Kenneth Grant Lady Frieda Harris Leah Hirsig Christopher Hyatt Charles Stansfeld Jones George Cecil Jones Richard Kaczynski Rose Edith Kelly James Lees Grady Louis McMurtry Mogg Morgan Marcelo Ramos Motta Nema Andahadna Victor Neuburg Sara Northrup Jack Parsons Helen Parsons Smith Theodor Reuss C. F. Russell Phyllis Seckler Wilfred Talbot Smith Leila Waddell James Wasserman Sam Webster Jane Wolfe Thelemic texts Aleister Crowley bibliography The Book of Lies The Book of the Law ( Liber AL vel Legis ) The Book of Thoth Clouds without Water Collected Works Confessions The Diary of a Drug Fiend Eight Lectures on Yoga The Equinox The Blue Equinox The Equinox of the Gods The Holy Books of Thelema Konx Om Pax The Law is for All Liber 777 Liber Aleph Liber OZ Liber Pennae Praenumbra Liber Resh Liber Trigrammaton Little Essays Toward Truth Magick (Book 4) Magick Without Tears Moonchild One Star in Sight The Stratagem and other Stories Thoth Tarot The Vision and the Voice White Stains Concepts and ideas 93 Abyss Aeon Agape Astral projection Body of light English Qaballa Great Work Hermetic Qabalah Holy Guardian Angel Magical formula Night of Pan Stele of Revealing Stellar wisdom True Will Magick Abrahadabra Ceremonial magic Enochian magic Eroto-comatose lucidity Goetia Obeah and wanga Sex magic Ceremony and ritual Liber Resh Pentagram Ritual Bornless Ritual Gnostic Mass Rites of Eleusis Godforms Nuit Hadit Heru-ra-ha Aiwass Therion Babalon Chaos Ma'at Harpocrates Symbolism Number of the beast Pentagram Rose Cross Tree of Life Unicursal hexagram Related topics Abbey of Thelema Abramelin oil Agape Lodge Boleskine House Book of Abramelin Cake of Light Choronzon Dianism Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn IPSOS Magical alphabet Magical organization Solar deity Solar Lodge The Beast Whore of Babylon Portals : History of science Science Astronomy Stars Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐g9sgw
Cached time: 20250816114916
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.014 seconds
Real time usage: 1.247 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6711/1000000
Revision size: 31324/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 491395/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8182/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 175864/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.590/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17587376/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  908.474      1 -total
 18.77%  170.537     28 Template:Navbox
 18.76%  170.399      2 Template:Reflist
 18.31%  166.358     36 Template:Cite_book
  8.78%   79.770      1 Template:Langx
  8.41%   76.358      1 Template:Greek_deities_(primordial)
  8.26%   75.049      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.38%   67.064      1 Template:Citation
  6.41%   58.270      8 Template:Annotated_link
  6.10%   55.429      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:728004:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816114916 and revision id 1296746565. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chaos_(cosmogony)&oldid=1296746565 " Categories : Chaos (cosmogony) Creation myths Greek primordial deities Greek underworld Places in Greek mythology Mythological archetypes Words and phrases derived from Greek mythology Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from April 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Proto-Indo-European-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 maint: location missing publisher This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 00:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chaos (cosmogony) 9 languages Add topic

