Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 2.1 Jewish streams and movements 2.2 Education 2.2.1 Schools 2.2.2 Higher education 2.2.3 Institutions of higher religious study 3 Institutions Toggle Institutions subsection 3.1 Support for Israel 3.2 Rabbinical courts 4 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 4.1 Significant Jewish population centres 4.1.1 Melbourne 4.1.2 Sydney 4.1.3 Perth 4.1.4 Adelaide 4.2 Assimilation and demographic changes 4.3 Distribution of Jewish Australians 4.4 Languages 5 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 5.1 Academics 5.2 Artists and entertainers 5.3 Business people 5.4 Legal system 5.5 Politicians 5.6 Rabbis 5.7 Sportspeople 5.8 Other 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Australian Jews 1 language עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic and religious group in Australia Ethnic group Australian Jews יהדות אוסטרליה ‎ Total population 91,022 – 250,000 [ 1 ] (0.4%–1% of the Australian population) Regions with significant populations Melbourne , Sydney and other metropolitan areas Languages Australian English ( predominant ) Hebrew , Yiddish , Russian , Hungarian , Romanian , French , Persian , Arabic , Afrikaans , Bukhori , Polish , German , Chinese .

Religion Judaism · Jewish secularism Related ethnic groups Anglo-Israelis and Israeli Australians Part of a series on Jews and Judaism Etymology Who is a Jew?

Jewish studies Religion God in Judaism ( names ) Principles of faith Mitzvot ( 613 ) Halakha Shabbat Holidays Prayer Tzedakah Land of Israel Brit Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Baal teshuva Philosophy Ethics Kabbalah Messiah Claimants Customs Rites Synagogue Rabbi Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Talmud Mishnah Gemara Rabbinic Midrash Tosefta Targum Beit Yosef Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Zohar History General Timeline Land of Israel Name "Judea" Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Leaders Modern historiography Historical population comparisons Ancient Israel Twelve Tribes of Israel Kingdom of Judah Kingdom of Israel Jerusalem ( in Judaism timeline ) Temple in Jerusalem ( First Second ) Assyrian captivity Babylonian captivity Second Temple period Yehud Medinata Maccabean Revolt Hasmonean dynasty Sanhedrin Schisms ( Pharisees , Sadducees , Essenes , Zealots , Sicarii ) Second Temple Judaism ( Hellenistic Judaism ) Jewish–Roman wars ( Great Revolt , Diaspora , Bar Kokhba ) Rabbinic period and Middle Ages Rabbinic Judaism History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire Christianity and Judaism ( Jews and Christmas ) Hinduism and Judaism Islamic–Jewish relations Middle Ages Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Modern era Haskalah Sabbateans Hasidism Jewish atheism Emancipation Old Yishuv Zionism Soviet Union The Holocaust Israel Arab–Israeli conflict Communities Ashkenazim Galician Litvak Mizrahim Sephardim Teimanim (Yemenite Jews) Beta Israel Gruzinim (Georgian Jews) Juhurim (Mountain Jews) Bukharim Italkim Romanyotim Cochinim Bene Israel Berber Crimean Karaites Krymchaks Kaifeng Jews Related groups Bnei Anusim Lemba Igbo Jews Samaritans Crypto-Jews Anusim Dönmeh Marranos Neofiti Xueta Mosaic Arabs Subbotniks Noahides Population Judaism by country Lists of Jews Diaspora Historical population by country Population by city Genetic studies Israel and Palestine Old Yishuv New Yishuv Israeli Jews Palestinian Jews Africa Algeria Angola Bilad-el-Sudan Botswana Cameroon Cape Verde Benin Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Ethiopia Beta Israel Eritrea Eswatini Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria ( Igbo ) Republic of the Congo São Tomé and Príncipe Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Uganda ( Abayudaya ) Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Bahrain Cambodia China Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kurdistan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia South Korea Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Romaniote Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Italkim Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Moldova Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Soviet Union Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sephardim Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern America Canada United States Greenland Latin America and Caribbean Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Puerto Rico Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Guam New Zealand Palau Denominations Orthodox Modern Haredi Hasidic Reform Conservative Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Science Haymanot Humanistic Culture Customs Minyan Wedding Clothing Niddah Pidyon haben Kashrut Shidduch Zeved habat Conversion to Judaism Aliyah Hiloni Music Religious Secular Art Ancient Yiddish theatre Dance Humour Cuisine American Ashkenazi Bukharan Ethiopian Israeli Israelite Mizrahi Sephardic Literature Israeli Yiddish Judeo-Tat American Surnames Ashkenazi Mizrahi Sephardic Languages Hebrew Biblical Mishnaic Medieval Modern Bukharian Ghardaïa Sign Jewish Koine Greek Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Aramaic Judeo-Berber Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Georgian Judaeo-Iranian Judeo-Italian Judeo-Malayalam Judaeo-Spanish Judeo-Tat Knaanic Shassi Yeshivish Yevanic Yiddish Zarphatic Politics Jewish political movements Autonomism Bundism Feminism Leftism Secularism Territorialism World Agudath Israel Zionism General Green Labor Kahanism Maximalism Neo-Zionism Religious Revisionist Post-Zionism Category Portal v t e Australian Jews , or Jewish Australians , ( Hebrew : יהודים אוסטרלים , romanized : yehudim ostralim ) are Jews who are Australian citizens or permanent residents of Australia . In the 2021 census there were 99,956 people who identified Judaism as their religious affiliation and 29,113 Australians who identified as Jewish by ancestry , an increase from 97,355 and 25,716, respectively, from the 2016 census .

[ 2 ] The actual number is almost certainly higher, because being a Jew is not just about being religious , but the census data is based on religious affiliation, so secular Jews often feel it would be inaccurate to answer with "Judaism". Also, since the question is optional, many practising Holocaust survivors and Haredi Jews are believed to prefer not to disclose their religion in the census.

[ citation needed ] By comparison, the Israeli newspaper Haaretz estimated a Jewish-Australian population of 120,000–150,000 [ 3 ] (not limited to adherents of Judaism ), while other estimates based on the death rate in the community estimate the size of the community as 250,000, which would make them 1% of the population. Based on the census data, Jewish citizens make up about 0.4% of the Australian population .

[ 4 ] The Jewish community of Australia is composed mostly of Ashkenazi Jews , though there are Jews in Australia from many other traditions and levels of religious observance and participation in the Jewish community.

Geographic distribution of the Jewish population of Australia (by reported religious affiliation, or by ancestry if no other religion is reported), by Statistical Areas 1 (SA1) [ 5 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of the Jews in Australia The chapel of the Sydney Chevra Kadisha , Woollahra , New South Wales The history of the Jews in Australia is contained in comprehensive major general histories by the academic historians Hilary L. Rubinstein , William Rubinstein , and Suzanne Rutland , as well as in specialised works by such scholars as Rabbi John Levi and Yossi Aron covering specific topics and time periods. The twice-a-year (June and November) Journals of the Australian Jewish Historical Society (the June issues edited in Sydney by Professor Rutland and the November issues in Melbourne by Dr Hilary Rubinstein) carry many useful original articles by both professional and amateur historians, and should not be overlooked.

The first Jews to come to Australia were at least eight English convicts transported to Botany Bay in 1788 aboard the First Fleet .

[ 6 ] About 15,100 convicts were transported by the time transportation ceased in 1840 in New South Wales and 1853 in Tasmania. It is estimated that, of those who arrived by 1845, about 800 were Jewish. Most of them came from London, were of working-class background, and were male. Only 7% of Jewish convicts were female, compared with 15% for non-Jewish convicts. The average age of the Jewish convicts was 25 but ranged from 8 to elderly.

[ 7 ] At first, the Church of England was the established religion, and during the early years of transportation all convicts were required to attend Anglican services on Sundays. This included Irish Catholics as well as the Jews. Similarly, education in the new settlement was Anglican church controlled until the 1840s.

[ 7 ] The first move toward organisation in the community was the formation of a Chevra Kadisha (a Jewish burial society) in Sydney in 1817, [ 7 ] but the allocation of land for a Jewish cemetery was not approved until 1832.

[ 8 ] In 1830, the first Jewish wedding in Australia was celebrated, the contracting parties being Moses Joseph and Rosetta Nathan.

[ 9 ] Jewish immigration in the interwar period came at a time of antisemitism and the White Australia policy . The Returned Services League and other groups publicised cartoons to encourage the government and the immigration Minister Arthur A. Calwell to stem the flow of Jewish immigrants.

[ 7 ] Sephardi Jews first immigrated to Australia in the mid-to-late 19th century, and the community thrived for some twenty years, there was a Sephardic congregation, and some Sephardi families occupied important communal positions. Gradually, however, the Sephardi population declined, and the congregation was disbanded in 1873. A new Sephardic community also emerged in the post-war period. Previously, Mizrahi Jews were generally not permitted to enter due to Australia's White Australia policy . However, following the Suez Crisis in 1956, a number of Egyptian Jews were allowed to enter. Over the following years, overtures from Jewish communities led the government to drop its previous stance on entry of Mizrahi Jews. By 1969, when Iraqi Jews were being persecuted, the government granted refugee status to Iraqi Jews who managed to reach Australia.

[ citation needed ] In Australia, in the wake of the outbreak of World War II , Jews escaping the Nazis who had German passports, such as two-year-old Eva Duldig , who years later was a top tennis player for Australia, and her parents sculptor Karl Duldig and artist and inventor Slawa Duldig , were classified as enemy aliens upon their arrival due to their having arrived with German identity papers.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Beginning the year prior to their arrival in Australia, a new Australian law had designated people "enemy aliens" if they were Germans, or were Australians who had been born in Germany.

[ 13 ] The Australian government therefore interned the three of them for two years in isolated Tatura Internment Camp 3 D , 180 kilometers north of Melbourne.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] They were held with nearly 300 other internees.

[ 17 ] The internment camp was located near Shepparton , in the northern part of the state of Victoria .

[ 10 ] [ 18 ] [ 12 ] There, armed soldiers manned watchtowers and scanned the camp that was bordered by a barbed wire fence with searchlights, and other armed soldiers patrolled the camp.

[ 19 ] Petitions to Australian politicians, stressing that they were Jewish refugees and therefore being unjustly imprisoned, had no effect.

[ 19 ] They remained in the internment camp until 1942, when her father enlisted in the Australian Army .

[ 12 ] [ 19 ] Culture [ edit ] Jewish streams and movements [ edit ] There are three main streams of Judaism active in Australia: Orthodox ( Modern and Haredi ), Conservative and Reform . Statistics are only available for the Melbourne community, but they are considered representative of other Jewish communities around the country. In Melbourne, 6% of Jews identify themselves as 'strictly orthodox,' 33% as 'traditionally religious' and 15% as 'Liberal or Reform.' 43% consider themselves as 'Jewish but not religious,' whilst 1% as 'opposed to religion' altogether. Many of the Jews who consider themselves 'Jewish but not religious' still send their children to orthodox Jewish day schools or are members of Orthodox synagogues.

[ citation needed ] According to Suzanne Rutland , 'most Australian Jews can be best described as non-practising orthodox.' This Anglo-Jewish community developed its own form of 'modern Orthodoxy' which remains predominant until today.

Hitler 's ascent to power and the horrors of World War II and the Holocaust also brought large numbers of refugees from central Europe . From the mid-1930s, Temple Beth Israel in Melbourne became the basis of a Reform community because of its newly arrived German members. The Temple's German-born rabbi played an integral role in promoting the movement and, in 1938, when visiting Sydney , he established Temple Emanuel . It also attracted many Jews from Germany and other parts of Central Europe , who arrived in Sydney prior to the outbreak of the war.

In the 1940s and 1950s, due to the conditions leading up to and resulting from the Holocaust , the HMT Dunera being diverted from the United Kingdom to Australia, and the stifling of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 saw the emergence of ultra-Orthodox Haredi and Hasidic communities in Sydney and Melbourne. Although a small Hasidic community existed in Shepparton since the 1910s supported with additional families by Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] The first Sephardic synagogue in Australia was founded in 1962.

[ 22 ] There had been at least two short-lived efforts to establish Reform congregations, the first as early as the 1890s. However, in 1930, under the leadership of Ada Phillips, a Liberal or Progressive congregation, Temple Beth Israel, was permanently established in Melbourne. In 1938 the long-serving senior rabbi , Rabbi Dr Herman Sanger, was instrumental in establishing another synagogue, Temple Emanuel in Sydney. He also played a part in founding a number of other Liberal synagogues in other cities in both Australia and New Zealand . The first Australian-born rabbi, Rabbi Dr John Levi , served the Australian Liberal movement.

[ 23 ] In 2012, the first Humanistic Jewish congregation, known as Kehilat Kolenu, was established in Melbourne, with links to the cultural Jewish youth movement Habonim Dror . Later in 2012, a similar congregation was established in Sydney, known as Ayelet HaShachar. The services are loosely based on the Humanistic Jewish movement in the United States and the musical-prayer group Nava Tehila in Israel.

Education [ edit ] Schools [ edit ] The Melbourne Hebrew School was a Jewish day school established in 1855 under the auspices of the Melbourne Hebrew Congregation, providing general and also Hebrew studies until 1895.

[ 24 ] In 1942, the first Jewish day school and kindergarten was formed in North Bondi, Sydney. The first communal Jewish day school, Mount Scopus College , was founded in Melbourne in 1949. In its first year, the school had 120 students, and reached a peak of 2,800 students in the 1980s. Today it is still one of the largest Jewish day school in the Jewish diaspora. The largest Jewish school in Australia today is Moriah College, Sydney .

The Jewish day school system provides an excellent academic, religious, Zionist, sporting and social experience. In recent decades, the ultra-orthodox and Reform movements have established their own schools and community schools have also formed. All in all, there are 19 Jewish day schools in Australia. It is estimated that in Melbourne between 70% and 75% of all Jewish students attend a Jewish school at some stage of their schooling. In Sydney, this figure is 62%. In 1996, over 10,000 Jewish students attended a Jewish school in Australia.

Jewish day schools in Australia are much more expensive than the government/state schools. Therefore, a number of state schools, especially in Sydney, have a large number of Jewish students. The Boards of Jewish Education attend to the Jewish educational needs of such students. As a result, several state schools offer Hebrew or Jewish Studies as elective courses. Further, a number of education boards also attend to Jewish students in the smaller centres of Adelaide, Brisbane and Canberra.

Higher education [ edit ] In addition to Jewish education at a school level, Australian Jewry have opportunities for Jewish higher education. The University of Sydney and Monash University in Melbourne both have full Jewish Studies departments, allowing students to study Jewish Civilization, Hebrew ( Modern and Classical ), Holocaust Studies , Yiddish and Zionism . Adult Jewish learning is also very popular in Australia, with the Melton Adult Education Program offering a variety of popular programs linked to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem .

The Rabbinical College of Australia and New Zealand offers post-High School education in Jewish studies.

Multiculturalism as an ideology developed in Australia during the 1970s. During this period, Jewish cultural life expanded and was in some cases assisted by the government . There are numerous cultural and social organisations, Jewish radio shows and newspapers, and Jewish museums in both Melbourne and Sydney.

[ 21 ] Institutions of higher religious study [ edit ] Australia's first Yeshivah the Rabbinical College of Australia and New Zealand was established in 1966 by Reb Zalman Serebryanski.

[ 25 ] In addition, the Chabad community founded Kollel Menachem, a community kollel founded in 1979.

[ 26 ] Kollel Beth HaTalmud Yehudah Fishman Institute was founded in 1981, and was the first overseas community Kollel established by the Lakewood Yeshiva under the direction of Rabbi Shneur Kotler and Rabbi Nosson Wachtfogel. The Kollel consists of a core group of scholars who are engaged in full-time.

[ 27 ] Adass Israel , a Hassidic community in Melbourne launched their own kollel, Kollel Beis Yosef in 1990 [ 28 ] With the arrival of Rabbi Kohn as new rabbi of Adass, there has been the establishment of the 'Kolel Horaah' a training centre for in depth Jewish law offering courses to scholars and aspiring rabbi's alike.

[ 29 ] Adass Israel has also established a junior religious seminary (yeshivah ketanah), to prepare students for overseas yeshivot by in depth study of Talmud and Jewish law.

[ 30 ] In 1983 Yeshivah College opened a special junior Hasidic talmudic seminary stream called Mesivtah Melbourne for high school students, where students from across Melbourne and Sydney study. The focus for this institution is religious studies without secular studies.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] In 1998 Mizrachi opened a kollel in conjunction with Torah MiTziyon in Israel. Rabbis and yeshiva students are sent to Australia to help maintain the running of the kollel.

[ 34 ] Institutions [ edit ] Australian Jewry has a number of important social and cultural institutions. These include B'nai B'rith , the National Council of Jewish Women (NCJW) and Kadimah in Melbourne which sponsors Yiddish culture . In addition, the Hakoah Club in Sydney, which began as a sporting club , is today Sydney Jewry's main social and cultural meeting point, due to its central location in Bondi and excellent, modern premises. Several thousand Hassidic and Haredi Jews predominantly in Melbourne speak Yiddish as an everyday language.

[ 35 ] Jewish cultural life as a whole has benefited from the growth of multiculturalism in Australia, particularly during the 1970s. Under the Labor government of Gough Whitlam , the Minister for Immigration, Al Grassby , recommended the establishment of ethnic broadcasting stations. The scheme was finally implemented in 1975, and since then the Jewish community has been served by Radio 2EA in Sydney and Radio 3EA in Melbourne, which in total broadcast in more than 50 community languages. The Jewish community languages are Hebrew, Yiddish and English.

In the 1980s and 1990s, Holocaust museums in both Melbourne and Sydney were established as part of increasing awareness of the Shoah (Holocaust). The Jewish Museum of Australia in Melbourne was opened by Rabbi Ronald Lubofski in 1982, and now has approximately 20,000 objects.

[ 36 ] Then in 1992, the opening of the Sydney Jewish Museum , dedicated to the Holocaust and Australian Jewish history and located in the historic Maccabean Hall, was heralded as "a landmark event".

Australian Jewish Media comprises radio, [ 37 ] [ 38 ] television, newspapers and newsletters, online magazines, [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] blogs, [ 43 ] and zines. The "Australia-Israel Review" has continued to be an important publication since its establishment in the 1970s. The longest-running Jewish community newspaper is the "Australian Jewish News", which celebrated its centenary in November 1995.

[ 44 ] Support for Israel [ edit ] The Israeli government maintains a number of Zionist organisations which focus on fundraising, Zionist education including a range of Israel experience programs, youth movements, promotion of aliyah and a range of cultural institutions. Israel has recognised this by continuing to provide strong funding and other support for the Zionist Federation of Australia , which also enjoys representation at the senior level of the Jewish Agency .

[ 44 ] Non- and Anti-Zionist Australian Jewish organisations critical of Israel There is a long tradition of non- and anti-Zionist Jewish organisations in Australia. An early notable example includes the Jewish Council Against Fascism and Anti-Semitism established in 1942.

[ 45 ] Since the mid-1980s diverse Australian Jewish organisations have been increasingly critical of Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and additionally the blockade of Gaza from 2007. The Australian Jewish Democratic Society, formed in 1984 has a long history of criticism of Israeli occupation [ 46 ] and Jewish Women in Support of an Independent Palestine participated in the weekly “Women in Black” protests at Sydney Town Hall from 1991.

[ 47 ] From October 2023, in response to increasing civilian death in Gaza resulting from military attacks and a blockade on aid by Israel, many new and existing Jewish organisations have called for a comprehensive ceasefire, food and aid to be allowed into Gaza, comprehensive sanctions against Israel and opposed the conflation of criticism of Israel with antisemitism. Most notable amongst these organisations is The Jewish Council of Australia [ 48 ] whose name references that of the earlier organisations and was founded in 2024 to represent non-Zionist Jews and support Palestinian freedom while opposing antisemitism. The Council has issued public calls for Australia to cut military ties and impose sanctions on Israel, backed pro-Palestinian protests and student rights, and been part of inter-Jewish efforts demanding accountability for Gaza assaults.

[ 49 ] Other organisations include Australian Jewish Democratic Society, Emet Australia, Jewish Women 4 Peace Action Ready Group, Jews against the Occupation ’48 (JAO’48), Jews for Palestine WA, Loud Jew Collective, Sydney Friends of Standing Together, The Jewish Council of Australia and Tzedek Collective.

Rabbinical courts [ edit ] Further information: Melbourne Beth Din Melbourne is currently being serviced by a number of courts.

The first Beth Din in Australia was set up under the guidance of the Chief Rabbi of the Commonwealth in the 1800’s. This was the first Beth Din in the British Empire outside of London. Following revelations of abuse by Sholom Gutnick the senior rabbi of the Beth Din, a restructure of the MBD was undertaken under the joint control of the Rabbinical Council of Victoria (RCV) and the Council of Orthodox Synagogue of Victoria (COSV).

[ 50 ] In addition the Adass community maintain their own Beth Din. There are also a number of ad hoc Beth Dins that are set up, usually for financial decision, or for conversions.

The Sydney Beth Din was set up in 1905. It serves the Jewish communities in Australia, New Zealand and Asia.

[ 51 ] The Beth Din have become the main Beth Din for anyone outside of Victoria following the Melbourne Beth Din's restructure. The Sydney Beth Din has had problems recently when its members were ruled to have had contempt of court in a number of its decisions.

Demographics [ edit ] The language most commonly spoken at home by Australian Jews (as reported by religious affiliation or by ancestry if no other religion is reported), by Statistical Areas 1 (SA1) with over 5% of the Jewish population.

[ 5 ] People affiliated with Judaism as a percentage of the total population in Sydney at the 2011 census, divided geographically by postal area About 90 percent of the Australian Jewish community live in Sydney and Melbourne.

[ 52 ] The Jewish Community Council of Victoria has estimated that 60,000 Australian Jews live in Victoria.

[ 53 ] In Frankston , the Jewish community nearly doubled between 2007 and 2012.

[ 54 ] In Adelaide Australian Jews have been present throughout the history of the city, with many successful civic leaders and people in the arts.

[ 55 ] According to the 2016 census , the Jewish population numbered 91,020 individuals, of whom 46% lived in Greater Melbourne , 39% in Greater Sydney , and 6% in Greater Perth . The states and territories with the highest proportion of Jews are Victoria (0.71%) and New South Wales (0.49%), whereas those with the lowest are the Northern Territory and Tasmania (both 0.05%).

[ 56 ] The same social and cultural characteristics of Australia that facilitated the extraordinary economic, political, and social success of the Australian Jewish community have also been attributed to contributing to widespread assimilation .

[ 57 ] Community success can also be measured by the vibrancy of Australian Jewish Media . While traditional Jewish print media is in decline, [ 58 ] new media forms such as podcasts, [ 59 ] online magazines, [ 60 ] and blogs [ 61 ] have stepped into the breach.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Significant Jewish population centres [ edit ] Melbourne [ edit ] Melbourne 's population is highly concentrated around the suburbs of Caulfield North and St Kilda East , although there are significant populations in the suburbs surrounding these suburbs.

[ 64 ] There are a large number of schools servicing the community.

Mount Scopus Memorial College – modern Orthodox , Jewish school Bialik College – secular Jewish  school Leibler Yavneh College – religious Jewish school. Founded in 1962 as a breakaway from Mount Scopus Sholem Aleichem College – school founded by the Bundist community in Melbourne King David School – Progressive Jewish school Yeshiva- Beth Rivka College – boys and girls schools servicing the Chabad community Adass Israel School – school servicing the ultra-Orthodox community Yesodei HaTorah College – a non-Hassidic ultra-Orthodox school Cheder Levi Yitzchak – a Chabad boys school with a more limited secular education.

Bnos Chana – a twin girls only school of Cheder Levi Yitzchak Divrei Emineh – a breakaway from Adass Israel serving the Satmar sect and some other Hasidic Jews Tiferes Bnos Yiroel – a girl's Haredi school There are numerous active congregations in the Jewish community, many concentrated in Caulfield and the St Kilda suburbs, although other areas such as Bentleigh house a significant number of communities.

The Jewish Museum of Australia displays Judaica , ritual objects, Holocaust material, and paintings and sculptures by Jewish authors. The nearby Kadimah Cultural Centre shows Jewish and Yiddish drama, and has a large library of Judaica. There are also kosher restaurants and grocery stores throughout the St Kilda area.

[ 65 ] The Australian Jewish News is based in Melbourne, but distributed Australia wide. The Jewish report is published monthly in Melbourne and Sydney, and the Hamodia Australian edition services the Haredi community. There are also numerous pamphlets that are produced for distribution in synagogues around Australia. And international Haredi magazines such as Mishpacha and Ami are printed in Melbourne weekly as well.

Notable Writers academics, and journalists, such as Arnold Zable , Elliot Perlman , Mark Baker , John Safran ; broadcasters, such as Raphael Epstein , Jon Faine , Ramona Koval , and Libby Gorr have been prominent in old media and are now joined by a younger generation increasingly making its voice heard through new media , such as comedian YouTubers Michael Shafar and Justine Sless.

[ citation needed ] Sydney [ edit ] A poster of Menachem Mendel Schneerson at the entrance of a Chabad house in Bondi Beach in Sydney's Eastern Suburbs .

Sydney has a thriving and dynamic Jewish diaspora community. There are an estimated 50,000 Jews in New South Wales out of an Australian Jewish population of 120,000.

Jews can be found throughout the Greater Sydney area, although approximately two-thirds reside in the eastern suburbs , from Vaucluse , through Randwick , Bondi and Double Bay , to Darlinghurst - East Sydney , where many of the service organisations are located. Most of the remainder live on the Upper North Shore , predominantly in the suburbs situated between Chatswood and St Ives . Smaller but active pockets reside in such areas as Maroubra , Coogee , Leichhardt , Newtown and Marrickville .

Strathfield , in the Inner West , was historically a centre for the Jewish community in Sydney, but the Jewish population of the area dwindled in recent decades and the synagogue closed in 2013.

[ 66 ] One of the strengths of the Sydney community is the significant contribution by overseas immigrants, to the extent that over two-thirds of the Sydney Jewish population originates from South Africa , Hungary , the former Soviet Union and Israel .

[ 67 ] Perth [ edit ] Carmel School is a Jewish day school in Perth . Today's Jewish Perth is a growing and vibrant community that is diverse and inclusive. The community numbers over 7,000 and there are a number of different religious congregations catering to the diverse interests, beliefs and traditions of this active community.

The oldest congregation, established over 110 years ago, is the Perth Hebrew Congregation , led by Rabbi Daniel Lieberman. The Perth Hebrew Congregation, also referred to simply as the Perth Synagogue, has more membership than all the other synagogues combined in Perth and thus caters for the vast majority of the Jewish population. They have erected an eruv making travel to and from the shul easier for the large number of orthodox families.

[ 68 ] Adelaide [ edit ] In Adelaide , there have been many Jews involved in the history of the city, with many successful civic leaders and people in the arts.

[ 69 ] Jacob Barrow Montefiore was a member of the South Australian Colonization Commission in London from 1835 to 1839, a body appointed by the British Government to oversee the establishment the Colony of South Australia , [ 70 ] [ 71 ] and Montefiore Hill in North Adelaide was named after him His brother, Joseph Barrow Montefiore was a businessman in Adelaide; both brothers also had interests in New South Wales , and other family members were also prominent in the new colonies.

[ 72 ] Since February 2017, Professor Ghil'ad Zuckermann from the University of Adelaide has been the President of the Australian Association for Jewish Studies .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] In November 2020, the Adelaide Holocaust Museum and Andrew Steiner Education Centre (AHMSEC) was established.

[ 75 ] Assimilation and demographic changes [ edit ] The predominant first response of Australian Jews (by reported religious affiliation, or by ancestry if no other religion is reported) to the question about ancestry, by Statistical Areas 1 (SA1) with more than 5% of Jewish population.

[ 5 ] The same social and cultural characteristics of Australia that facilitated the extraordinary economic, political, and social success of the Australian Jewish community have also been attributed to contributing to widespread assimilation .

[ 76 ] From 2008 to 2012, more than 400 Australian Jews moved to Israel and most of them have done compulsory military service .

[ 77 ] There was an almost 50 percent increase in immigration from Australia to Israel between 2009 and 2010.

[ 78 ] There was a 45 percent increase in percentage of immigration in 2010, the highest of the English speaking countries ; 240 Australians moved to Israel , up from 165 in 2009.

[ 3 ] Prior to 1933, the intermarriage rate in the Australian Jewish community was approximately 30%. This high percentage potentially threatened the future of the community. However, the arrival of Jewish refugees prior to and following World War II , changed the pattern of assimilation.

Demographic research indicates that the intermarriage rate dropped immediately after the war and that by 1971, almost 90% of Jewish men and over 90% of Jewish women were married to Jewish partners.

The 1996 census showed that the intermarriage rate for all Australian Jewry was 15%. Once again, the smaller Jewish communities appear to have a higher rate of intermarriage, with Melbourne 's rate far lower than that of Sydney . Similar research, conducted in 1999 by Sydney's Jewish Communal Appeal, concluded that one third of that generation have a non-Jewish partner.

Along with intermarriage comes the physical relocation of many Jews, who prefer to leave the densely populated Jewish areas and the reservoir of potential Jewish life partners. In the rural areas of New South Wales for example, where only 5% of the State's Jewry reside, intermarriage rises to 84%. Even in the larger towns, assimilation and intermarriage vary from area to area.

Of the two most recent waves of immigration to Australia between 1986 and 1991, Jews from the Former Soviet Union seem to have a considerably high intermarriage rate, in contrast to the South African Jewish immigrants , for whom intermarriage is almost entirely unknown.

[ 21 ] Distribution of Jewish Australians [ edit ] According to profile.id.com.au, [ 79 ] the 10 local government areas as of 2011 [update] with the largest Jewish communities, based by percentage of total population, were: LGA Jewish population % of total 1 City of Glen Eira , Melbourne 24,774 18.9% 2 Waverley Municipal Council , Sydney 10,876 17.1% 3 Municipality of Woollahra , Sydney 7,381 14.2% 4 City of Stonnington , Melbourne 4,571 4.9% 5 City of Port Phillip , Melbourne 3,891 4.3% 6 City of Randwick , Sydney 5,375 4.2% 7 Ku-ring-gai Council , Sydney 3,847 3.5% 8 City of Bayside , Melbourne 2,949 3.2% 9 Municipality of Hunter's Hill , Sydney 1,334 2.5% 10 City of Botany Bay , Sydney 607 1.5% Jewish communities are concentrated in four electorates. In NSW Division of Wentworth (16.2% of the electorate), in Vic Division of Macnamara 12.8%; in Vic Division of Goldstein 8.8% and in Division of Kingsford Smith 6.0%.

[ 80 ] Languages [ edit ] The language most commonly spoken at home by Australian Jews (as reported by religious affiliation or by ancestry if no other religion is reported), by Statistical Areas 1 (SA1) with over 5% of the Jewish population.

[ 5 ] The vast majority of Jews speak English; indeed, three-quarters (75.1%) speak no other language, and of the remainder, 16.9% speak English 'Very well' and 5.0% speak it 'Well'. Nevertheless, many Jews do not speak English at home (26,242 people), and, of these, the most common non-English language spoken in Jewish homes was Russian, spoken by an estimated 9,964 people. However, Hebrew is likely to become the most common non-English language spoken at home in the future (if this is not already the case) with an estimated 9,543 Jewish people speaking it at home. The number of Hebrew speakers increased by 23.6% from 2006 to 2011 and the number of French speakers increased by 12.7%. Yet non-English languages are becoming rarer overall; excluding Hebrew, the number of non-English speakers decreased by 8.3% since 2006, most likely due to the passing of older Holocaust survivors and other Jewish refugees from Nazi-occupied Europe .

Language spoken at home, estimated number of Jewish people: [ 81 ] Languages Number of speakers % of Jewish population 1 English 83,453 76.1% 2 Russian 9,964 9.1% 3 Hebrew 9,954 8.7% 4 Yiddish 1,901 1.7% 5 Hungarian 1,140 1.0% 6 French 899 0.8% 7 Polish 742 0.7% 8 German 699 0.6% 9 Other non-English 1,353 1.2% Data exclude language not-stated responses. Columns may not sum to 100% due to rounding.

Notable people [ edit ] Academics [ edit ] Roy Clive Abraham , linguist Bernhard Neumann , German-born British-Australian mathematician Peter Singer , philosopher Ghil'ad Zuckermann , linguist and revivalist Artists and entertainers [ edit ] Lior Attar , singer, musician Danny Ben-Moshe , writer John Bluthal , actor Saskia Burmeister , actress Deborah Conway , singer Isla Fisher , actress Amelia Frid , Russian-born actress Renee Geyer , soul singer David Helfgott , pianist (inspired Academy Award -winning film Shine ) Barrie Kosky , opera director Ben Lee , singer, songwriter and actor David Malouf , writer Miriam Margolyes , British-Australian actress Olivia Newton-John , singer/songwriter Leon Pole , artist Ohad Rain , Australian-born Israeli singer-songwriter John Safran , comedian Troye Sivan , South African-born Australian singer, actor and model Elana Stone , musician Yael Stone , actress Felix Werder , German-born composer Yitzhak Yedid , Israeli-born composer Business people [ edit ] Alan Finkel , Australia's Chief Scientist John Gandel , businessman, philanthropist David Gonski , businessman, philanthropist Solomon Lew , businessman Frank Lowy , Slovak-born Israeli Australian businessman Anthony Pratt , Australian businessman Richard Pratt , businessman Sheree Rubinstein , entrepreneur, women's business leader and advocate Sidney Sinclair , businessman Victor Smorgon , businessman Harry Triguboff , Chinese-born Australian businessman Alex Waislitz , businessman Nick Molnar , entrepreneur, businessman Legal system [ edit ] James Spigelman , Former Chief Justice of New South Wales James Edelman , High Court Justice Louis Waller , legal academic and head of Monash law faculty Politicians [ edit ] See also: List of Jewish members of Australian parliaments Hajnal Ban Black , Israeli-born author, politician Josh Burns , member for Macnamara Sir Zelman Cowen , politician, Governor-General of Australia Michael Danby , member for Melbourne Ports Mark Dreyfus , attorney general of Australia Syd Einfeld , Australian politician and Jewish community leader Josh Frydenberg , politician and former deputy leader of the Liberal Party Sir Isaac Isaacs , judge and politician, Chief Justice of Australia, and Governor-General of Australia Henry Ninio , Egyptian-born Lord Mayor of Adelaide Martin Pakula , politician Kerryn Phelps , president of the AMA and independent member for Wentworth Mark Regev , Australian-born Israeli diplomat and civil servant David Southwick , politician Rabbis [ edit ] Dr John Levi AM , First Australian born Rabbi, Emeritus Rabbi of Temple Beth Israel and founder of The King David School in Melbourne, Historian of the early Jewish community in Australia Raymond Apple , Senior Rabbi of the Great Synagogue of Sydney David Bar-Hayim , born David Mandel, head of the Machon Shilo in Israel Eliezer Berkovits , leading rabbinic philosopher, served as a rabbi in Sydney 1946–50 Israel Brodie , Chief Rabbi of the Commonwealth, served as a rabbi in Australia 1923–37 Harry Freedman , rabbi, author and translator Yitzchok Dovid Groner , head of the Yeshiva Centre in Melbourne, implicated in coverups of child sex abuse Chaim Gutnick , first head of the Rabbinical Council of Victoria Meir Shlomo Kluwgant , senior rabbi in Melbourne, implicated in coverups of child sex abuse Karen Soria , Reform rabbi, first woman to serve as a rabbi in Australia Sportspeople [ edit ] Ashley Brown , soccer player Jordan Brown , soccer player Gavin Fingleson , Olympic silver medalist baseball player Jessica Fox , canoeist, Olympic gold medalist Noemie Fox , canoeist,  Olympic gold medalist Jake Girdwood-Reich , footballer Todd Goldstein , AFL Player for the North Melbourne Kangaroos Todd Greenberg , former NRL executive Michael Klinger , cricketer Jemima Montag , racewalker , Commonwealth Games gold medallist Jonathan Moss , former first-class cricketer for the Victoria cricket team (2000–2007). Played for Australia at the Maccabiah Games in Israel Phil Moss , former manager of the Central Coast Mariners in the A-League, and former player in the National Soccer League Zac Sapsford , footballer Harry Sheezel , AFL player for the North Melbourne Kangaroos Steven Solomon , sprinter Jordi Swibel , footballer Lionel Van Praag , speedway champion Julien Wiener , cricketer David Zalcberg , table tennis player Other [ edit ] Alex Fein , activist and entrepreneur Sir John Monash , distinguished General in the Australian Army during World War I .

Richard Kingsland , Royal Australian Air Force pilot during World War II , former Secretary of the Departments of Interior, Repatriation, and Veterans' Affairs Ikey Solomon , convict transported to Tasmania .

Sharri Markson , journalist Gregory Sher, Australian soldier killed in Afghanistan [ 82 ] See also [ edit ] Australia portal Judaism portal Australia/Israel & Jewish Affairs Council Jewish Council of Australia Australian Jewish Democratic Society Zionist Federation of Australia Executive Council of Australian Jewry Antisemitism in Australia Australian Association for Jewish Studies Australian Jews in Israel History of the Jews in Australia Israeli Australians List of Oceanian Jews Category:Jewish Australian writers Category:Jewish Australian history Gerim References [ edit ] ^ Self-identifying population of 91,022 according to: 2016 Australian census Core population of 112,800 and enlarged population (Jewish ancestry) of 120,000-135,000 according to: DellaPergola, Sergio (2015).

World Jewish Population, 2015 (Report). Berman Jewish DataBank . Retrieved 19 April 2017 .

120,000-250,000 according to: Raphael Ahren (25 March 2011).

"JAFI Reforms May Hurt Australian Immigration to Israel, Leader Says" .

Haaretz.com . Retrieved 19 April 2017 .

(not limited to adherents of Judaism). Jewish citizens make up about 0.5% of the Australian population.

^ "2016 Census" .

www.abs.gov.au .

^ a b Raphael Ahren (25 March 2011).

"JAFI Reforms May Hurt Australian Immigration to Israel, Leader Says" .

Haaretz.com . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

^ Graham, David (2014).

The Jewish population of Australia: key findings from the 2011 census (PDF) . Australian Centre for the Study of Jewish Civilisation, Monash University.

ISBN 978-0-9874195-7-6 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ a b c d " "Census of Population and Housing - Cultural Diversity, 2016, TableBuilder" " . Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS).

^ "The Jewish experience in Australia - Fact sheet 217 – National Archives of Australia" .

naa.gov.au . Archived from the original on 30 October 2014 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ a b c d Rutland, Suzanne, 2005, The Jews in Australia , ISBN 0521612853 .

^ V.D. Lipman, A Social History of the Jews of England, 1850-1950 , London, 1954, p.121.

^ Suzanne D. Rutland (2008).

"Jews" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Dictionary of Sydney Trust . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ a b de Jong-Duldig, Eva (8 August 2017).

"Driftwood: escape and survival through art" . National Library of Australia.

^ "Eva De Jong-Duldig – Escape and survival through art" .

SBS German .

^ a b c Mercer, Phil (29 April 2022).

"Australian Musical Charts Family's Escape from Nazis in Europe" .

Voice of America .

^ Editors Annalisa Pes, David Attwell, Susanna Zinato (2019).

Poetics and Politics of Shame in Postcolonial Literature , Taylor & Francis, ISBN 9780429513756 .

^ Browne, Ashley; Lawrence, Dashiel (2018).

People of the Boot; The Triumphs and Tragedy of Australian Jews in Sport . Hybrid Publishers.

ISBN 9781925283426 .

^ Katz, Deborah (4 September 2019).

"Holocaust Footnotes: Escaping To Singapore" .

The Jewish Press .

^ Miriam Cosic (29 April 2022).

"Melbourne’s newest musical a multi-generational European family saga," Plus61J.

^ Mockridge, Melinda (2014).

"Art behind the wire: the untold story of refugee families interned in Australia during the Second World War" .

Victorian History Library .

^ Benjamin, Henry (4 March 2013).

"Times at Tatura" .

J-Wire .

^ a b c Meissner, Renate (2018). "Exil in Australian 2 / Exile in Australia".

Erinnerungen [ Memories ] (PDF) . Vol. 5. Vienna: National Fund of the Republic of Austria for Victims of National Socialism .

ISBN 978-3-9504794-8-5 .

^ "60 Years: An Appreciation - Chabad.org" . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ a b c "The Jewish Community of Australia: History of the Australian Jewish Community" .

jafi.org . Archived from the original on 7 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ W.L. "Australia." Encyclopaedia Judaica.

Vol. 2. Keter Publishing House. 1971.

^ Graff, Werner (2005).

A time to keep: the story of Temple Beth Israel, 1930 to 2005 . Melbourne, Vic: Hybrid Publishers.

ISBN 1-876462-38-8 .

^ Melbourne, School of Historical Studies, Department of History, The University of.

"Jews and Judaism - Entry - eMelbourne - The Encyclopedia of Melbourne Online" .

www.emelbourne.net.au . Retrieved 21 June 2018 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "History - RabbinicalCollege.edu.au" . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ "About Us" .

Kollel Menachem Online .

^ "Home" .

kollelbhtyfi .

^ "Photo Essay: Dinner for Kollel Beis Yosef in Melbourne, Australia (Photos by JDN)" . 13 March 2015.

^ "Adass Israel welcomes new Rov" .

^ "Melbourne Australia Yeshiva Ketana Matzah Baking at Adass Shul Matzah Bakery" . 2 April 2012.

^ "Melbourne Mesivta Publishes Kovetz Ha'aros" . 9 November 2020.

^ "Melbourne Mesivta Releases Kovetz" . 6 November 2020.

^ "Melbourne Mesivta Celebrates 30" . 13 May 2013.

^ "Melbourne, Australia" .

Torah Mitzion . Retrieved 10 August 2021 .

^ "Yiddish in the Ultra-orthodox Community" .

Australian Centre for Jewish Civilisation .

^ "The Jewish Community of Melbourne" . The Museum of the Jewish People at Beit Hatfutsot. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2018 .

^ "Mazel Tov Cocktail" .

PodOmatic .

^ "J-AIR - Jewish Australian Internet Radio" .

www.j-air.com.au .

^ "Home - +61J" .

+61J .

^ "Galus Australis" .

Galus Australis .

^ "Kvetchr.com" .

kvetchr.com .

^ "J-Wire" .

J-Wire .

^ Sensible Jew ^ a b "Jewish Life in Australia" .

bje.org.au . Archived from the original on 7 July 2015 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ "Jewish Labour Bund (Australia)" , Wikipedia , 29 July 2025 , retrieved 11 August 2025 The Jewish Council Against Fascism and Anti-Semitism was not anti-Zionist as is presently understood but was not fully supportive of Zionism ^ "Australian Jewish Democratic Society – A PROGRESSIVE VOICE AMONG JEWS, A JEWISH VOICE AMONG PROGRESSIVES" . 26 May 2025 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Women in Black protest in Sydney | Green Left" .

www.greenleft.org.au . 12 June 1991 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Jewish Council of Australia" , Wikipedia , 26 July 2025 , retrieved 11 August 2025 ^ Australia, Jewish Council of (1 April 2024).

"Australia must cut all military ties and place sanctions on Israel" .

Jewish Council of Australia . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "History" . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ "HOME" .

Sydney Beth Din .

^ Goldberg, Dan (2 January 2013).

"Australian Jews may top Forbes' rich list, but 20% live on poverty line Israel News" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 15 September 2013 .

^ "Jewish Community Council of Victoria (JCCV) - Overview" . JCCV. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013 . Retrieved 15 September 2013 .

^ "Census shows Jews are on the move | The Australian Jewish News" . Jewishnews.net.au. 29 June 2012 . Retrieved 15 September 2013 .

^ Adelaide Jewish Museum Archived 2008-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 8 September 2011.

^ "Census TableBuilder - Dataset: 2016 Census - Cultural Diversity" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics – Census 2016 . Archived from the original on 14 January 2023 . Retrieved 29 July 2017 .

^ Postrel, Virginia (May 1993).

"Uncommon Culture" .

Reason Magazine .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2007 . Retrieved 5 October 2007 .

^ "The Australian Jewish News | Galus Australis | Jewish Life in Australia" .

galusaustralis.com . Archived from the original on 18 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ "Mazel Tov Cocktail" .

PodOmatic . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ "J-Wire" .

J-Wire . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ "sensiblejew" .

sensiblejew.com . Archived from the original on 18 May 2017 . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ "Home - Macroscope" . Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 .

^ "kvetchr.com" .

kvetchr.com . Archived from the original on 5 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ "2016 Census QuickStats: Melbourne Ports" .

www.censusdata.abs.gov.au .

^ "Australia Virtual Jewish History Tour - Jewish Virtual Library" .

jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ "Strathfield Synagogue faces sale due to dwindling congregation" .

ABC News . 15 May 2014 – via www.abc.net.au.

^ "Our Sydney - Jewish Sydney" .

jewishsydney.com.au . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ "Jewish Community of Perth, Australia" . Jewishtimesasia.org . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

^ "Adelaide Jewish Museum" . Archived from the original on 8 October 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Majority of the Colony of South Australia" .

South Australian Register . Vol. XXII, no. 3509. South Australia. 5 January 1858. p. 3 . Retrieved 6 December 2020 – via National Library of Australia.

^ "Foundation of the Province" .

SA Memory . State Library of South Australia. 5 February 2015 . Retrieved 6 December 2020 .

^ Elton, Jude.

"Montefiore Hill" .

Adelaidia . History SA . Retrieved 6 December 2020 .

^ "AAJS Newsletter No 66, May 2017" (PDF) . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ AAJS Newsletter No 78, September 2020 ^ Adelaide Holocaust Museum and Andrew Steiner Education Centre to open in November , REBECCA DI GIROLAMO, October 24, 2020, Sunday Mail.

^ Postrel, Virginia (May 1993).

"Uncommon Culture" .

Reason Magazine .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2007 . Retrieved 5 October 2007 .

^ Tom Tilley (29 November 2012).

"Aussie Zionists training to fight for Israel" .

ABC News . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ Raphael Ahren (1 April 2011).

"JA Cuts Deal to Keep Immigration Emissary Down Under" .

Haaretz.com . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

^ "Jewish Maps of Australia by Local Government Areas" .

profile.id.com.au .

^ "The "Jewish vote" and the 2022 federal election" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 29 June 2022.

^ Dr David Graham.

"The Jewish Population of Australia" (PDF) . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

^ "The Last Post Ceremony commemorating the service of (8243734) Private Gregory Sher, 1st Commando Regiment, Afghanistan" .

www.awm.gov.au . Retrieved 7 June 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Crown, Alan. "The Jewish Press in Australia." Arts: The Journal of the Sydney University Arts Association 15 (1990).

online Freiberg, Freda. "Lost in OZ?: Jews in the Australian cinema." Continuum 8.2 (1994): 196-205.

Jones, Jeremy. "Confronting reality: anti-Semitism in Australia today." Jewish Political Studies Review (2004): 89-103.

online Rutland, Suzanne D.

The Jews in Australia (Cambridge University Press, 2006).

online Stratton, Jon. "The impossible ethnic: Jews and multiculturalism in Australia." Diaspora: A Journal of Transnational Studies 5.3 (1996): 339-374.

Stratton, Jon. "The Colour of Jews: Jews, Race and the White Australia Policy." Journal of Australian Studies 20.50-51 (1996): 51-65.

Zuesse, Evan M. "From Assimilation to Affirmation: The Jews of Australia." in Religion and Multiculturalism in Australia: Essays in Honour of Victor Hayes 7 (1992): 172+.

v t e Jews and Judaism in Australia Topics History History Kimberley Plan 1982 Israeli Consulate and Hakoah Club bombings 1991 Sydney synagogue attacks 2024 Australian Jewish doxxing incident 2024 Melbourne synagogue attack Society Judaism in Australia Antisemitism in Australia Australian Jews Notable figures Australian Jewish media Australia–Israel relations Schools NSW Emanuel School Kesser Torah College Masada College Moriah College Yeshiva College (closed) VIC Adass Israel School Beth Rivkah Ladies College Bialik College Leibler Yavneh College Mount Scopus Memorial College Ohel Chana Sholem Aleichem College The King David School Yeshivah College WA Carmel School SA Massada College (closed) Communal organisations Roof bodies Executive Council of Australian Jewry Jewish Community Council of Victoria Zionist Federation of Australia Jewish Communal Appeal (JCA) Political groups Australia/Israel & Jewish Affairs Council Australian Jewish Democratic Society Independent Australian Jewish Voices Jewish Council of Australia Jewish Labour Bund Religious Australian Jewish Association Kosher Australia Melbourne Beth Din Rabbinical Council of Victoria Union for Progressive Judaism Student groups Australasian Union of Jewish Students Hineni Historical Adelaide Holocaust Museum and Andrew Steiner Education Centre Australian Jewish Genealogical Society Australian Jewish Historical Society Melbourne Holocaust Museum Jewish Museum of Australia Sydney Jewish Museum Other AJAX Football Club Australian Association for Jewish Studies Courage to Care Jewish Care Jewish House Maccabi Australia Moving Forward Together v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_Jews&oldid=1306281290 " Categories : Australian Jews Jewish Australian history Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from March 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2017 Short description is different from Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Hebrew-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 23:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian Jews 1 language Add topic

