Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Early legal career Toggle Early legal career subsection 2.1 Clerkships 2.2 Private law practice 2.3 U.S. Department of Justice 3 U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (2006–2017) Toggle U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (2006–2017) subsection 3.1 Freedom of religion 3.2 Administrative law 3.3 Interstate commerce 3.4 Campaign finance 3.5 Civil rights 3.6 Criminal law 3.7 Death penalty 3.8 List of judicial opinions 4 Nomination to Supreme Court 5 U.S. Supreme Court (2017–present) Toggle U.S. Supreme Court (2017–present) subsection 5.1 Banking regulation 5.2 First Amendment 5.3 LGBT rights 5.4 Second Amendment 5.5 Vagueness doctrine 5.6 Abortion 5.7 American Indian law & relations 5.8 COVID-19 restrictions 6 Legal philosophy Toggle Legal philosophy subsection 6.1 Voting alignment 6.2 Judicial activism 6.3 Federalism and state power 6.4 Assisted suicide 6.5 Statutory interpretation 7 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 7.1 Religion 7.2 Ethics controversy 8 Selected works Toggle Selected works subsection 8.1 Books 8.2 Articles 8.2.1 Other 8.3 Speeches 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Additional sources 11 Further reading 12 Videos 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Neil Gorsuch 34 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lombard Magyar Македонски मराठी مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US Supreme Court justice since 2017 "Gorsuch" redirects here. For the surname, see Gorsuch (surname) .

Neil Gorsuch Official portrait, 2017 Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Incumbent Assumed office April 10, 2017 Nominated by Donald Trump Preceded by Antonin Scalia Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit In office August 8, 2006 – April 9, 2017 Nominated by George W. Bush Preceded by David M. Ebel Succeeded by Allison H. Eid Principal Deputy Associate Attorney General In office June 2005 – July 2006 Attorney General John Ashcroft Personal details Born Neil McGill Gorsuch ( 1967-08-29 ) August 29, 1967 (age 57) Denver, Colorado , U.S.

Spouse Louise Burleston ​ ( m.

1996) ​ Children 2 Parent Anne Gorsuch Burford Education Columbia University ( BA ) Harvard University ( JD ) University of Oxford ( DPhil ) Signature Academic background Thesis The Right to Receive Assistance in Suicide and Euthanasia (2004) Doctoral advisor John Finnis Other advisors Timothy Endicott Academic work Discipline Legal philosophy Notable works The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia (2006) Neil Gorsuch's voice Neil Gorsuch delivers the opinion of the Court in National Pork Producers Council v. Ross Recorded May 11, 2023 This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Neil McGill Gorsuch ( / ˈ ɡ ɔːr s ʌ tʃ / GOR -sutch ; [ 1 ] born August 29, 1967) is an American jurist who serves as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States . He was nominated by President Donald Trump on January 31, 2017, and has served since April 10, 2017.

Gorsuch spent his early life in Denver, Colorado . After graduating from Columbia University , where he became an established writer, Gorsuch received his legal education at Harvard Law School and earned a doctorate in jurisprudence from Oxford University in 2004 as a Marshall Scholar . His doctoral thesis concerned the morality of assisted suicide and was written under the supervision of legal philosopher John Finnis . He was a law clerk for Judge David B. Sentelle , Justice Byron White , and Justice Anthony Kennedy .

From 1995 to 2005, Gorsuch was in private practice with the law firm of Kellogg, Hansen, Todd, Figel & Frederick . He was the principal deputy associate attorney general at the United States Department of Justice from 2005 until his appointment to the Tenth Circuit. President George W. Bush nominated Gorsuch to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit on May 10, 2006, to replace Judge David M. Ebel , who achieved senior status that same year.

Gorsuch is a proponent of textualism in statutory interpretation and originalism in interpreting the United States Constitution .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Along with Justice Clarence Thomas , he is an advocate of natural law jurisprudence .

[ 5 ] He is the first Supreme Court justice to serve alongside a justice for whom he once clerked (Kennedy).

[ 6 ] During his tenure on the Supreme Court he has written the majority opinion in landmark cases such as Bostock v. Clayton County on LGBT rights, McGirt v. Oklahoma on Indian law, Kennedy v. Bremerton School District on personal religious observance while serving in an official capacity, and Ramos v. Louisiana on juries' guilty verdicts.

Early life and education Gorsuch was born on August 29, 1967, in Denver, Colorado .

[ 7 ] His parents were Anne Gorsuch Burford (née McGill; 1942–2004) and David Ronald Gorsuch (1937–2001).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] He was the eldest of three children, [ 10 ] and is a fourth-generation Coloradan.

[ 11 ] John McGill, his maternal grandfather, was a surgeon, and his paternal grandfather, John Gorsuch, was an established lawyer in Denver, Colorado .

[ 12 ] Both of Gorsuch's parents were also attorneys.

[ 13 ] They encouraged their children to engage in debate, often spontaneously.

[ 14 ] From 1976 to 1980, Anne Burford served in the Colorado House of Representatives . In 1981, she was appointed by President Ronald Reagan as the first woman to serve as administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency .

[ 15 ] [ 14 ] Her conservative views contrasted with those of her husband, who was a liberal .

[ 16 ] Gorsuch attended Christ the King Roman Catholic School, a private grade school in Denver. The school's moral lessons influenced him and he was remembered by classmates for assuming strong stances. He assisted his mother in her campaign for the Colorado legislature at age nine.

[ 14 ] After her appointment, Gorsuch's family moved to Bethesda, Maryland . He enrolled in Georgetown Preparatory School , [ 17 ] a selective Jesuit college-preparatory school , arriving as a freshman in 1981.

[ 18 ] He was two years junior to future justice Brett Kavanaugh , a classmate he later clerked with at the Supreme Court. Gorsuch was a member of Georgetown Prep's debate , forensics, and international relations clubs, [ 19 ] and served as a United States Senate page in the early 1980s.

[ 20 ] He graduated in 1985 as student body president; in contrast to Kavanaugh, he was described as a fairly outgoing and extroverted student.

[ 19 ] [ 21 ] Gorsuch attended Columbia University after high school, graduating in 1988 with a Bachelor of Arts , cum laude , in history and politics. He undertook a heavier courseload to graduate in three years.

[ 22 ] As an undergraduate, he wrote for the Columbia Daily Spectator [ 23 ] and co-founded the satirical student publication The Fed in 1986.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Gorsuch distinguished himself as an active debater and an ardent conservative, publishing pieces that criticized left-wing politics. After a brief stint as a writer for a short-lived journal, he led efforts to establish The Fed as a conservative alternative to liberal campus newspapers.

[ 22 ] He was a member of the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity [ 26 ] and was inducted into the Phi Beta Kappa honor society.

[ 27 ] [ 22 ] [ 28 ] After graduating from Columbia, Gorsuch attended Harvard Law School on a Harry S. Truman Scholarship .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] He was an editor of the Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy [ 31 ] [ 27 ] and was a member of the Lincoln's Inn Society , the Harvard Prison Legal Assistance Project, and the Harvard Defenders program.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Gorsuch was described as a committed conservative who supported the Gulf War and congressional term limits on "a campus full of ardent liberals".

[ 34 ] Despite his contrasting political views, he was generally well-liked by students.

[ 35 ] Philip C. Berg, a classmate and close friend, remembered him as "very sensitive" and non-confrontational, recalling when he received Gorsuch's support in coming out as gay .

[ 32 ] Gorsuch graduated in 1991 with a Juris Doctor , cum laude .  Future president Barack Obama was among his classmates.

[ 36 ] Early legal career Clerkships Gorsuch served as a law clerk for Judge David B. Sentelle of the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit from 1991 to 1992. After spending a year at Oxford , later earning a doctorate as a Marshall Scholar , Gorsuch clerked for Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy from 1993 to 1994.

[ 27 ] [ 30 ] [ 37 ] His work with White occurred right after White retired from the Supreme Court; therefore, Gorsuch assisted White with his work on the Tenth Circuit, where White sat by designation.

[ 27 ] Gorsuch was part of a group of five law clerks assigned that year that included Brett Kavanaugh , who described Gorsuch at the time, saying: "He fit into the place very easily. He's just an easy guy to get along with. He doesn't have sharp elbows. We had a wide range of views, but we all really got along well." [ 38 ] Private law practice Instead of joining an established law firm, Gorsuch decided to join the two-year-old boutique firm of Kellogg, Huber, Hansen, Todd, Evans & Figel (now Kellogg, Hansen, Todd, Figel & Frederick ), where he focused on trial work.

[ 14 ] After winning his first trial as lead attorney, a jury member told Gorsuch he was like Perry Mason .

[ 14 ] He was an associate in the Washington, D.C., law firm from 1995 to 1997 and a partner from 1998 to 2005.

[ 27 ] [ 39 ] Gorsuch's clients included Colorado billionaire Philip Anschutz .

[ 40 ] At Kellogg Huber, Gorsuch focused on commercial matters, including contracts , antitrust , RICO , and securities fraud .

[ 27 ] In 2002, Gorsuch wrote an op-ed criticizing the Senate for delaying the nominations of Merrick Garland and John Roberts to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit , writing, "the most impressive judicial nominees are grossly mistreated" by the Senate.

[ 41 ] In 2004, Gorsuch received a Doctor of Philosophy in legal philosophy from the University of Oxford , where he completed research on assisted suicide and euthanasia as a postgraduate student at University College .

[ 42 ] [ 31 ] [ 27 ] A Marshall Scholarship enabled him to study at Oxford in 1992–93, where he was supervised by the natural law philosopher John Finnis .

[ 43 ] His thesis was also supervised by Canadian legal scholar Timothy Endicott of Balliol College, Oxford .

[ 42 ] [ 44 ] In 1996, Gorsuch married Louise, an Englishwoman and champion equestrienne on Oxford's riding team whom he met during his stay there.

[ 14 ] [ 45 ] U.S. Department of Justice Gorsuch served as Principal Deputy to the Associate Attorney General , Robert McCallum , at the United States Department of Justice from June 2005 until July 2006.

[ 27 ] [ 46 ] As McCallum's principal deputy, he assisted in managing the Department of Justice's civil litigation components, which included the antitrust, civil, civil rights , environment, and tax divisions.

[ 27 ] While managing the United States Department of Justice Civil Division , Gorsuch was tasked with all the "terror litigation" arising from the president's War on Terror , successfully defending the extraordinary rendition of Khalid El-Masri , fighting the disclosure of Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse photographs, and, in November 2005, traveling to inspect the Guantanamo Bay detention camp .

[ 47 ] Gorsuch helped Attorney General Alberto Gonzales prepare for hearings after the public revelation of NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–07) , and worked with Senator Lindsey Graham in drafting the provisions in the Detainee Treatment Act that attempted to strip federal courts of jurisdiction over the detainees.

[ 48 ] U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (2006–2017) Gorsuch as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit In January 2006, Philip Anschutz recommended Gorsuch's nomination to Colorado's U.S. senator Wayne Allard and White House Counsel Harriet Miers .

[ 40 ] On May 10, 2006, President George W. Bush nominated Gorsuch to the seat on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit vacated by Judge David M. Ebel , who was taking senior status .

[ 31 ] Like Ebel, Gorsuch was a former clerk of Justice White. The American Bar Association 's Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary unanimously rated him "well qualified" in 2006.

[ 27 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] On July 20, 2006, Gorsuch was confirmed by unanimous voice vote in the U.S. Senate .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] He was Bush's fifth appointment to the Tenth Circuit.

[ 53 ] When Gorsuch began his tenure at Denver's Byron White United States Courthouse , Justice Kennedy administered the oath of office.

[ 41 ] During his time on the Tenth Circuit, ten of Gorsuch's law clerks went on to become Supreme Court clerks, and he was sometimes regarded as a " feeder judge ".

[ 54 ] One of his former clerks, Jonathan Papik , became an associate justice of the Nebraska Supreme Court in 2018.

[ 55 ] Freedom of religion Gorsuch advocates a broad definition of religious freedom that is inimical to church–state separation advocates.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] In Hobby Lobby Stores v. Sebelius (2013), Gorsuch wrote a concurrence when the en banc circuit found the Affordable Care Act 's contraceptive mandate on a private business violated the Religious Freedom Restoration Act .

[ 59 ] That ruling was upheld 5–4 by the Supreme Court in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.

(2014).

[ 60 ] When a panel of the court denied similar claims under the same act in Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged v. Burwell (2015), Gorsuch joined Judges Harris Hartz , Paul Joseph Kelly Jr.

, Timothy Tymkovich , and Jerome Holmes in their dissent to the denial of rehearing en banc .

[ 61 ] That ruling was vacated and remanded to the Tenth Circuit by the per curiam Supreme Court in Zubik v. Burwell (2016).

[ 60 ] In Pleasant Grove City v. Summum (2007), he joined Judge Michael W. McConnell 's dissent from the denial of rehearing en banc , taking the view that the government's display of a donated Ten Commandments monument in a public park did not obligate the government to display other offered monuments.

[ 62 ] The Supreme Court subsequently adopted most of the dissent's view, reversing the Tenth Circuit's judgment.

[ 60 ] Gorsuch has written, "the law [...] doesn't just apply to protect popular religious beliefs: it does perhaps its most important work in protecting unpopular religious beliefs, vindicating this nation's long-held aspiration to serve as a refuge of religious tolerance".

[ 63 ] Administrative law Gorsuch has called for reconsideration of Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.

(1984), in which the Supreme Court instructed courts to grant deference to federal agencies' interpretation of ambiguous laws and regulations. In Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch (2016), Gorsuch wrote for a unanimous panel finding that court review was required before an executive agency could reject the circuit court's interpretation of an immigration law.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Alone, Gorsuch added a concurring opinion , criticizing Chevron deference and National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services (2005) as an "abdication of judicial duty" and writing that deference is "more than a little difficult to square with the Constitution of the framers' design".

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In United States v. Hinckley (2008), Gorsuch argued that one possible reading of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act likely violates the nondelegation doctrine .

[ 68 ] Justices Antonin Scalia and Ruth Bader Ginsburg had held the same view in their 2012 dissent in Reynolds v. United States .

[ 69 ] Interstate commerce Gorsuch has been an opponent of the dormant Commerce Clause , which allows state laws to be declared unconstitutional if they too greatly burden interstate commerce . In 2011, Gorsuch joined a unanimous panel finding that the dormant Commerce Clause did not prevent the Oklahoma Water Resources Board from blocking water exports to Texas.

[ 70 ] A unanimous Supreme Court affirmed that ruling in Tarrant Regional Water District v. Herrmann (2013).

[ 71 ] In 2013, Gorsuch joined a unanimous panel finding that federal courts could not hear a challenge to Colorado's internet sales tax .

[ 72 ] A unanimous Supreme Court reversed that ruling in Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl (2015).

[ 71 ] In 2016, the Tenth Circuit panel rejected the challenger's dormant commerce clause claim, with Gorsuch writing a concurrence.

[ 73 ] In Energy and Environmental Legal Institute v. Joshua Epel (2015), Gorsuch held that Colorado's mandates for renewable energy did not violate the commerce clause by putting out-of-state coal companies at a disadvantage.

[ 74 ] He wrote that the Colorado renewable energy law "isn't a price-control statute, it doesn't link prices paid in Colorado with those paid out of state, and it does not discriminate against out-of-staters".

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Campaign finance In Riddle v. Hickenlooper (2014), Gorsuch joined a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit in finding that it was unconstitutional for a Colorado law to set the limit on donations for write-in candidates at half the amount for major party candidates.

[ 77 ] He added a concurrence noting that although the standard of review of campaign finance in the United States is unclear, the Colorado law would fail even under intermediate scrutiny .

[ 78 ] Civil rights In Planned Parenthood v. Herbert (2016), Gorsuch wrote for the four dissenting judges when the Tenth Circuit denied a full rehearing of a divided panel opinion that had ordered the Utah governor to resume the organization's funding, which Herbert had blocked in response to a video controversy .

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] In A.M. v. Holmes (2016), the Tenth Circuit considered a case in which a 13-year-old child was arrested for burping and laughing in gym class. The child was handcuffed and arrested based on a New Mexico statute that makes it a misdemeanor to disrupt school activities. The child's family brought a federal § 1983 civil rights action against school officials and the school resource officer who made the arrest, arguing that it was a false arrest that violated the child's constitutional rights. In a 94-page majority opinion, the Tenth Circuit held that the defendants enjoyed qualified immunity from suit.

[ 81 ] Gorsuch wrote a four-page dissent, arguing that the New Mexico Court of Appeals had "long ago alerted law enforcement" that the statute that the officer relied upon for the child's arrest does not criminalize noises or diversions that merely disturb order in a classroom.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Criminal law In 2009, Gorsuch wrote for a unanimous panel finding that a court may still order criminals to pay restitution even after it missed a statutory deadline.

[ 84 ] The Supreme Court affirmed that ruling 5–4 in Dolan v. United States (2010).

[ 71 ] In United States v. Games-Perez (2012), Gorsuch ruled on a case where a felon owned a gun in violation of 18 U.S.C.

§ 922 (g)(1), but alleged that he did not know that he was a felon at the time. Gorsuch joined the majority in upholding the conviction based on Tenth Circuit precedent, but filed a concurring opinion arguing that said precedent was wrongly decided: "The only statutory element separating innocent (even constitutionally protected) gun possession from criminal conduct in §§ 922(g) and 924(a) is a prior felony conviction. So the presumption that the government must prove mens rea here applies with full force." [ 85 ] In the 2019 case Rehaif v. United States , the Supreme Court overruled this decision, with Gorsuch joining.

In 2013, Gorsuch joined a unanimous panel finding that intent does not need to be proven under a bank fraud statute.

[ 86 ] A unanimous Supreme Court affirmed that ruling in Loughrin v. United States (2014).

[ 71 ] In 2015, Gorsuch wrote a dissent to the denial of rehearing en banc when the Tenth Circuit found that a convicted sex offender had to register with Kansas after he moved to the Philippines.

[ 87 ] A unanimous Supreme Court reversed the Tenth Circuit in Nichols v. United States (2016).

[ 71 ] Death penalty Gorsuch favors a strict reading of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA).

[ 60 ] In 2015, he wrote for the court when it permitted Oklahoma attorney general Scott Pruitt to order the execution of Scott Eizember, prompting a 30-page dissent by Judge Mary Beck Briscoe .

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] After the state's unsuccessful execution of Clayton Lockett , Gorsuch joined Briscoe when the court unanimously allowed Pruitt to continue using the same lethal injection protocol. The Supreme Court upheld that ruling 5–4 in Glossip v. Gross (2015).

[ 90 ] List of judicial opinions During his tenure on the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit , Gorsuch authored 212 published opinions.

[ 91 ] Some of those are: United States v. Hinckley , 550 F. 3d 926 (2008), on principles of interpretation and construction of a statute, according to plain meaning and context United States v. Ford , 550 F. 3d 975 (2008) on entrapment and email evidence Blausey v. US Trustee , 552 F. 3d 1124 (2009), on procedure Williams v. Jones , 583 F. 3d 1254 (2009), dissent, on murder and evidence Wilson v. Workman , 577 F. 3d 1284 (2009), habeas corpus writ procedure Fisher v. City of Las Cruces , 584 F. 3d 888 (2009), Fourth Amendment excessive force claims against police officers Strickland v.

United Parcel Service , Inc.

, 555 F. 3d 1224 (2009), on gender discrimination and harassment , arguing that if men are treated as equally badly as women, there is no claim American Atheists, Inc.

v. Davenport , 637 F. 3d 1095 (2010), on crosses displayed on highways Flitton v. Primary Residential Mortgage, Inc.

, 614 F. 3d 1173 (2010), on jurisdiction over attorney fees in a gender discrimination and retaliation case Laborers' International Union , Local 578 v. NLRB , 594 F. 3d 732 (2010), dismissing the union's challenge to a National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) finding that the union committed an unfair labor practice by persuading a company to dismiss a worker who did not pay union dues McClendon v. City of Albuquerque , 630 F. 3d 1288 (2011), dismissing class action lawsuit over inhumane jail conditions Public Service Co. of New Mexico v. NLRB , 692 F. 3d 1068 (2012), dismissing a union's claim that the NLRB was wrong to not find an unfair labor practice, when an employer dismissed a worker for deliberately disconnecting a customer's gas supply (no evidence that it treated this employee differently) United States v. Games-Perez , 695 F. 3d 1104 (2012), on imprisonment without trial United States v. Games-Perez , 667 F. 3d 1136 (2012), on criminal law procedure Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. v. Sebelius , 723 F. 3d 1114 (2013), on the Affordable Care Act and religious freedom Niemi v. Lasshofer , 728 F. 3d 1252 (2013) fugitive disentitlement doctrine Riddle v.

Hickenlooper , 742 F. 3d 922 (2014), stating: "No one before us disputes that the act of contributing to political campaigns implicates a 'basic constitutional freedom,' one lying 'at the foundation of a free society' and enjoying a significant relationship to the right to speak and associate—both expressly protected First Amendment activities.

Buckley v. Valeo , 424 U.S. 1, 26 (1976)" Yellowbear v. Lampert , 741 F. 3d 48 (2014), freedom to practice religion in prison Teamsters Local Union No. 455 v. NLRB , 765 F. 3d 1198 (2014) , denying a labor union's claim that a lockout entitled employees to back pay, under the NLRA 1935 , 29 USC § 158(a)(1) United States v. Krueger , 809 F. 3d 1109 (2015), regarding the Fourth Amendment and search and seizures International Union of Operating Engineers v. NLRB , 635 Fed. Appx. 480 (2015) , on NLRB's review of an unfair labor practice by a union, removing an employee from an eligible work list and refusing her the right to review United States v. Arthurs (2016), evidence United States v. Mitchell (2016), evidence, tracking without a warrant NLRB v. Community Health Services , 812 F.3d 768 (2016) , dissenting, arguing against an NLRB decision that interim earnings should not be disregarded when calculating back pay for employees whose hours were unlawfully reduced TransAm Trucking v. Administrative Review Board , 833 F. 3d 1206 (2016) Archived March 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , dissenting against the majority's judgment that an employee was unjustly dismissed.

Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch , 834 F.3d 1142 (2016), on U.S. administrative law , doubting the doctrine of deference to the federal government by courts in Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.

, 467 U.S. 837 (1984) Nomination to Supreme Court Main article: Neil Gorsuch Supreme Court nomination President Donald Trump introduces Gorsuch, accompanied by his wife Marie Louise Gorsuch, as his nominee for the Supreme Court at the White House on January 31, 2017.

During the 2016 U.S. presidential election , candidate Donald Trump included Gorsuch, as well as his circuit colleague Timothy Tymkovich , in a list of 21 judges whom Trump would consider nominating to the Supreme Court if elected.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] After Trump took office in January 2017, unnamed advisers listed Gorsuch in a shorter list of eight, who they said were the leading contenders to be nominated to fill the seat left vacant by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia .

[ 94 ] On January 31, 2017, Trump announced his nomination of Gorsuch to the Supreme Court.

[ 95 ] Gorsuch was 49 years old at the time of the nomination, making him the youngest nominee to the Supreme Court since the 1991 nomination of Clarence Thomas , who was 43.

[ 96 ] It was reported by the Associated Press that, as a courtesy, Gorsuch's first call after the nomination was to President Obama's pick for the same position, Merrick Garland , Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit . Obama had nominated Garland on March 16, 2016, but Senate Judiciary Committee chairman Chuck Grassley did not schedule a hearing for him, leaving Garland's nomination to expire on January 3, 2017.

[ 97 ] Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell invoked the so-called " Biden Rule " (of 1992) to justify the Senate's refusal to consider Garland's nomination in a general election year.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] Trump formally transmitted his nomination to the Senate on February 1, 2017.

[ 101 ] The American Bar Association unanimously gave Gorsuch its top rating—"Well Qualified"—to serve as Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.

[ 102 ] His confirmation hearing before the Senate started on March 20, 2017.

[ 103 ] On April 3, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved his nomination with a party-line 11–9 vote.

[ 104 ] On April 6, 2017, Democrats filibustered (prevented cloture ) the confirmation vote, after which Republicans invoked the " nuclear option ", allowing a filibuster of a Supreme Court nominee to be broken by a simple majority vote.

[ 105 ] On April 4, BuzzFeed and Politico ran articles highlighting similar language occurring in Gorsuch's book The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia and an earlier law review article by Abigail Lawlis Kuzma, Indiana 's deputy attorney general . Academic experts contacted by Politico "differed in their assessment of what Gorsuch did, ranging from calling it a clear impropriety to mere sloppiness." [ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] John Finnis , who supervised Gorsuch's dissertation at Oxford, said, "The allegation is entirely without foundation. The book is meticulous in its citation of primary sources. The allegation that the book is guilty of plagiarism because it does not cite secondary sources which draw on those same primary sources is, frankly, absurd." Kuzma said, "I have reviewed both passages and do not see an issue here, even though the language is similar. These passages are factual, not analytical in nature, framing both the technical legal and medical circumstances of the ' Baby/Infant Doe ' case that occurred in 1982." [ 107 ] In his book on Gorsuch, John Greenya described how Gorsuch was challenged during his confirmation hearings concerning some of his dissertation advisor's more strident views, which Gorsuch generally disagreed with.

[ 110 ] On April 7, 2017, the Senate confirmed Gorsuch's nomination to the Supreme Court by a 54–45 vote, with three Democrats ( Heidi Heitkamp , Joe Manchin , and Joe Donnelly ) joining all Republicans in attendance.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Gorsuch received his commission on April 8, 2017.

[ 113 ] He was sworn into office on Monday, April 10, 2017, in two ceremonies. The chief justice of the United States administered the constitutional oath of office in a private ceremony at 9 a.m. at the Supreme Court, making Gorsuch the 101st associate justice of the Court. At 11 a.m., Justice Kennedy administered the judicial oath of office in a public ceremony at the White House Rose Garden.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] U.S. Supreme Court (2017–present) According to The New York Times , Gorsuch's time on the Supreme Court has been defined by his "folksy demeanor and a flashy writing style" with Jonathan H. Adler presenting Gorsuch and fellow Trump-appointed justice Kavanaugh as "a study in contrasts".

[ 117 ] The Los Angeles Times described his rulings as those of "a wild card" and wrote that Gorsuch tends "to go his own way and chart a course that does not always align with the traditional views on the right or the left".

Vox has called him the court's "most libertarian" justice.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] According to CNBC , Gorsuch's rulings address "historical injustice in a way that seems at odds with Republican attacks on 'woke' history's being taught in schools", [ 120 ] particularly on questions involving Native Americans and tribal law.

[ 121 ] Gorsuch has a reputation as the most defendant-friendly justice on the court's conservative wing, [ 122 ] [ 123 ] with Slate calling him and Ketanji Brown Jackson "the Supreme Court's oddest pairing" owing to their occasional tendency to side together on cases involving defendants' rights in criminal trials; [ 124 ] Gorsuch sided with criminal defendants in 45 percent of cases the court heard.

[ 119 ] In corporate law, Gorsuch's rulings have exemplified "procedural originalism", what Slate has called "taking the history of jurisdiction seriously, and applying the original meaning even when it leads to results that rankle the highest-paid corporate litigators in the game".

[ 125 ] Vox ' s Ian Millhiser has written that, while Gorsuch's rulings sometimes depart from orthodoxy on areas where there is philosophical disagreement among conservatives, they "reliably align with the consensus" in areas where there is unanimity in conservative ideology.

[ 126 ] A 2024 quantitative analysis of Gorsuch's rulings found that he broadly tended to side with justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito more than any other two justices.

[ 127 ] Banking regulation Gorsuch wrote his first U.S. Supreme Court decision for a unanimous court in Henson v. Santander Consumer USA Inc.

, 582 U.S. ___ (2017). The Court ruled against the borrowers, holding that Santander in this case was not a debt collector under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act since it purchased the original defaulted car loans from CitiFinancial for pennies on the dollar, making Santander the owner of the debts and not merely an agent.

[ 128 ] When the act was enacted, regulations were put on institutions that collected other companies' debts, but the act left unaddressed businesses collecting their own debts.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] First Amendment Gorsuch joined the majority in National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra and Janus v. AFSCME , which both held unconstitutional certain forms of compelled speech .

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Gorsuch authored the majority opinion in Kennedy v. Bremerton School District (2022), which concerned a public high school football coach who was fired for praying on the field after games. The opinion held that the coach's conduct was protected by both the Free Speech and Free Exercise clauses of the First Amendment , and that the school's attempt to stop him was not mandated by the amendment's Establishment Clause.

[ 133 ] Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion in 303 Creative LLC v. Elenis (2023), which held that the Free Speech Clause protected a web designer's freedom to sell custom wedding websites only for opposite-sex weddings, notwithstanding a Colorado law prohibiting businesses from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation.

LGBT rights In 2017, in Pavan v. Smith , the Supreme Court "summarily overruled" the Arkansas Supreme Court's decision to deny same-sex married parents the same right to appear on the birth certificate.

[ 134 ] Gorsuch wrote a dissent, joined by Thomas and Alito, arguing that the Court should have fully heard the arguments of the case.

[ 135 ] In 2020, Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion in the combined cases of Bostock v. Clayton County , Altitude Express Inc. v. Zarda , and R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission , ruling that businesses cannot discriminate in employment against LGBTQ people. He argued that discrimination based on sexual orientation was illegal discrimination on the basis of sex, because the employer would be discriminating "for traits or actions it would not have questioned in members of a different sex".

[ 136 ] The ruling was 6–3, with Gorsuch joined by Chief Justice Roberts and the Court's four Democratic appointees.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] Justices Thomas, Alito, and Kavanaugh dissented from the decision, arguing that it improperly extended the Civil Rights Act to include sexual orientation and gender identity.

[ 139 ] In October 2020, Gorsuch agreed with the justices in an "apparently unanimous" decision to deny an appeal from Kim Davis , a county clerk who refused to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples.

[ 140 ] In June 2021, he joined the justices in the unanimous Fulton v. City of Philadelphia decision, ruling in favor of a Catholic adoption agency that had been denied a contract by the City of Philadelphia due to the agency's refusal to adopt to same-sex couples.

[ 141 ] Gorsuch and Thomas joined Alito's concurrence, which argued for reconsidering, possibly overturning, Employment Division v. Smith , "an important precedent limiting First Amendment protections for religious practices." [ 142 ] Also in 2021, Gorsuch was one of three justices, with Thomas and Alito, who voted to hear an appeal from a Washington State florist who had refused service to a same-sex couple based on her religious beliefs against same-sex marriage.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] In November 2021, Gorsuch dissented from the Court's 6–3 decision to reject an appeal from Mercy San Juan Medical Center , a hospital affiliated with the Roman Catholic Church, which had sought to deny a hysterectomy to a transgender patient on religious grounds.

[ 146 ] The decision to reject the appeal left in place a lower court ruling in the patient's favor; Thomas and Alito also dissented.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] In November 2023, Gorsuch voted with the 6–3 majority to decline to hear a case against Washington State's ban on conversion therapy for minors, allowing the law to stand; Kavanaugh, Thomas, and Alito dissented.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] Second Amendment Gorsuch at the LBJ Presidential Library in 2019 Gorsuch joined Thomas's dissent from denial of certiorari in Peruta v. San Diego County , in which the Ninth Circuit had upheld California's restrictive concealed carry laws.

[ 151 ] Gorsuch wrote a statement regarding the denial of an application for a stay presented to Roberts in Guedes v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives , a 2019 D.C. Circuit case challenging the Trump administration's ban on bump stocks . In his statement Gorsuch criticized the Trump Administration's action as well as the justification the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit used for upholding the ban.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] Vagueness doctrine In Sessions v. Dimaya (2018), the Supreme Court ruled 5–4 to uphold the Ninth Circuit's decision that the residual clause in the Immigration and Nationality Act was unconstitutionally vague . Gorsuch joined Justices Kagan, Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor in the opinion, and wrote a separate concurrence reiterating the importance of the vagueness doctrine within Scalia's 2015 opinion in Johnson .

[ 154 ] In United States v. Davis (2019), Gorsuch wrote the Opinion of the Court striking down the residual clause of the Hobbs Act based on the rationale used in Dimaya .

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] Abortion In December 2018, Gorsuch dissented when the Court voted against hearing cases brought by the states of Louisiana and Kansas to deny Medicaid funding to Planned Parenthood .

[ 157 ] He and Alito joined Thomas's dissent arguing that it was the Court's job to hear the case.

[ 158 ] In February 2019, Gorsuch sided with three of the Court's other conservative justices, rejecting a stay to temporarily block a law restricting abortion in Louisiana.

[ 159 ] The law that the court temporarily stayed, in a 5–4 decision, would require that doctors performing abortions have admitting privileges in a hospital.

[ 160 ] In June 2020, the Supreme Court struck down Louisiana's abortion restriction in June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo , a 5–4 decision; Gorsuch was among the four dissenters.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] In September 2021, the Supreme Court declined a petition to block a Texas law banning abortion after six weeks ; the vote was 5–4 with Gorsuch in the majority, joined by Thomas, Alito, Kavanaugh, and Barrett.

[ 163 ] In June 2022, Gorsuch was among the five justices who formed the majority opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization , which ruled there is no constitutional right to abortion, overruling Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey .

[ 164 ] American Indian law & relations Gorsuch is regarded as an authority on American Indian law.

[ 165 ] During his time on the Supreme Court, he has frequently affirmed tribal rights; his appointment to the Court was supported by multiple tribes and Native American organizations due to his favorable rulings as a Tenth Circuit judge.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] In March 2019, Gorsuch joined the four liberal justices (in two plurality opinions) in a 5–4 majority in Washington State Dept. of Licensing v. Cougar Den, Inc.

[ 168 ] The Court's decision sided with the Yakama Nation, striking down a Washington state tax on transporting gasoline, on the basis of an 1855 treaty in which the Yakama ceded a large portion of Washington in exchange for certain rights.

[ 169 ] Gorsuch ended his concurrence by writing: "Really, this case just tells an old and familiar story. The State of Washington includes millions of acres that the Yakamas ceded to the United States under significant pressure. In return, the government supplied a handful of modest promises. The state is now dissatisfied with the consequences of one of those promises. It is a new day, and now it wants more. But today and to its credit, the Court holds the parties to the terms of their deal. It is the least we can do." [ 170 ] In May 2019, Gorsuch again joined the four more liberal justices in a decision favorable to Native Americans' treaty rights, signing on to Justice Sotomayor's opinion to reach a 5–4 decision in Herrera v. Wyoming . The case held that hunting rights in Montana and Wyoming , granted by the U.S. government to the Native American Crow people by an 1868 treaty, were not extinguished by the 1890 grant of statehood to Wyoming.

[ 171 ] In July 2020, Gorsuch again joined the liberal justices to make a 5–4 majority in McGirt v. Oklahoma . The case considered whether much of eastern Oklahoma still remained under the jurisdiction of the " Five Civilized Tribes ", given that the Native American Treaties that had designated the region as under their reservation status had never been dissolved by Congress, and, if so, whether crimes committed by Native Americans against other Native Americans on tribal land were under the jurisdiction of Native Courts.

[ 172 ] The landmark decision in the affirmative, written by Gorsuch, found that "For Major Crimes Act purposes, land reserved for the Creek Nation since the 19th century remains 'Indian country.'" [ 173 ] [ 174 ] In the opinion, he wrote: "Today we are asked whether the land these treaties promised remains an Indian reservation for purposes of federal criminal law. Because Congress has not said otherwise, we hold the government to its word." [ 174 ] The case was later reviewed in the June 2022 case Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta , which considered whether non-Natives who committed crimes against Natives on Native American territory can be charged under the jurisdiction of Native American tribal courts.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] While the state of Oklahoma had initially argued for the overturning of McGirt , the Court agreed to hear only issues relating to the impacts of McGirt .

[ 177 ] The 5–4 decision by Justice Brett Kavanaugh opposed the more expanded viewpoint of non-Native criminal jurisdiction, with the opinion giving jurisdiction over such crimes to both tribal and federal/state governments. Gorsuch derided the opinion in his dissent, writing, "Where this Court once stood firm, today it wilts." [ 178 ] [ 179 ] On June 15, 2022, Gorsuch, Barrett, and the three liberal justices ruled in favor of the Native American Tribes of Texas in the case Ysleta del Sur Pueblo v. Texas . The case concerned a dispute over whether Texas could control and regulate gambling on Texan Native American reservations. The initial conflict had developed from the tribes' having been in a trust with Texas from 1968 to 1987 before being granted a federal trust, resulting in a statute governing the tribes' subjugation to Texas's gambling restrictions.

[ 180 ] The ruling emphasized that the tribes have the power to regulate electronic bingo games on their land regardless of the state's prohibition of non-prohibited gambling. Thus, as long as a game is not outright prohibited by the state of Texas, the state government cannot impose regulations upon tribal games. Gorsuch emphasized in his opinion that "None of this is to say that the Tribe may offer gaming on whatever terms it wishes [...] Other gaming activities are subject to tribal regulation and must conform to the terms and conditions set forth in federal law." [ 181 ] COVID-19 restrictions On November 26, 2020, Gorsuch joined the majority opinion in Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn v. Cuomo , which struck down COVID-19 restrictions imposed by the state of New York on houses of worship.

[ 182 ] On May 18, 2023, Gorsuch issued a statement about the Court's decision to dismiss a lawsuit by several states aimed at continuing Title 42 expulsions of immigrants, a policy instituted to prevent the introduction of COVID-19 cases to the United States. His statement criticized many of the restrictions the government had imposed since the pandemic started and said, "Since March 2020, we may have experienced the greatest intrusions on civil liberties in the peacetime history of this country." [ 183 ] Legal philosophy Gorsuch is a proponent of originalism , the idea that the Constitution should be interpreted as perceived at the time of enactment, and of textualism , the idea that statutes should be interpreted literally, without considering the legislative history and underlying purpose of the law.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] An editorial in the National Catholic Register opined that Gorsuch's judicial decisions lean more toward natural law philosophy.

[ 184 ] In January 2019, Bonnie Kristian of The Week wrote that an "unexpected civil libertarian alliance" was developing between Gorsuch and Sotomayor "in defense of robust due process rights and skepticism of law enforcement overreach." [ 185 ] Voting alignment FiveThirtyEight used Lee Epstein et al.'s Judicial Common Space scores [ 186 ] (which are not based on a judge's behavior, but rather the ideology scores of either home state senators or the appointing president) to find a close alignment between the conservatism of other appellate and Supreme Court judges such as Kavanaugh, Thomas, and Alito.

[ 187 ] The Washington Post ' s statistical analysis estimated that the ideologies of most of Trump's announced candidates were "statistically indistinguishable" and also associated Gorsuch with Kavanaugh and Alito.

[ 188 ] Judicial activism Gorsuch in 2019 In a 2016 speech at Case Western Reserve University , Gorsuch said that judges should strive to apply the law as it is, focusing backward, not forward, and looking to text, structure, and history to decide what a reasonable reader at the time of the events in question would have understood the law to be—not to decide cases based on their own moral convictions or the policy consequences they believe might serve society best.

[ 189 ] In a 2005 National Review article, Gorsuch argued that "American liberals have become addicted to the courtroom, relying on judges and lawyers rather than elected leaders and the ballot box, as the primary means of effecting their social agenda" and that they are "failing to reach out and persuade the public". He wrote that, in doing so, American liberals are circumventing the democratic process on issues like gay marriage , school vouchers , and assisted suicide , and this has led to a compromised judiciary, which is no longer independent. Gorsuch wrote that American liberals' "overweening addiction" to using the courts for social debate is "bad for the nation and bad for the judiciary".

[ 51 ] [ 190 ] Federalism and state power Justin Marceau, a professor at the University of Denver 's Sturm College of Law , called Gorsuch "a predictably socially conservative judge who tends to favor state power over federal power". Marceau added that this is important because federal laws have been used to try to reel in "rogue" state laws in civil rights cases.

[ 191 ] Assisted suicide In July 2006, Gorsuch's book The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia , developed from his doctoral thesis, was published by Princeton University Press .

[ 42 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ 194 ] In the book, Gorsuch makes clear his personal opposition to euthanasia and assisted suicide , arguing that the U.S. should "retain existing law [banning assisted suicide and euthanasia] on the basis that human life is fundamentally and inherently valuable, and that the intentional taking of human life by private persons is always wrong." [ 63 ] [ 193 ] [ 195 ] Statutory interpretation Gorsuch has been considered to follow in Scalia's footsteps as a textualist in statutory interpretation of the plain meaning of the law.

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] This was exemplified in his majority opinion in Bostock v. Clayton County , 590 U.S. ___ (2020), which ruled that Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 grants protection from employment discrimination due to sexual orientation and gender identity. Gorsuch wrote in the decision, "An employer who fired an individual for being homosexual or transgender fires that person for traits or actions it would not have questioned in members of a different sex. Sex plays a necessary and undisguisable role in the decision, exactly what Title VII forbids." [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] Personal life Gorsuch and family with Donald Trump, Anthony Kennedy, and Mike Pence prior [ 201 ] to his swearing-in Gorsuch and his wife, Marie Louise Gorsuch, [ 202 ] a British citizen, met at Oxford. The two married at St. Nicholas' Anglican Church in Henley-on-Thames in 1996.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] They live in Boulder, Colorado , and have two daughters, Emma and Belinda.

[ 205 ] [ 206 ] [ 207 ] Gorsuch enjoys the outdoors and fly fishing ; he went fly fishing on at least one occasion with Justice Scalia.

[ 11 ] [ 208 ] He raises horses, chickens, and goats, and often arranges ski trips with colleagues and friends.

[ 60 ] He has authored three nonfiction books. The first, The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia , was published by Princeton University Press in July 2006.

[ 209 ] He is a co-author of The Law of Judicial Precedent , published by Thomson West in 2016.

[ 39 ] In 2024, Gorsuch co-wrote Over Ruled: The Human Toll of Too Much Law , a critique of overregulation and mass incarceration.

In 2017, after his announcement as a Supreme Court nominee, the New York Times reported that Gorsuch owned a timeshare outside Granby, Colorado , with associates of Philip Anschutz , that was later sold the same year.

[ 40 ] Reporting from Politico in April 2023 revealed that Gorsuch had sold the cabin to Brian Duffy, the CEO of the law firm Greenberg Traurig , which litigates cases before the Supreme Court, but failed to disclose the purchaser's identity on his federal disclosure forms.

[ 210 ] The property was listed for sale for a few years but did not go under contract until the week after Gorsuch joined the Supreme Court.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Since 2017, Greenberg Traurig has been involved in at least 22 cases before or presented to the Supreme Court.

[ 210 ] [ 212 ] Gorsuch has been active in several professional associations throughout his legal career, [ 27 ] including the American Bar Association , the American Trial Lawyers Association , Phi Beta Kappa , the Republican National Lawyers Association, and the New York , Colorado , and District of Columbia Bar Associations.

[ 27 ] In May 2019, it was announced that Gorsuch would become the new chairman of the board of the National Constitution Center , succeeding former vice president Joe Biden .

[ 213 ] Religion Gorsuch was the first member of a mainline Protestant denomination to sit on the Supreme Court since the retirement of John Paul Stevens in 2010.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] [ 216 ] He and his two siblings were raised Catholic and attended weekly Mass .

[ 217 ] [ 205 ] His wife, Louise, is British-born; the two met while Neil was studying at Oxford . Louise was raised in the Church of England .

[ 218 ] When the couple returned to the United States they joined Holy Comforter, an Episcopal parish in Vienna, Virginia , attending weekly services. Gorsuch volunteered there as an usher.

[ 216 ] The Gorsuch family later attended St. John's Episcopal Church in Boulder, Colorado, a liberal church with a longstanding open-door policy for the LGBT community.

[ 95 ] [ 219 ] [ 220 ] During his 2017 confirmation hearing, responding to a senator's question about his faith, Gorsuch replied, "I attend an Episcopal church in Boulder with my family, senator." [ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] After marrying in a non-Catholic ceremony and joining an Episcopal church, Gorsuch has not publicly clarified his religious affiliation.

[ 218 ] Ethics controversy See also: Supreme Court of the United States § Ethics In 2017, Gorsuch sold a property he co-owned for $1.8 million to the CEO of a prominent law firm, Greenberg Traurig .

[ 224 ] This has raised ethics questions, including why Gorsuch did not list the buyer on his ethics form when reporting a profit of between $250,000 and $500,000.

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] [ 226 ] Selected works Books Gorsuch, Neil (2004).

The right to receive assistance in suicide and euthanasia, with particular reference to the law of the United States (DPhil thesis). University of Oxford.

— (2009).

The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

doi : 10.1515/9781400830343 .

ISBN 978-1-4008-3034-3 .

— (2019).

A Republic, If You Can Keep It . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-0-525-57678-5 .

—; Nitze, Janie (2024).

Over Ruled: The Human Cost of Too Much Law . New York: Harper.

ISBN 9780063238473 .

Articles Gorsuch, Neil; Guzman, Michael (1991).

"Will the Gentlemen Please Yield? A Defense of the Constitutionality of State-Imposed Term Limitations" .

Hofstra Law Review .

20 : 341– 385.

— (2000).

"The Right to Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia" (PDF) .

Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy .

23 (2): 599– 710.

PMID 12524693 .

— (2004).

"The Legalization of Assisted Suicide and the Law of Unintended Consequences: A Review of the Dutch and Oregon Experiments and Leading Utilitarian Arguments for Legal Change" .

Wisconsin Law Review .

2004 : 1347– 2424. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2020 .

— (2007).

"A Reply to Raymond Tallis on the Legalization of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia" .

Journal of Legal Medicine .

28 (3): 327– 332.

doi : 10.1080/01947640701554468 .

PMID 17885904 .

S2CID 36871391 .

— (2014).

"Law's Irony (Thirteenth Annual Barbara K. Olson Memorial Lecture)" (PDF) .

Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy .

37 (3): 743– 756. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 30, 2017.

— (2016).

"Of Lions and Bears, Judges and Legislators, and the Legacy of Justice Scalia (2016 Sumner Canary Memorial Lecture)" .

Case Western Reserve Law Review .

66 (4): 905– 920.

— (2016).

"Access to Affordable Justice: A Challenge to the Bench, Bar, and Academy" (PDF) .

Judicature .

100 (3): 46– 55. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

— (2018).

"In Tribute: Justice Anthony M. Kennedy" (PDF) .

Harvard Law Review .

132 : 3– 5.

Other Gorsuch, Neil (November 4, 1992).

"Rule of Law: The Constitutional Case for Term Limits" .

The Wall Street Journal . p. A15.

Gorsuch, Neil (May 4, 2002).

"Justice White and judicial excellence" .

United Press International .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020.

Gorsuch, Neil (March 18, 2004).

"Letter to the Editor: Nonpartisan Fee Awards" .

The Washington Post . p. A30.

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020.

Gorsuch, Neil; Matey, Paul (January 31, 2005).

"No Loss, No Gain" .

Legal Times .

Gorsuch, Neil (February 7, 2005).

"Liberals'N'Lawsuits" .

National Review Online .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020.

Gorsuch, Neil; Matey, Paul (2005).

"Settlements in Securities Fraud Class Actions: Improving Investor Protections" (PDF) .

Critical Legal Issues Working Paper Series .

128 .

Gorsuch, Neil (May 18, 2007).

"The assisted suicide debate" .

The Times Literary Supplement .

Gorsuch, Neil (2013). "Intention and the Allocation of Risk". In Keown, John; George, Robert (eds.).

Reason, Morality, and Law. The Philosophy of John Finnis . Oxford University Press. pp.

413– 424.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199675500.003.0026 .

ISBN 978-0-19-967550-0 .

Gorsuch, Neil; Coats, Nathan; Dunn, Stephanie; Myhre, Blain; Witt, Jesse (2013). "Effective Brief Writing".

Appellate Practice Update 2013 .

OCLC 889590599 .

Gorsuch, Neil (September 5, 2019).

"Disregarding the Separation of Powers Has Real-Life Consequences" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020.

Speeches Gorsuch, Neil (September 3, 2016).

Legacy of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia (video 59:59 mins) . Tenth Circuit Court Bench & Bar Conference.

Colorado Springs, Colorado : C-Span .

See also Donald Trump judicial appointment controversies List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 1) List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 6) References ^ "How to pronounce Gorsuch" .

The Washington Post . March 22, 2017.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2017 . Retrieved April 3, 2017 .

^ a b Totenberg, Nina (January 24, 2017).

"3 Judges Trump May Nominate For The Supreme Court" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 5, 2018 .

^ a b Karl, Jonathan (January 24, 2017).

"Judge Neil Gorsuch Emerges as Leading Contender for Supreme Court" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 28, 2020 .

^ a b Ponnuru, Ronesh (January 31, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch: A Worthy Heir to Scalia" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ Kelleher, J. Paul (March 20, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch's "natural law" philosophy is a long way from Justice Scalia's originalism" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 9, 2018 .

^ Livni, Ephrat (April 7, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch is the first US Supreme Court justice to sit on the bench with his high-court boss" .

Quartz . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

^ "The Supreme Court: Justice Neil M. Gorsuch" .

Supreme Court Historical Society . Retrieved March 3, 2024 .

^ "Neil Gorsuch" . August 28, 2019.

Archived from the original on August 16, 2021 . Retrieved October 1, 2021 .

^ "David Ronald Gorsuch" . geni.com. February 1937.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved November 27, 2017 .

^ Liptak, Adam; Baker, Peter; Fandos, Nicholas; Turkewitz, Julie (February 4, 2017).

"In Fall of Gorsuch's Mother, a Painful Lesson in Politicking" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2021 . Retrieved May 17, 2021 .

^ a b de Vogue, Ariane (February 1, 2017).

"Meet Neil Gorsuch: A fly-fishing Scalia fan" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Greenya 2018 , p. 9–10, 14.

^ Greenya 2018 , p. 11.

^ a b c d e f Kindy, Kimberly; Horwitz, Sari; Wan, William (February 19, 2017).

"Simply stated, Gorsuch is steadfast and surprising" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ Savage, David G. (January 24, 2017).

"Conservative Colorado judge emerges as a top contender to fill Scalia's Supreme Court seat" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Greenya 2018 , p. 14.

^ "Notable Alumni" . Georgetown Preparatory School.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 25, 2017 .

^ "Inside the high school that produced Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh, Justice Neil Gorsuch and other famous alums" .

ABC News . September 26, 2018 . Retrieved April 11, 2023 .

^ a b Mervosh, Sarah (July 10, 2018).

"Kavanaugh and Gorsuch Both Went to the Same Elite Prep School" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 11, 2023 .

^ "Nomination of Neil M. Gorsuch, Nominee to be Circuit Judge for the Tenth Circuit" (PDF) .

congress.gov . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. June 21, 2006. p. 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 5, 2024 . Retrieved June 4, 2024 .

^ "Trump's Two SCOTUS Picks Also Went to High School Together - Washingtonian" . July 9, 2018 . Retrieved April 11, 2023 .

^ a b c Vinciguerra, Thomas (Fall 2017).

"The Education of Neil Gorsuch" .

Columbia Magazine . Retrieved April 11, 2023 .

^ "Columbia Daily Spectator" . spectatorarchive.library.columbia.edu. October 1, 1985.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ Quigley, Aidan (February 2017).

"At Columbia, Gorsuch blasted progressive protesters, defended free speech" .

POLITICO . Retrieved April 11, 2023 .

^ Marhoefer, Laurie (December 1, 1999).

"The History of Columbia's Oldest Student Paper" .

The Fed .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 28, 2017 .

^ Greenya 2018 , p. 32.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Congress (July 20, 2006).

Neil M. Gorsuch .

Congressional Record—Senate . Vol. 152. p. 15346.

ISBN 978-0-16-086155-0 . Retrieved June 12, 2017 – via Google Books .

^ Clarke, Sara (January 31, 2017).

"10 Things You Didn't Know About Neil Gorsuch" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

^ "Joseph E. Stevens Award | The Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation" .

Truman.gov . Archived from the original on December 13, 2016 . Retrieved April 3, 2017 .

^ a b "Neil M. Gorsuch '91 nominated to the U.S. Supreme Court" . Harvard Law Today. January 31, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021.

^ a b c "Hon. Neil Gorsuch" . The Federalist Society. Archived from the original on January 25, 2017.

^ a b Halper, Jamie D. (February 9, 2017).

"Former Classmates Reflect on Gorsuch's Law School Days" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved April 12, 2023 .

^ Halper, Jamie D. (February 1, 2017).

"Harvard Law Graduate Neil M. Gorsuch Nominated to Supreme Court" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved April 12, 2023 .

^ Levenson, Michael (February 2, 2017).

"At Harvard Law, Gorsuch stood out on a campus full of liberals" .

Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 25, 2017 .

^ Greenya 2018 , p. 38, 42.

^ Clauss, Kyle Scott (February 1, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch, Trump's Supreme Court Pick, Attended Harvard Law with Obama" .

Boston .

Boston, Massachusetts .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 3, 2017 .

^ The same 1993 Term, Gorsuch's Harvard Law School classmates David T. Goldberg (HLS 1991) and Julius Genachowski (HLS 1991) both clerked for Justice David Souter.

^ Greenya 2018 , p. 55.

^ a b Mauro, Tony (January 24, 2017).

"Three Things to Know About Neil Gorsuch, SCOTUS Front-Runner" .

The National Law Journal .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

(subscription required) ^ a b c Charlie Savage ; Julie Turkewitz (March 15, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch Has Web of Ties to Secretive Billionaire" .

The New York Times . p. A1.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ a b Liptak, Adam (February 1, 2017).

"In Judge Neil Gorsuch, an Echo of Scalia in Philosophy and Style" .

The New York Times . p. A1.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2017 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ a b c Gorsuch, Neil McGill (2004).

The right to receive assistance in suicide and euthanasia, with particular reference to the law of the United States .

ora.ox.ac.uk (DPhil thesis).

University of Oxford .

OCLC 59196002 .

EThOS uk.bl.ethos.401384 .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2017 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ Warren, Ashley.

"Judge Neil M. Gorsuch ('92) sworn in to US Supreme Court – Association of Marshall Scholars" .

www.marshallscholars.org . Association of Marshall Scholars . Retrieved March 2, 2019 .

^ "Judge Neil M. Gorsuch" .

Administrative Office of the United States Courts . The United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2018 .

^ Rayner, Gordon (February 1, 2017).

"British family of Donald Trump Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch 'thrilled but terrified' " .

The Telegraph .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 7, 2018 .

^ Kim, Seung Min (March 9, 2017).

"DOJ sends 144,000 pages of Gorsuch documents to Senate" .

POLITICO . Retrieved April 10, 2023 .

^ Charlie Savage (March 16, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch Helped Defend Disputed Bush-Era Terror Policies" .

The New York Times . p. A13.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ Charlie Savage (March 19, 2017).

"Newly Public Emails Hint at Gorsuch's View of Presidential Power" .

The New York Times . pp. A15.

Archived from the original on March 19, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ Johnson, Carrie.

Who Is Neil Gorsuch, Trump's First Pick For The Supreme Court?

Archived June 24, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , NPR , February 5, 2017.

^ Ratings of Article III Judicial Nominees: 109th Congress Archived October 31, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , American Bar Association Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary (last updated January 10, 2008).

^ a b Mulkern, Anne C. (July 20, 2006).

"Gorsuch confirmed for 10th Circuit" .

The Denver Post .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ Pres. Nom. 1565 Archived April 9, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , 109th Cong. (2006).

^ Rutkus, Denis Steven; Scott, Kevin M.; Bearden, Maureen (January 23, 2007), U.S. Circuit and District Court Nominations by President George W. Bush During the 107th–109th Congresses (PDF) , Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, The Library of Congress, p. 63, archived (PDF) from the original on February 6, 2017 , retrieved February 11, 2017 ^ "Supreme Court Clerk Hiring Watch: An Analysis Of The October Term 2016 Clerk Class" . August 4, 2016.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2021 . Retrieved August 13, 2016 .

^ Pilger, Lori (March 21, 2018).

"Ricketts' pick for Nebraska Supreme Court 'operating on higher level,' colleague says" . journalstar.com.

Archived from the original on June 27, 2018 . Retrieved June 26, 2018 .

^ Boston, Rob (December 29, 2017).

"Here Are the Top Ten Church–State Stories from 2017" .

Americans United for Separation of Church and State .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2018 . Retrieved January 20, 2018 .

^ Mystal, Elie (April 10, 2017).

"Religious Freedom or Religious Preference? Neil Gorsuch Will Decide Next Week" .

Above the Law . New York.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2021 . Retrieved January 20, 2018 .

^ Epps, Garrett (March 20, 2017).

"Gorsuch's Selective View of 'Religious Freedom' " .

The Atlantic . Washington, DC.

Archived from the original on January 21, 2018 . Retrieved January 20, 2018 .

^ "Recent Cases: Tenth Circuit Holds For-Profit Corporate Plaintiffs Likely to Succeed on the Merits of Substantial Burden on Religious Claim" Archived October 1, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , 127 Harv. L. Rev. 1025 (2014) discussing Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. v. Sebelius Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 723 F.3d 1114 (10th Cir. 2013).

^ a b c d e Citron, Eric, Potential nominee profile: Neil Gorsuch Archived January 31, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , SCOTUSblog.com, January 13, 2017.

^ Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged v. Burwell Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 799 F.3d 1315 (10th Cir. 2015) (Hartz, J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc).

^ Summum v. Pleasant Grove City Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 499 F.3d 1170, 1175 (10th Cir. 2007) (McConnell, J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc).

^ a b Barnes, Robert (January 28, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch naturally equipped for his spot on Trump's Supreme Court shortlist" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ Frankel, Allison (August 24, 2016).

"Is court deference to federal agencies unconstitutional? 10th Circuit judge thinks so" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on January 29, 2017 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

^ Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 834 F.3d 1142 (10th Cir. 2016).

^ Adler, Jonathan H. (August 24, 2016).

"Should Chevron be reconsidered? A federal judge thinks so" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ "Hugo Rosario Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Loretta E. Lynch" (PDF) .

United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit . August 23, 2016.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 29, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ "United States of America v. Shawn Lloyd Hinckley" (PDF) .

United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit . December 9, 2008.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 27, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ "Reynolds v. United States" . SCOTUSBlog.com. January 23, 2012.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Tarrant Regional Water Dist. v. Herrmann Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 656 F.3d 1222 (10th Cir. 2011).

^ a b c d e Recht, Hannah (January 2, 2017).

"Seven Cases Where the Supreme Court Sided With Neil Gorsuch (And One Time it Didn't)" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 735 F. 3d 904 (10th Circ. 2013).

^ Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 814 F.3d 1129 (10th Cir. 2016).

^ Energy and Environment Legal Institute v. Epel Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 793 F.3d 1169 (10th Cir. 2015).

^ Proctor, Cathy (July 14, 2015).

"Federal judges rule on Colorado's renewable energy mandate" .

Denver Business Journal .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ "Energy and Environmental Legal Institute v. Joshua Epel" (PDF) .

United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit . July 13, 2015.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ Torres-Spelliscy, Ciara (February 3, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch Understands Campaign Finance — And That's The Problem" .

Brennan Center for Justice .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2020 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Riddle v. Hickenlooper Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 742 F.3d 922 (10th Cir. 2014).

^ Barnes, Robert (March 18, 2017).

"Rulings offer glimpse into what kind of justice Gorsuch would be" .

The Washington Post . p. A1.

Archived from the original on March 19, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ Planned Parenthood Association of Utah v. Herbert Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 839 F.3d 1301 (10th Cir. 2016).

^ a b "A.M., on behalf of her minor child, F.M. v. Ann Holmes; Principal Susan Labarge; Arthur Acosta, City of Albuquerque Police Officer, in his individual capacity" (PDF) . United States Court of Appeals Tenth Circuit. July 25, 2016.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 31, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

Majority finding on qualified immunity, pp. 93–94; Gorsuch dissent, pp. 1–4.

^ Feldman, Noah (July 27, 2016).

"A Belch in Gym Class. Then Handcuffs and a Lawsuit" .

Bloomberg .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Sandlin, Scott (July 28, 2016).

"Burp arrest of 7th-grader upheld by fed appeals court" .

Albuquerque Journal .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2016 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ United States v. Dolan Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 571 F.3d 1022 (10th Cir. 2009).

^ "United States of America v. Miguel Games-Perez" (PDF) .

United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit . September 17, 2012.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 7, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ United States v. Loughrin Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 710 F.3d 1111 (10th Cir. 2013) ^ United States v. Nichols Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 784 F. 3d 666, 667 (10th 2015) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc).

^ Boczkiewicz, Robert (September 15, 2015).

"Court upholds death penalty in deadly 2003 Oklahoma crime spree" .

The Oklahoman .

Archived from the original on June 21, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ Eizember v. Trammell Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , 803 F.3d 1129 (10th Cir. 2015).

^ "The Supreme Court, 2014 Term: Leading Cases" (PDF) .

Harvard Law Review .

129 : 171. 2015.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 20, 2016 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

^ "Selected Resources on Neil M. Gorsuch" .

Law Library of Congress .

Library of Congress .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ Carpentier, Megan (September 24, 2016).

"Trump's supreme court picks: from Tea Party senator to anti-abortion crusader" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2019 . Retrieved October 12, 2016 .

^ "Donald Trump Supreme Court List" .

Donaldjtrump/com . Archived from the original on May 2, 2017 . Retrieved April 3, 2017 .

^ Gerstein, Josh (January 3, 2017).

"A closer look at Trump's potential Supreme Court nominees" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 24, 2017 . Retrieved January 23, 2017 .

^ a b Barnes, Robert (January 31, 2017).

"Trump picks Colo. appeals court judge Neil Gorsuch for Supreme Court" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Landler, Mark (February 1, 2017).

"Trump's Court Pick Sets Up Political Clash—Democrats Digging In—Gorsuch Would Restore a 5-to-4 Split" .

The New York Times . p. A1.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2017 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ "Gorsuch Phoned Garland, the Judge GOP Rejected" Archived February 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , Telegram.com, February 1, 2017.

^ "In Context: The 'Biden Rule' on Supreme Court nominations in an election year" . PolitiFact.

Archived from the original on June 27, 2018 . Retrieved June 26, 2018 .

^ Davis, Julie Hirschfeld (February 22, 2016).

"Joe Biden Argued for Delaying Supreme Court Picks in 1992" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2019 . Retrieved June 26, 2018 .

^ DeBonis, Mike (February 22, 2016).

"Joe Biden in 1992: No nominations to the Supreme Court in an election year" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2019 . Retrieved June 26, 2018 .

^ "Congressional Record" .

Congress.gov . February 1, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 3, 2017 . Retrieved April 3, 2017 .

^ "ABA Committee on Federal Judiciary Rates Supreme Court Nominee Neil Gorsuch "Well Qualified" " .

americanbar.org .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2017 . Retrieved March 12, 2017 .

^ Kim, Seung Min.

"Gorsuch confirmation hearing set for March 20" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 16, 2017 .

^ Flegenheimer, Matt (April 4, 2017).

"Democrats' Vow to Bar Gorsuch Sets Up a Clash, Senate Decorum Fades, Seeing 'No Alternative,' Republicans Plan to Bypass Filibuster" .

The New York Times . p. A1.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 15, 2017 .

^ Killough, Ashley.

"GOP triggers nuclear option on Neil Gorsuch nomination" .

CNNPolitics .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2019 . Retrieved April 7, 2017 .

^ "Analysis | Neil Gorsuch's 11th-hour plagiarism scare" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved July 22, 2017 .

^ a b Bryan Logan (April 4, 2016) Neil Gorsuch is accused of plagiarism amid a heated Supreme Court confirmation fight Archived April 18, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , businessinsider.com; accessed April 15, 2017.

^ "Gorsuch's writings borrow from other authors" .

Politico . April 4, 2017.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2017 . Retrieved April 15, 2017 .

^ "A Short Section In Neil Gorsuch's 2006 Book Appears To Be Copied From A Law Review Article" .

BuzzFeed .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2017 . Retrieved July 22, 2017 .

^ Greenya 2018 , p. 47.

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

163 (61).

U.S. Government Publishing Office : S2442 – S2443 . April 7, 2017 . Retrieved July 8, 2025 .

^ Adam Liptak ; Matt Flegenheimer (April 8, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch Confirmed by Senate as Supreme Court Justice" .

The New York Times . p. A1.

Archived from the original on April 29, 2019 . Retrieved April 15, 2017 .

^ "Gorsuch, Neil M. - Federal Judicial Center" . fjc.gov.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 30, 2017 .

^ Totenberg, Nina (April 7, 2017).

"Senate Confirms Gorsuch To Supreme Court" . NPR.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2019 . Retrieved April 7, 2017 .

^ "President Donald J. Trump Congratulates Judge Neil M. Gorsuch on his Historic Confirmation" .

whitehouse.gov . April 7, 2017.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2021 . Retrieved March 1, 2021 – via National Archives .

^ "Gorsuch sworn in as Supreme Court justice in Rose Garden as Trump beams" .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 15, 2017 .

^ Liptak, Adam (May 12, 2019).

"Kavanaugh and Gorsuch, Justices With Much in Common, Take Different Paths" .

New York Times . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ Savage, David G. (March 18, 2025).

"On an often unpredictable Supreme Court, Justice Gorsuch is the latest wild card" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved July 12, 2019 .

^ a b Millhiser, Ian (May 21, 2024).

"The Republican Party's man inside the Supreme Court" .

Vox . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ Hurley, Lawrence (June 15, 2023).

"Conservative Justice Gorsuch echoes 'woke' historians in railing against historical injustices" .

CNBC . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ Fritze, John (November 24, 2021).

"Native Americans are winning at the Supreme Court – with help from Justice Gorsuch" .

USA Today . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ French, David (August 4, 2024).

"Neil Gorsuch Has a Few Thoughts About America Today" .

New York Times . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

This was an interesting element of the book to me and something that people who are not familiar with your jurisprudence might not know — it's that you've long been a champion of the rights of criminal defendants.

^ Stern, Mark (January 7, 2019).

"Sotomayor and Gorsuch Resume Their Fight for the Future of the Sixth Amendment" .

Slate . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Neil Gorsuch are on a mission to restore criminal defendants' constitutional rights... It's no surprise that Sotomayor and Gorsuch are emerging as the court's staunchest defenders of the Sixth Amendment.

^ Willis, Jay (October 2, 2023).

"The Supreme Court's Oddest Pairing Comes out Swinging on Behalf of Criminal Defendants" .

Slate . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ Stern, Mark (June 28, 2023).

"Neil Gorsuch's Quirky Originalism Just Dealt a Major Blow to Corporate America" .

Slate . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ Millhiser, Ian (September 25, 2024).

"How would a second Trump presidency change America's courts?" .

Vox . Retrieved March 18, 2024 .

^ Jens, Dean (June 2, 2024).

"Using Math to Analyze the Supreme Court Reveals an Intriguing Pattern" .

Politico . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ Henson v. Santander Consumer USA Inc.

Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , U.S. Supreme Court, June 12, 2017.

^ Liptak, Adam (June 12, 2017).

"Supreme Court Bars Favoring Mothers Over Fathers in Citizenship Case" .

The New York Times .

^ Williams, Joseph P.

Neil Gorsuch Submits First Legal Opinion as a Supreme Court Judge Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , U.S. News & World Report , June 12, 2017.

^ "NIFLA v. Becerra" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved July 4, 2018 .

^ "Janus v. AFSCME" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved July 4, 2018 .

^ "Supreme Court rules school district cannot prohibit football coach's prayers on field" . June 27, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 27, 2022 . Retrieved June 27, 2022 .

^ Liptak, Adam (June 26, 2017).

"Gay Couples Entitled to Equal Treatment on Birth Certificates, Justices Rule" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2019 . Retrieved June 16, 2020 .

^ Barnes, Robert (July 16, 2017).

"A Supreme Court mystery: Has Roberts embraced same-sex marriage ruling?" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 16, 2020 .

^ "Justices rule LGBT people protected from job discrimination" .

AP NEWS . June 15, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 16, 2020 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane (June 15, 2020).

"Why Trump's Supreme Court appointee Neil Gorsuch just protected LGBTQ rights" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2020 . Retrieved June 16, 2020 .

^ Kendall, Jess Bravin and Brent (June 15, 2020).

"Supreme Court Rules for Gay and Transgender Rights in the Workplace" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 16, 2020 .

^ "Supreme Court extends employment protections to LGBT individuals" .

Roll Call . June 15, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 16, 2020 .

^ "Supreme Court rejects appeal from county clerk who wouldn't issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples" .

NBC News . October 5, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 5, 2020 .

^ "Fulton v. City of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" .

SCOTUSblog . Retrieved December 14, 2022 .

^ Liptak, Adam (June 17, 2021).

"Supreme Court Backs Catholic Agency in Case on Gay Rights and Foster Care" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane; Stracqualursi, Veronica (July 2, 2021).

"Supreme Court rejects appeal from florist who wouldn't make arrangement for same-sex wedding" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on July 22, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ Higgins, Tucker (July 2, 2021).

"Supreme Court declines to decide whether religious flower shop owner can refuse same-sex weddings" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ "Gay couple wins case against florist after Supreme Court rejects appeal" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2021 . Retrieved July 5, 2021 .

^ "Supreme Court won't hear case involving transgender rights" .

AP NEWS . November 1, 2021.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ Chung, Andrew; Hurley, Lawrence (November 2, 2021).

"U.S. Supreme Court spurns Catholic hospital appeal over transgender patient" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ Press |, Associated (November 2, 2021).

"Supreme Court turns down Northern California Catholic hospital appeal over transgender patient" .

The Mercury News .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 2, 2021 .

^ Cole, Devan (December 11, 2023).

"Supreme Court lets stand Washington state law barring conversion therapy for minors | CNN Politics" .

CNN . Retrieved December 11, 2023 .

^ Marimow, Ann E. (December 11, 2023).

"Supreme Court declines to hear challenge to 'conversion therapy' ban" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved December 11, 2023 .

^ "Peruta v. California" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved August 27, 2018 .

^ Adler, John H. (March 2, 2020).

"Supreme Court: SCOTUS Denies Certiorari in Bump Stock Case (But Justice Gorsuch Blasts Lower Court's Reasoning)" .

Reason . Archived from the original on December 7, 2020 . Retrieved February 19, 2021 .

^ "Denial of certiorari court order in Guedes v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives , 89 U. S. ____ (2020)" (PDF) . United States Supreme Court. March 3, 2020. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 7, 2020 . Retrieved February 19, 2021 .

^ Liptak, Adam (April 17, 2018).

"Justice Gorsuch Joins Supreme Court's Liberals to Strike Down Deportation Law" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2018 – via NYTimes.com.

^ Church, Tom (August 25, 2019).

"United States v. Davis (U.S. Supreme Court, June 2019)" . The Federal Docket Published by the criminal defense lawyers at Pate, Johnson & Church. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 19, 2021 .

^ "United States v. Davis (2019)" .

Oyez Project . Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 19, 2021 .

^ Higgins, Tucker (December 10, 2018).

"Supreme Court hamstrings states' efforts to defund Planned Parenthood" .

www.cnbc.com .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved December 11, 2018 .

^ "US Supreme Court Justices won't hear states' appeal over Planned Parenthood" .

FOX6Now.com . December 10, 2018.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved December 11, 2018 .

^ "Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts joins liberal justices to block Louisiana abortion clinic law" .

CBS News . February 7, 2019.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 10, 2019 .

^ Totenberg, Nina; Montanaro, Domenico; Gonzales, Richard; Campbell, Barbara (February 7, 2019).

"Supreme Court Stops Louisiana Abortion Law From Being Implemented" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 10, 2019 .

^ "Supreme Court strikes, in 5–4 ruling, down restrictive Louisiana abortion law" .

NBC News . June 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ "Supreme Court Hands Abortion-Rights Advocates A Victory In Louisiana Case" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 30, 2020 .

^ Liptak, Adam; Goodman, J. David; Tavernise, Sabrina (September 1, 2021).

"Supreme Court, Breaking Silence, Won't Block Texas Abortion Law" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2021 . Retrieved September 15, 2021 .

^ Totenberg, Nina (June 24, 2022).

"Supreme Court overturns Roe v. Wade, ending right to abortion upheld for decades" .

NPR . Retrieved June 26, 2022 .

^ Robert Glennon, 'Supreme Court Rules the US is Not Required to Ensure Access to Water for the Navajo Nation,' The Conversation June 27, 2023 ^ Stern, Mark Joseph (March 20, 2019).

"Why Gorsuch Keeps Joining the Liberals to Affirm Tribal Rights" .

Slate . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ Fritze, John (November 24, 2021).

"Native Americans are winning at the Supreme Court – with help from Justice Gorsuch" .

USA Today . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ Martin, Nick (March 20, 2019).

"Gorsuch Sides With Liberal Justices to Spoil Washington's Attempt to Rewrite Tribal Law" .

Splinter .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2019 .

^ Deshais, Nicholas (March 21, 2019).

"Neil Gorsuch joins liberals giving Yakama Nation a Supreme Court victory over state of Washington | The Spokesman-Review" .

The Spokesman-Review .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2019 .

^ "Washington State Dept. of Licensing v. Cougar Den, Inc, No. 16-1498 | Casetext" .

casetext.com .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2019 .

^ Ablavsky, Gregory (May 20, 2019).

"Opinion analysis: Court rejects issue preclusion in affirming Crow Tribe's treaty hunting right" .

SCOTUSblog .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2019 . Retrieved July 10, 2020 .

^ Rubin, Jordan (July 9, 2020).

"Supreme Court Tribal Treaty Decision Praised as Game Changer (3)" .

Bloomberg Law . Retrieved August 11, 2022 .

^ Higgins, Tucker; Mangan, Dan (July 9, 2020).

"Supreme Court says eastern half of Oklahoma is Native American land" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2020 . Retrieved July 9, 2020 .

^ a b Liptak, Adam; Healy, Jack (July 9, 2020).

"Supreme Court Rules Nearly Half of Oklahoma Is Indian Reservation" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 11, 2020 . Retrieved July 9, 2020 .

^ Liptak, Adam (June 29, 2022).

"Supreme Court Narrows Ruling for Tribes in Oklahoma" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ "OKLAHOMA v. CASTRO-HUERTA" .

Cornell Law School . Retrieved August 11, 2022 .

^ Carter, Ray (August 9, 2021).

"STATE ASKS HIGH COURT TO OVERTURN MCGIRT DECISION" .

OCPA . Retrieved August 11, 2022 .

^ Fletcher, Matthew (June 29, 2022).

"In 5-4 ruling, court dramatically expands the power of states to prosecute crimes on reservations" .

SCOTUSBlog . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ Brewer, Graham Lee (June 30, 2022).

"The Supreme Court gave states more power over tribal land. Tribes say that undermines their autonomy" .

NBC News . Retrieved August 11, 2022 .

^ Mann, Ronald (June 16, 2022).

"Divided court rejects Texas' bid to control gambling in tribal casinos" .

Scotusblog . Retrieved June 22, 2022 .

^ "Supreme Court sides with tribes in fight with Texas over authorized gambling on their lands" . June 15, 2022.

^ Vile, John R.

"Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn v. Cuomo (2020)" . The First Amendment Encyclopedia presented by the John Seigenthaler Chair of Excellence in First Amendment Studies. Archived from the original on December 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 29, 2020 .

^ "598 U. S. ____ (2023)" (PDF) .

^ Kengor, Paul (March 23, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch and Natural Law" .

Ncregister.com .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 30, 2017 .

^ Kristian, Bonnie (January 16, 2019).

"The unexpected alliance of Sonia Sotomayor and Neil Gorsuch" .

The Week .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2019 .

^ Epstein, Lee; Martin, Andrew D.; Segal, Jeffrey A.; Westerland, Chad (May 2007).

"The Judicial Common Space" .

Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization .

23 (2): 303– 325.

doi : 10.1093/jleo/ewm024 .

hdl : 10.1093/jleo/ewm024 .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2018 . Retrieved August 9, 2018 .

^ Roeder, Oliver (July 6, 2018).

"How Four Potential Nominees Would Change The Supreme Court" .

FiveThirtyEight .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2018 . Retrieved July 7, 2018 .

^ Cope, Kevin (July 7, 2018).

"Exactly how conservative are the judges on Trump's short list for the Supreme Court? Take a look at this one chart" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2018 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane (January 25, 2017).

"How Neil Gorsuch could end up as Donald Trump's Supreme Court nominee" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ Gorsuch, Neil (February 7, 2005).

"Liberals 'N' Lawsuits" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2017 . Retrieved January 22, 2017 .

^ Simpson, Kevin (December 11, 2016).

"Neil Gorsuch: Elite credentials, conservative western roots land Denver native on SCOTUS list" .

The Denver Post .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 28, 2017 .

^ Gerald Dworkin (March 20, 2017).

"The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia (review)" .

The New Rambler .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ a b Gorsuch, N.M. (2009).

The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia . New Forum Books. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-3034-3 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Laughland, Oliver; Redden, Molly; Booth, Robert; Bowcott, Owen (February 3, 2017).

"Oxford scholar who was mentor to Neil Gorsuch compared gay sex to bestiality" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 25, 2017 .

^ Matthew, Dylan (February 5, 2017).

"I read Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch's book. It's very revealing" . Vox.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ Chemerinsky, Erwin (August 1, 2019).

"Chemerinsky: Justice Gorsuch fulfills expectations from the right and the left" .

ABA Journal . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Barnes, Robert; Min Kim, Sueng (September 6, 2019).

" 'Everything conservatives hoped for and liberals feared': Neil Gorsuch makes his mark at the Supreme Court" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Williams, Pete (June 15, 2020).

"Supreme Court rules existing civil rights law protects gay and lesbian workers" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ de Vogue, Ariana (June 15, 2020).

"Why Trump's Supreme Court appointee Neil Gorsuch just protected LGBTQ rights" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2020 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Stern, Mark Joseph (June 15, 2020).

"Neil Gorsuch Just Handed Down a Historic Victory for LGBTQ Rights" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ Gorsuch, Neil Gorsuch (August 6, 2024).

Over Ruled: The Human Toll of Too Much Law .

HarperCollins .

ISBN 9780063238480 .

^ Dube Dwilson, Stephanie (January 31, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch's Family: 5 Fast Facts You Need to Know" . Heavy.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved November 27, 2017 .

^ "Neil Gorsuch's wife, Louise: The outdoorsy, religious Brit who captured his heart" .

Fox News . April 20, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2018 .

^ "Neil Gorsuch's wife, Louise: The outdoorsy, religious Brit who captured his heart" .

Fox News . April 20, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 28, 2018 .

^ a b Aguilera, Elizabeth (November 20, 2006).

"10th Circuit judge's oath a family affair" .

The Denver Post .

^ Burness, Alex.

Students of Supreme Court candidate Neil Gorsuch at CU law school cite fairness, dedication to truth Archived February 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Denver Post , February 1, 2017.

^ "University of Colorado Law School website: Judge Neil Gorsuch page" .

University of Colorado .

Boulder, Colorado .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

Judge Neil M. Gorsuch was nominated to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in May 2006. His nomination was confirmed in the United States Senate by unanimous voice vote.

^ "Supreme Court choice Neil Gorsuch draws Democrat opposition" . BBC.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Taylor, Audrey; Sands, Geneva (January 26, 2017).

"Judge Neil Gorsuch: What You Need to Know About the Possible SCOTUS Nominee" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved June 28, 2020 .

^ a b c Przybyla, Heidi (April 25, 2023).

"Law firm head bought Gorsuch-owned property" .

POLITICO . Retrieved April 25, 2023 .

^ Savage, Charlie (April 25, 2023).

"Head of a Major Law Firm Bought Real Estate From Gorsuch" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 26, 2023 .

^ "The Supreme Court Sabotages Efforts to Protect Public Health and Safety" .

The New York Times . July 1, 2022.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 27, 2023 .

^ Sherman, Mark (May 14, 2019).

"Gorsuch replaces Biden as chair of civic education group" .

AP NEWS .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 14, 2021 .

^ "Neil Gorsuch belongs to a notably liberal church — and would be the first Protestant on the Court in years" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2017 . Retrieved October 11, 2018 .

^ Petiprin, Andrew.

"Guest opinion column: Episcopal Church a fitting place for conservative Neil Gorsuch" .

OrlandoSentinel.com .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2019 . Retrieved October 11, 2018 .

^ a b "What Neil Gorsuch's faith and writings could say about his approach to religion on the Supreme Court" .

The Denver Post . February 10, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 11, 2018 .

^ Neil Gorsuch - Religion , Denverpost.com, February 10, 2017; accessed February 25, 2017.

^ a b Burke, Daniel.

"What is Neil Gorsuch's religion? It's complicated" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved July 12, 2018 .

^ "Neil Gorsuch Belongs to a Notably Liberal Church—and Would Be the First Protestant on the Court in Years" .

The Washington Post . February 1, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 25, 2017 .

^ Shellnutt, Kate.

"Trump's Supreme Court Pick: Religious Freedom Defender Neil Gorsuch" .

Christianity Today .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ "- CONFIRMATION HEARING ON THE NOMINATION OF HON. NEIL M. GORSUCH TO BE AN ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES" .

www.congress.gov . Retrieved March 29, 2022 .

^ " 'God knows': Ketanji Brown Jackson's faith to share spotlight at confirmation hearings" .

ABC News . Retrieved March 29, 2022 .

^ Paulsen, David (October 7, 2019).

"Neil Gorsuch's 'hero' uncle was a progressive Episcopal priest on a winding spiritual path" .

Episcopal News Service . Retrieved March 29, 2022 .

^ a b Sneed, Jessica Schneider,Tierney (April 25, 2023).

"Justice Neil Gorsuch's property sale to prominent lawyer raises more ethical questions | CNN Politics" .

CNN . Retrieved August 23, 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Stieb, Matt (April 25, 2023).

"It's Neil Gorsuch's Turn for a Financial Scandal" .

Intelligencer . Retrieved August 23, 2024 .

^ Wang, Amy B. (May 11, 2023).

"Gorsuch property sale renews calls for Supreme Court ethics reform" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved August 23, 2024 .

Additional sources Greenya, John (2018).

Gorsuch: The Judge Who Speaks for Himself . New York, NY: Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-1501180378 .

Further reading Questionnaire for the Nominee to the Supreme Court submitted to the U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary Congressional Research Service Report R44778, Judge Neil M. Gorsuch: His Jurisprudence and Potential Impact on the Supreme Court , coordinated by Andrew Nolan, Caitlin Devereaux Lewis, and Kate M. Manuel (2017).

Congressional Research Service Report R44772, Majority, Concurring, and Dissenting Opinions by Judge Neil M. Gorsuch , coordinated by Michael John Garcia (2017).

Congressional Research Service Legal Sidebar, The Essential Neil Gorsuch Reader: What Judge Gorsuch Cases Should You Read?

(2017).

Videos Appearances on C-SPAN Law's Irony lecture as given at the Federalist Society (video 29 min.) YouTube.

External links Neil Gorsuch at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Neil Gorsuch at the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges , a publication of the Federal Judicial Center .

Neil Gorsuch at Ballotpedia Selected Resources on Neil M. Gorsuch , Law Library of Congress website Nominee Spotlight on Judge Neil M. Gorsuch Archived March 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine at the Stanford Law Review Online Biography , whitehouse.gov Appearances on C-SPAN Legal offices Preceded by – Principal Deputy Associate Attorney General 2005–2006 Succeeded by – Preceded by David M. Ebel Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit 2006–2017 Succeeded by Allison H. Eid Preceded by Antonin Scalia Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States 2017–present Incumbent U.S. order of precedence (ceremonial) Preceded by Elena Kagan as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court Order of precedence of the United States as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court Succeeded by Brett Kavanaugh as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court v t e Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Chief justices John Jay ( 1789–1795 , cases ) John Rutledge ( 1795 , cases ) Oliver Ellsworth ( 1796–1800 , cases ) John Marshall ( 1801–1835 , cases ) Roger B. Taney ( 1836–1864 , cases ) Salmon P. Chase ( 1864–1873 , cases ) Morrison Waite ( 1874–1888 , cases ) Melville Fuller ( 1888–1910 , cases ) Edward Douglass White ( 1910–1921 , cases ) William Howard Taft ( 1921–1930 , cases ) Charles Evans Hughes ( 1930–1941 , cases ) Harlan F. Stone ( 1941–1946 , cases ) Fred M. Vinson ( 1946–1953 , cases ) Earl Warren ( 1953–1969 , cases ) Warren E. Burger ( 1969–1986 , cases ) William Rehnquist ( 1986–2005 , cases ) John Roberts ( 2005–present , cases ) Associate justices J. Rutledge * (1790–1791) Cushing (1790–1810) Wilson (1789–1798) Blair (1790–1795) Iredell (1790–1799) T. Johnson (1792–1793) Paterson (1793–1806) S. Chase (1796–1811) Washington (1798–1829) Moore (1800–1804) W. Johnson (1804–1834) Livingston (1807–1823) Todd (1807–1826) Duvall (1811–1835) Story (1812–1845) Thompson (1823–1843) Trimble (1826–1828) McLean (1829–1861) Baldwin (1830–1844) Wayne (1835–1867) Barbour (1836–1841) Catron (1837–1865) McKinley (1838–1852) Daniel (1842–1860) Nelson (1845–1872) Woodbury (1845–1851) Grier (1846–1870) Curtis (1851–1857) Campbell (1853–1861) Clifford (1858–1881) Swayne (1862–1881) Miller (1862–1890) Davis (1862–1877) Field (1863–1897) Strong (1870–1880) Bradley (1870–1892) Hunt (1873–1882) J. M. Harlan (1877–1911) Woods (1881–1887) Matthews (1881–1889) Gray (1882–1902) Blatchford (1882–1893) L. Lamar (1888–1893) Brewer (1890–1910) Brown (1891–1906) Shiras (1892–1903) H. Jackson (1893–1895) E. White * (1894–1910) Peckham (1896–1909) McKenna (1898–1925) Holmes (1902–1932) Day (1903–1922) Moody (1906–1910) Lurton (1910–1914) Hughes * (1910–1916) Van Devanter (1911–1937) J. Lamar (1911–1916) Pitney (1912–1922) McReynolds (1914–1941) Brandeis (1916–1939) Clarke (1916–1922) Sutherland (1922–1938) Butler (1923–1939) Sanford (1923–1930) Stone * (1925–1941) O. Roberts (1930–1945) Cardozo (1932–1938) Black (1937–1971) Reed (1938–1957) Frankfurter (1939–1962) Douglas (1939–1975) Murphy (1940–1949) Byrnes (1941–1942) R. Jackson (1941–1954) W. Rutledge (1943–1949) Burton (1945–1958) Clark (1949–1967) Minton (1949–1956) J. M. Harlan II (1955–1971) Brennan (1956–1990) Whittaker (1957–1962) Stewart (1958–1981) B. White (1962–1993) Goldberg (1962–1965) Fortas (1965–1969) T. Marshall (1967–1991) Blackmun (1970–1994) Powell (1972–1987) Rehnquist * (1972–1986) Stevens (1975–2010) O'Connor (1981–2006) Scalia (1986–2016) Kennedy (1988–2018) Souter (1990–2009) Thomas (1991–present) Ginsburg (1993–2020) Breyer (1994–2022) Alito (2006–present) Sotomayor (2009–present) Kagan (2010–present) Gorsuch (2017–present) Kavanaugh (2018–present) Barrett (2020–present) K. Jackson (2022–present) * Also served as chief justice of the United States v t e Judicial opinions of Neil Gorsuch U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (August 8, 2006 – April 9, 2017); by calendar year 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Supreme Court of the United States (April 10, 2017 – present); by term 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neil_Gorsuch&oldid=1303770833 " Categories : 1967 births Living people 20th-century American lawyers 20th-century Roman Catholics 21st-century American Episcopalians 21st-century American lawyers Alumni of University College, Oxford American Christians Columbia College (New York) alumni George W. Bush administration personnel Georgetown Preparatory School alumni Harvard Law School alumni Judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States Lawyers from Denver United States court of appeals judges appointed by George W. Bush United States federal judges appointed by Donald Trump United States Department of Justice lawyers University of Colorado Boulder faculty University of Colorado Law School faculty Writers from Colorado Marshall Scholars Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from February 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2024 Articles with hCards Articles with hAudio microformats People appearing on C-SPAN FJC Bio template with ID same as Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neil Gorsuch 34 languages Add topic

