Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geology 2 Tectonic history 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Somali plate 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Minor tectonic plate including the east coast of Africa and the adjoining seabed Somali plate Type Minor Approximate area 16,700,000 km 2 [ 1 ] Movement 1 south-east Speed 1 6 mm/year Features East Africa , Horn of Africa , Gulf of Aden , Socotra Archipelago , Madagascar , Indian Ocean 1 Relative to the African plate The Somali plate is a minor tectonic plate which straddles the Equator in the Eastern Hemisphere .  It is currently in the process of separating from the African plate along the East African Rift Valley and moving to the Indian subcontinent.  It is approximately centered on the island of Madagascar and includes about half of the east coast of Africa, from the Gulf of Aden in the north through the East African Rift Valley. The southern boundary with the Nubian–African plate is a diffuse plate boundary consisting of the Lwandle plate .

[ 2 ] Geology [ edit ] The Arabian plate diverges to the north forming the Gulf of Aden . The Indian plate , Australian plate , and Antarctic plate all diverge from the Somali plate forming the eastern Indian Ocean . The Somali-Indian boundary spreading ridge is known as the Carlsberg Ridge . The Somali-Australian boundary spreading ridge is known as the Central Indian Ridge . The Somali-Antarctic boundary spreading ridge is known as the Southwest Indian Ridge . The western boundary with the African plate is diverging to form the East African Rift , which stretches south from the triple junction in the Afar depression . The southern boundary with the Nubian–African plate is a diffuse plate boundary with the Lwandle plate .

[ 2 ] The Seychelles and the Mascarene Plateau are located northeast of the Madagascar.

Tectonic history [ edit ] From 1.4–1.2 Ga the Kibaran orogeny fused the Tanzanian and Congo cratons.

[ 3 ] From 1000 to 600 Ma the super-continent Gondwana was formed and the Pan-African orogeny sutured the Tanzanian and Kalahari cratons .

[ 3 ] The rifting of Gondwana occurred from 190 Ma to 47 Ma separating Madagascar from the eastern coast of Africa and placing the Seychelles / Mascarene Plateau northeast of Madagascar.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The rifting of the Red Sea started around 30 million years ago and the first rifting occurred in the northern West African Rift System around 20 million years ago .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Victoria microplate References [ edit ] ^ Alden, Andrew (2017-03-17) Here Are the Sizes of Tectonic or Lithospheric Plates . thoughtco.com ^ a b Saria, E; Calais, E.; Stamps, D.S.; Delvaux, D.; Hartnady, C.J.H. (20 March 2014). "Present-day Kinematics of the East African Rift".

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .

119 (4): 3584– 3600.

Bibcode : 2014JGRB..119.3584S .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.723.5337 .

doi : 10.1002/2013JB010901 .

S2CID 128891002 .

^ a b Rogers, J; Santosh, M (2004).

Continents and supercontinents (PDF) . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 723.

ISBN 9780195165890 .

^ Ali, J; Aitchison, C (2008). "Gondwana to Asia: Plate tectonics, paleogeography and the biological connectivity of the Indian sub-continent from the Middle Jurassic through latest Eocene (166–35 Ma)".

Earth-Science Reviews .

88 ( 3– 4): 145– 166.

Bibcode : 2008ESRv...88..145A .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2008.01.007 .

^ Plummer, P (1995). "Ages and geological significance of the igneous rocks from Seychelles".

Journal of African Earth Sciences .

20 (2): 91– 101.

Bibcode : 1995JAfES..20...91P .

doi : 10.1016/0899-5362(95)00035-R .

^ Chorowicz, Jean (October 2005). "The East African rift system".

Journal of African Earth Sciences .

43 ( 1– 3): 379– 410.

Bibcode : 2005JAfES..43..379C .

doi : 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2005.07.019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Somali tectonic plate .

Emerick, C. M., 1985, Age progressive volcanism in the Comores Archipelago and Northern Madagascar , Oregon State Univ., Corvallis, PhD Thesis, Abstract v t e Major African geological formations Plates Major plates: African plate Minor plates: Somali plate Microplates: Lwandle plate Madagascar plate Rovuma plate Seychelles plate Victoria Microplate Cratons and shields Arabian-Nubian Shield Congo Craton Kaapvaal Craton Kalahari Craton Saharan Metacraton Tanzania Craton Tuareg Shield West African Craton Zimbabwe Craton Shear zones Aswa Dislocation Broodkop Shear Zone Central African Shear Zone Chuan Shear Zones Foumban Shear Zone Kandi Fault Zone Mwembeshi Shear Zone Todi Shear Zone Western Meseta Shear Zone Orogens Alpine Orogen Cape Fold Belt Damara Orogen East African Orogen Eburnean Orogen Gondwanide Orogen Kibaran Orogen Kuunga Orogen Mauritanide Belt Pan-African orogens Terra Australis Orogen Rifts Afar Triangle Anza trough Bahr el Arab rift Benue Trough Blue Nile rift East African Rift Gulf of Suez Rift Lamu Embayment Melut Basin Muglad Basin Red Sea Rift Sangha Aulacogen Atbara rift Urema Valley West and Central African Rift System White Nile rift Sedimentary basins Angola Basin Aoukar Blue Nile Basin Chad Basin Congo Basin Douala Basin El Djouf Karoo Basin Gabon Basin Iullemmeden Basin Kufra Basin Murzuq Basin Niger Delta Basin Ogaden Basin Orange River Basin Ouled Abdoun Basin Owambo Basin Reggane Basin Rio del Rey Basin Sirte Basin Somali Coastal Basin Taoudeni Basin Tanzania Coastal Basin Tindouf Basin Turkana Basin Mountain ranges Aïr Mountains Atlas Mountains Aurès Mountains Bambouk Mountains Blue Mountains Cameroon line Central Pangean Mountains Chaillu Mountains Drakensberg Eastern Arc Mountains Eastern Rift mountains Ethiopian Highlands Great Escarpment Great Karas Mountains Guinea Highlands Hoggar Mountains Imatong Mountains Jebel Uweinat Loma Mountains Mandara Mountains Marrah Mountains Mitumba Mountains Nuba Mountains Rif Mountains Rwenzori Mountains Sankwala Mountains Serra da Leba Serra da Chela Teffedest Mountains Tibesti Mountains Inselbergs (aka koppie) Anti-Atlas Mount Gorongosa Jugurtha Tableland Mount Mabu Mulanje Massif Mont Niénokoué Wase Rock Zuma Rock List of inselbergs v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Somali_plate&oldid=1300778093 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of Africa Geology of the Indian Ocean Geology of Somalia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 10:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Somali plate 26 languages Add topic

