Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Nityapralaya 1.2 Brahmapralaya 1.3 Prakritapralaya 1.4 Atyantikapralaya 2 Philosophy 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Pralaya 18 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Català Čeština فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Português Русский संस्कृतम् தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mahapralaya ) Period of dissolution (non-activity) in Hindu cosmology For ships of this name, see INS Pralaya .

"Proloy" redirects here. For the 2013 film, see Proloy (film) .

The Matsya (fish) avatar of Vishnu saves the first Manu during a Prakritapralaya.

Pralaya ( Sanskrit : प्रलय , romanized : Pralaya , lit.

'Destruction') is a concept in Hindu eschatology . Generally referring to four different phenomena, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] it is most commonly used to indicate the event of the dissolution of the entire universe that follows a kalpa (a period of 4.32 billion years) called the Brahmapralaya .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Pralaya also refers to Nityapralaya , the continuous destruction of all animate and inanimate beings that occurs on a daily basis, Prakritapralaya , the great flood produced by Prakriti (Nature) that ends all of creation after the completion of 1,000 Chaturyuga (four-age) cycles, and Atyantikapralaya , the dissolution of one's Atman (Self) due to its union with Brahman (Ultimate Reality).

[ 6 ] A concept that has been referenced in literature since the Upanishads , [ 7 ] the concept of pralaya has been widely discussed in Hindu cosmology as well as philosophy .

Description [ edit ] Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Hindu cosmology posits an endless cycle of the periodic creation and destruction of the universe.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Nityapralaya [ edit ] Nityapralaya refers to constant dissolution, the phenomenon that describes the daily entropy of the mind and the body of all living and non-living beings.

[ 10 ] Being created, all matter is subject to constant decay and destruction, and is often described to be a personal experience, leading to a temporary earthly death.

[ 11 ] The Skanda Purana describes the Nityapralaya to be the various negative experiences and losses that a human being experiences, such as being robbed, having one's wife stolen, the arrival of one's enemy, the onset of fever, as well as blight, all of which culminates in death, the most painful experience. Such mental anguish is stated to be the result of one's own karma . One's karma is also stated to determine one's rebirth as various lesser beasts, the actions of the being during such births in turn determining one's karma.

[ 12 ] Brahmapralaya [ edit ] The Bhagavata Purana states that one kalpa (age), which consists of a thousand revolutions of the four ages, the Satya , Treta , Dvapara , and the Kali , and the reign of fourteen Manus , is one day in the life of the creator deity, Brahma . A pralaya is described to be an equal length of time, referred to as a night in the life of the deity. This form of the dissolution is caused by the sleep of Brahma, and is hence named after him. It is also called naimittika , which means, 'occasional'. During this period, Narayana withdraws the universe within him, and also rests upon his serpent mount, Shesha .

[ 13 ] The Agni Purana describes that the resources of the earth are depleted by the end of the four-age cycle, leading to a severe drought for a century. All beings perish on earth during this period. The waters that are present in the three worlds are dried up due to their consumption by Vishnu . The seven rays of the sun become seven suns, and burn the three worlds, as well as the netherworld . The earth is described to resemble a tortoise during this event. A fire of dissolution, a manifestation of Rudra , along with the breath of Shesha, burn the netherworld. The inhabitants of the three worlds first travel to Maharloka, and then to Janaloka. Vishnu causes a century of rain upon the worlds to douse the fire. He returns to his yogic sleep for an age, and waking up in his form of Brahma, he creates the universe once more. The universe is stated to remain in a non-manifested state for two parārdhas (311.04 trillion years) .

[ 14 ] The term Mahapralaya stands for "Great Dissolution", and is synonymous with the Brahmapralaya.

[ 15 ] According to the Shiva Purana , the lower ten realms ( lokas ) are destroyed during this phenomenon, [ 16 ] while the higher four realms called the Satyaloka , Tapa-loka, Jana-loka, and Mahar-loka, are preserved. During each Mahapralaya, all 14 realms are destroyed.

Prakritapralaya [ edit ] The Vishnu Purana describes the Prakritapralaya .

After the completion of 1,000 four-age cycles or a kalpa , a great flood is unleashed on Bhumi , the earth, by Prakriti, the personification of nature. When Jala (water) reaches the abode of the Saptarishis , the entire world is encompassed by a single ocean. The breath of Vishnu disperses all the clouds and reabsorbs them, after which he proceeds to sleep. When Agni destroys the world and nature, elemental dissolution begins. Jala swallows the gunas of the earth, and subsequently the universe, after which its rasa is devoured by Agni. When Akasha is consumed by the flames of Agni, Vayu and sound permeate throughout, becoming one with Agni by absorbing its guna. When Vayu comes into contact with ether, it loses its elemental potency, causing ether alone to occupy the vacuum. Consciousness, combined with darkness, take over the universe, which in turn is conquered by Buddhi . At this juncture, the seven components of Prakriti recombine. At that point Urvashi is impregnated by the pious seeds of those who dwell in Swarg lok and engage in passionate coitus. The Hiranyagarbha of Brahma dissolves in the waters that surround Prakriti. Prakriti fuses with Purusha , assimilating Buddhi, becoming Brahman.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Atyantikapralaya [ edit ] This form of pralaya is referred to as absolute dissolution. The Agni Purana states that such a dissolution may be achieved with knowledge acquisition, after recognising the suffering caused by one's mind. It explains the cycles of birth and rebirth ( samsara ), and a temporary residence at abodes in between. It states that a person is born on earth based on their deeds in their previous life. It states that a person who had led a mostly sinful life would experience their fruits of performing good deeds at Svarga first, before assuming a new form to suffer for their sins at Naraka . A person who had led a mostly pious life would suffer the consequences of their sins first, after which they would enjoy the fruits of Svarga.

[ 19 ] Atyantika refers to the liberation of one's sense of self. Atyantikapralaya is achieved with the knowledge of God, which occurs when one loses oneself in service to the Paramatman , the Supreme Self. This involves the recognition that most of the cause and effect that occurs in the phenomenal universe is maya , an illusion, and that all that has a beginning and an end is not real. One conquers avidya (ignorance) with the realisation that there is no distinction between one's own Atman (Self) and the Paramatman. When one finally realises this truth, one's sense of self dissolves into and unites with Brahman, and one achieves mukti (liberation).

[ 20 ] Philosophy [ edit ] In the Samkhya philosophy, one of the six schools of classical Indian philosophy , pralaya means "non-existence", a state of matter achieved when the three gunas (principles of matter) are in perfect balance. The word pralaya comes from Sanskrit meaning "dissolution" or by extension "reabsorption, destruction, annihilation or death".

See also [ edit ] Hindu units of time Kalpa (day of Brahma ) Manvantara (age of Manu ) Pralaya (period of dissolution) Yuga Cycle (four yuga ages): Satya (Krita) , Treta , Dvapara , and Kali Hiranyagarbha References [ edit ] ^ Soifer, Deborah A. (8 November 1991).

Myths of Narasimha and Vamana, The: Two Avatars in Cosmological Perspective . State University of New York Press. p. 70.

ISBN 978-1-4384-2063-9 .

^ Williams, George M. (2008-03-27).

Handbook of Hindu Mythology . OUP USA. p. 236.

ISBN 978-0-19-533261-2 .

^ Bäumer, Bettina (1996).

Kalatattvakosa . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. p. 31.

ISBN 978-81-208-1402-8 .

^ Dalal, Roshen (2010).

Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide . Penguin Books India. p. 312.

ISBN 978-0-14-341421-6 .

^ Johnson, W.J. (2009).

A Dictionary of Hinduism . Oxford University Press. pp. 165, 241.

ISBN 978-0-19-861025-0 .

^ Barz, Richard Keith; Theil-Horstmann, Monika (1989).

Living Texts from India . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 146.

ISBN 978-3-447-02967-4 .

^ Basu, Baman Das (2007).

The Sacred Books of the Hindus . Cosmo Publications. p. 207.

ISBN 978-81-307-0553-8 .

^ Klostermaier, Klaus K. (2007-07-05).

A Survey of Hinduism: Third Edition . SUNY Press. p. 496.

ISBN 978-0-7914-7082-4 .

^ Walls, Jerry L. (2007-12-03).

The Oxford Handbook of Eschatology . Oxford University Press. p. 389.

ISBN 978-0-19-988359-2 .

^ Caṭṭopādhyāẏa, Rāmapada; Chattopadhyay, Ramampada (1992).

A Vaiṣṇava Interpretation of the Brahmasūtras: Vedānta and Theism . BRILL. p. 52.

ISBN 978-90-04-09570-0 .

^ Baartmans, Frans (1990).

Āpaḥ, the Sacred Waters: An Analysis of a Primordial Symbol in Hindu Myths . B.R. Publishing Corporation. p. 30.

ISBN 978-81-7018-582-6 .

^ Shastri, J. L.; Bhatt, G. P.

The Skanda Purana Part 7: Ancient Indian Tradition And Mythology [Volume 55] . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 317.

ISBN 978-81-208-3922-9 .

^ Shastri, J. L.; Tagare, Dr G. V. (2004-01-01).

The Bhagavata Purana Part 5: Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Volume 11 . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 2143.

ISBN 978-81-208-3878-9 .

^ The Agni Purana . Motilal Banarsidass. 1984. p. 1028.

ISBN 978-81-208-0306-0 .

^ Rajarajan, R. K. K. (2020).

"Water, Source of 'Genesis' and the End Macro and Micro Viṣṇu in the Hymns of the Āḻvārs" .

The Medieval History Journal .

23 (2): 296– 331.

doi : 10.1177/0971945820956583 .

ISSN 0971-9458 .

S2CID 227240912 .

^ B. K. Chaturvedi (2004).

Shiv Purana . Diamond Pocket Books. p. 124.

ISBN 8171827217 .

^ Valborg, Helen (2007).

Symbols of the Eternal Doctrine: From Shamballa to Paradise . Theosophy Trust Books. p. 168.

ISBN 978-0-9793205-1-4 .

^ Srinivasan, Dr A. V.

The Puranas: A Magnifying Glass for Vedic Wisdom . Periplus Line LLC. p. 13.

ISBN 978-1-63587-202-6 .

^ The Agni Purana . Motilal Banarsidass. 1984. p. 1031.

ISBN 978-81-208-0306-0 .

^ Bäumer, Bettina (1988).

Kalātattvakośa: Primal elements-Mahābhūta . Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi. p. 31.

ISBN 978-81-208-1402-8 .

v t e Hindu cosmology Space Loka Brahmaloka Vaikuntha Kailasha Manidvipa Goloka Svarga Patala Naraka Aṇḍa Hiranyagarbha Time Life of Brahma Kalpa of Brahma Manvantara of Manu (age of mankind) Yuga / Cycle Satya Yuga Treta Yuga Dvapara Yuga Kali Yuga Pralaya (dissolution) Samudra Manthana Literature Nasadiya Sukta Brahmanda Purana Vishnu Purana Related List of numbers in Hindu scriptures Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pralaya&oldid=1300098262 " Categories : Hindu philosophical concepts Time in religion Hindu cosmology Hindu eschatology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from October 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles containing Sanskrit-language text This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 07:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pralaya 18 languages Add topic

