Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Commonality in many "educations" 2 Multinational school-based values education schemes Toggle Multinational school-based values education schemes subsection 2.1 Living Values Education Programme 2.2 Human Values Foundation 2.3 Character education 2.4 Science of Living 3 Examples of values education from around the world Toggle Examples of values education from around the world subsection 3.1 Australia 3.2 India 3.3 Indonesia 3.4 Japan 3.5 Singapore 3.6 Slovenia 3.7 Sweden 3.8 Thailand 3.9 United Kingdom 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Values education 6 languages العربية Español हिन्दी Svenska தமிழ் Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process by which people give moral values to each other Values education is the process by which people give moral values to each other. According to Powney et al.

[ 1 ] It can be an activity that can take place in any human organisation. During which people are assisted by others, who may be older, in a condition experienced to make explicit our ethics in order to assess the effectiveness of these values and associated behaviour for their own and others' long term well-being, and to reflect on and acquire other values and behaviour which they recognise as being more effective for long term well-being of self and others. There is a difference between literacy and education.

There has been very little reliable research on the results of values education classes, but there are some encouraging preliminary results.

[ 2 ] One definition refers to it as the process that gives young people an initiation into values, giving knowledge of the rules needed to function in this mode of relating to other people and to seek the development in the student a grasp of certain underlying principles, together with the ability to apply these rules intelligently, and to have the settled disposition to do so [ 3 ] Some researchers use the concept values education as an umbrella of concepts that include moral education and citizenship education [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] instead. Values education topics can address to varying degrees are character , moral development , Religious Education , Spiritual development , citizenship education , personal development , social development and cultural development .

[ 7 ] There is a further distinction between explicit values education and implicit values education [ 8 ] [ 9 ] where: explicit values education is associated with those different pedagogies, methods or programmes that teachers or educators use in order to create learning experiences for students when it comes to value questions.

Another definition of value education is "learning about self and wisdom of life" in a self-exploratory, systematic and scientific way through formal education. According to C.V.Good'value education is the aggregate of all the process by means of which a person develops abilities and other forms of behaviour of the positive values in the society in which he lives.

Commonality in many "educations" [ edit ] Moral education Morals as socio-legal-religious norms are supposed to help people behave responsibly. However, not all morals lead to responsible behaviour. Values education can show which morals are "bad" morals and which are "good". The change in behaviour comes from confusing questions about right and wrong.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] American psychologist Lawrence Kohlberg who specialized in research on moral education and reasoning, and
was best known for his theory of stages of moral development , believed children needed to be in an environment that allowed for open and public discussion of day-to-day conflicts and problems to develop their moral reasoning ability.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Teacher education Cross has made a start at documenting some teacher training attempts.

[ 17 ] Multinational school-based values education schemes [ edit ] Living Values Education Programme [ edit ] This project of worldwide proportions inspired by the new religious movement called the Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University incorporates twelve values ( unity , peace , happiness, hope , humility , simplicity , trust , freedom , co-operation , honesty , courage , love ), [ 18 ] and has formed the basis of the whole-school ethos approach in schools such as West Kidlington Primary School, Kidlington whose head master Neil Hawkes and Values education coordinators Linda Heppenstall used the work and other programmes to help them form a values-based school.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The Living Values Education Programme website lists 54 countries where values education projects are undertaken.

[ 21 ] Human Values Foundation [ edit ] The Human Values Foundation was established in 1995 to make available worldwide, a comprehensive values-themed programme for children from 4 to 12 years entitled "Education in Human Values".  Its fully resourced lesson plans utilise familiar teaching techniques of discussion, story-telling, quotations, group singing, activities to reinforce learning and times of quiet reflection.  Following the success of "EHV", a second programme was published – Social and Emotional Education ("SEE"), primarily for ages 12 to 14+ but it has also proved constructive for older children identified as likely to benefit from help getting their lives 'back on track.  The programmes enable children and young people to explore and put into practice a wide spectrum of values with the potential to enrich their lives.  Through experiential learning, over time participants develop a well-considered personal morality, all the while gaining invaluable emotional and social skills to help them lead happy, fulfilled, successful lives.

Character education [ edit ] Main article: Character education Character education is an umbrella term generally used to describe the teaching of children in a manner that will help them develop as personal and social beings. However, this definition requires research to explain what is meant by "personal and social being". Concepts that fall under this term include social and emotional learning, moral reasoning/cognitive development, life skills education, health education; violence prevention, critical thinking, ethical reasoning, and conflict resolution and mediation. Lickona (1996) mentions eleven principles of successful character education.

[ 22 ] It seems to have been applied in the UK [ 23 ] and the United States [ 24 ] Science of Living [ edit ] Science of Living (Jeevan Vigyan; Jeevan = Life and Vigyan = Science) is a detailed program that complements the current educational approach with spiritual and value-based learning. While both mental and physical development is needed for a student's growth, Jeevan Vigyan adds a third pillar – that of emotional intelligence and morality (or values) – to education in schools and colleges. A combination of theory and practice, Jeevan Vigyan draws on the findings of various life sciences as well as nutritional sciences. Our parasympathetic nervous system and endocrinal system are known to be the drivers of our emotions and our behaviour. These biological centres can be influenced the Science of Living through a system of yogic exercises, breathing exercises, meditation and contemplation. Science of Living's source of inspiration is Jain Acharya Ganadhipati Shri Tulsi (1914–1997). His thoughts were further developed and expanded by Acharya Shri Mahapragya (1920–2010). Currently, Muni Shri Kishan Lal Ji, under the leadership of Acharya Shri Mahashraman, is the Principal of SOL.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Examples of values education from around the world [ edit ] Taylor [ 27 ] gives a thorough overview of values education in 26 European countries.

Australia [ edit ] The Australian Government currently funds Values education in its schools, with its own publications and funding of school forums on values education at all levels of education. It also helps in becoming a better person.

[ 28 ] A conference on "Moral Education and Australian Values" was held in 2007 at Monash University .

[ 29 ] India [ edit ] The Indian Government currently promote Values education in its schools. The Ministry of Education has taken a strong step to introduce values among schools and teachers training centres.

Indonesia [ edit ] A key feature of education in Indonesia is the five principles of Pancasila .

[ 30 ] Japan [ edit ] Elementary school and middle school students from first to ninth grades will be taught the importance of life, to listen to others with different opinions, to be fair, respect their country and learn about foreign cultures.

Singapore [ edit ] Teacher training institutions in Singapore all have curricular for learning to teach civics and moral education programmes – but students do not take these as seriously as they should due to lack of assessment. The reason has been said to be the lack of innovative teaching approaches such as discourse pedagogy.

[ 31 ] Slovenia [ edit ] There is an obligatory school subject that includes the aspect of values education and Citizenship Culture and Ethics. It is taught in 7th or 8th grade of primary school. Besides this, there are two elective subjects that partly deal with values education: Religions and Ethics (for 7th, 8th, and 9th grade) and Philosophy for children (Critical thinking, Ethical exploring, Me and the other; for 7th, 8th, and 9th grade). The Slovenian educational system does not require special training in the field of values education for teachers that teach mentioned subjects.

Sweden [ edit ] Values education is a part of Swedish schools. Whereas the formal curricula are about educating students to be competent democratic citizens by practising student participation, qualitative studies have shown that in everyday school life, values education and school democracy often appeared to be reduced to traditional disciplining with a high focus on rules and regulations.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] This in turn evokes some critiques among students.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Most research on values education in Sweden is done by qualitative methods, especially ethnographic or field studies as well as a focus group and interview studies.

[ 37 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 32 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] Some studies have been conducted by survey and other quantitative methods.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] In addition, theoretical work with roots in Dewey and Habermas has been done on deliberative democracy and deliberative conversations in schools.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] Thailand [ edit ] In Thailand, values have traditionally been taught within the context of Buddhist religious education. Since 1982 there has been a revival of applied values as an extracurricular activity suitable for Buddhist, Moslem and Christian students alike to prepare Thai students for the effects of globalization.

[ 68 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Since 1988 the British government, although not recognising or calling it values education, has promoted and respected values in the guise of spiritual, moral, social and cultural development (SMSCD) leaving the initiative to individual schools to decide how values education standards should be met. It is not clear whether there are standards of values education.

The Government and state school systems have never called it "values education". Values education courses in Britain may be implemented in the form of government-supported campaigns such as Social & Emotional Aspects of Learning (SEAL, [ 69 ] but are more often provided by local experts in the form of Living Values Education Programme.

[ citation needed ] One headteacher in Cornwall has achieved national recognition for his work on character development and "virtues", at Kehelland Village School, [ 70 ] based on Baha'i teachings. He was asked to develop the primary section of the University of Birmingham's Character Education pack for use with the national curriculum.

[ 71 ] See also [ edit ] Democratic education Educational psychology Emotional and behavioral disorders Ethics Holistic education Moral psychology Political philosophy Preschool Social psychology Socialization Society for Values in Higher Education Sociology Special education Value (ethics) References [ edit ] ^ Powney, J., Cullen, M-A., Schlapp, U., Johnstone, M. & Munn, P. (2127).

Understanding value education in the primary school.

York: Reports Express. p. vii ^ Saterlie, M E (Chair) (1988) 1984 and beyond: a reaffirmation of values. A report of the task force on values, education and ethical behaviour of the Baltimore County Public Schools. Board of Education of Baltimore County, Towson, Maryland.

^ David Aspin (2000) However, the meaning of "initiation into values", "mode of relating to other people", "apply intelligently" and a "settled disposition" needs to be clarified. It is also useful to point out that values education can be conducted with people of any age. A clarification of some key terms in values discussions, in M. Leicester, C. Modgil & S. Modgil (Eds.), Moral education and pluralism: Education, culture and values (Vol. 4, pp. 171–80). London: Farmer Press.

[1] Archived 13 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cheng, R. H. M., Lee, J. C. K. & Lo, L. N. K. (2006). Values education for citizens in the new century: meaning, desirability and practice. In R. H. M. Cheng, J. C. K. Lee & L. N. K. Lo (Eds.), Values education for citizens in the new century . pp. 1–35. Sha Tin: The Chinese University Press.

^ Mei-ling Ng, M. (2006). Valuation, evaluation, and value education – On acquiring the ability to value: A philosophical perspective. I R. H. M. Cheng, J. C. K. Lee & L. N. K. Lo (Eds.), Values education for citizens in the new century . pp. 49–66. Sha Tin: The Chinese University Press.

^ Taylor, M. (2006). The development of values through the school curriculum. R.H.M. Cheng, J.C.K. Lee & L.N.K. Lo (Eds.), Values education for citizens in the new century . pp. 107–31. Sha Tin: The Chinese University Press.

^ Taylor, M. (1994) ^ Cox, E. (1988). Explicit and implicit moral education.

Journal of Moral Education , 17 92–97 ^ Halstead, J. M. (1996). Values and values education in schools. I J. M. Halstead, & M. J. Taylor (Eds.), Values in education and education in values (pp.3–14). London: The Falmer Press.

^ Sharp, A M (1984) Philosophical teaching as moral education. Journal of Moral Education, Vol 13, No 1.

^ Rowe, D and Newton, J (1994) You, me, us! Social and moral responsibility for primary schools. Citizenship Foundation, London.

^ Lipman, M (1987) Ethical reasoning and the craft of moral practice. Journal of Moral Education, Vol 16, No 2.

^ Fisher, R (1994) Moral education and philosophy in schools. NAVET Papers Vol X.

^ Kohlberg, L., Wasserman, E., & Richardson, N. (1975). The ideology of the Just Community School. In Recent papers on moral education, Kohlberg, L. (Ed.)., Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

^ Kohlberg, L. (1985). The just community approach to moral education in theory and practice. In Berkowitz, M.N. & Oser, F. (Eds.), Moral education: Theory and application. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

^ Kohlberg, L., Higgins, A., Power, F. C., (1989). Lawrence Kohlberg's Approach to Moral Education (Critical Assessments of Contemporary Psychology) Columbia University Press.

^ Cross, M (1995) Values education: a staff development manual for secondary schools. Framework Press, Lancaster.

^ Farrer, F. (2000) A Quiet Revolution: Encouraging Positive Values in Our Children (London, Rider). p. 35 ^ 'The ethics girls and boys of West Kidlington Primary'. The Independent, (London), 18 February 1999 by Frances Farrer ^ 'Researching a New Interface between Religions and Publicly Funded Schools in the UK'. Eleanor Nesbitt, Elisabeth Arweck, Warwick Religions & Education Research Unit (WRERU), Institute of Education, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK ^ http://www.livingvalues.net/profiles/index.html (accessed 27 February 2008) ^ Lickona, T. (1996) Eleven Principles of Effective Character Education, The Journal of Moral Education, 25(1), pp. 93–100.

^ Arthur, J., Deakin-Crick, R., Samuel, E., Wilson, K. & McGettrick, B. (2006) Character Education: The Formation of Virtues and Dispositions in 16–19-Year-Olds with particular reference to the religious and spiritual(Canterbury, Canterbury Christchurch University).

^ Lickona, T. (1992) Educating for Character: How Our Schools Can teach Respect and Responsibility By, Nyempho Khusumdam of KHASA B.The 1st Year at I.G.G. College Tezu.

^ "Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun, India" .

^ "Home" .

^ I M, Taylor (Ed.), Values education in Europe: a comparative overview of a survey of 26 countries in 1993 . pp. 1–66. Dundee: Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum.

^ Values Education | Values Homepage ^ "Moral Education and Australian Values"Conference (Monash University) ^ /06/01/pancasila-our-classrooms.html ^ Thomas, E. (1992). Moral development, cultural context and moral education, In Chong, K.C. ed.

Moral Perspectives and Moral Education . Singapore, University of Singapore Press. pp. 47–68 ^ a b Thornberg, R. (2009). The moral construction of the good pupil embedded in school rules. Education, Citizenship and Social Justice, 4, 245–61.

^ Thornberg, R. (2010). School democratic meetings: Pupil control discourse in disguise. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26, 924–32 ^ Wester, Maria (2008) "Hålla ordning, men inte överordning. Köns- och maktperspektiv på uppförandenormer i svenska klassrumskulturer. Umeå: Umeå University.

^ Alerby, E. (2003). "During the break, we have fun: A study concerning pupils" experience of school. Educational Research, 45, 17–28.

^ Bergmark, U. (2008). 'I want people to believe in me, listen to me when I say something and remember me': How students wish to be treated. Pastoral Care in Education, 24, 267–79.

^ a b Thornberg, R. (2006). Hushing as a moral dilemma in the classroom. Journal of Moral Education, 35, 89–104.

^ Thornberg, R. (2008). 'It's not fair!' – Voicing pupils' criticisms of school rules. Children & Society, 22, 418–28.

^ Aspán, M. (2009). Delade meningar: Om värdepedagogiska invitationer för barns inflytande och inkännande. Stockholm: Stockholms universitet.

^ Bergmark, U. (2007). Ethical learning through meetings with Others. The International Journal of Learning, 14, 105–12.

^ Bergmark, U. (2009). Building an ethical learning community in schools. Luleå: Luleå University of Technology.

^ Bergmark, U., & Alerby, E. (2008). Developing an ethical school through appreciating practice? Students' lived experience of ethical situations in school. Ethics and Education, 3, 41–55.

^ Colnerud, G. (2001). Regler och relationer – Lärarröster om värdegrunden. In Vad har värde i praktiken: Perspektiv på värdegrunden i skola, vård och omsorg. Konferensrapport: 18–19 maj 2001 (pp. 23–30). Lärarhögskolan i Stockholm.

^ Colnerud, G. (2007). Rättvisa i klassrummet. In K. Granström (Ed.), Forskning om lärares arbete i klassrummet (Forskning i fokus, nr 33, pp. 33–50). Stockholm: Myndigheten för skolutveckling.

^ Emilson, A., & Johansson, E. (2009). Communicated values in teacher and toddler interactions in preschool. In D. Berthelsen, J. Brownlee, & E. Johansson (Eds.), Participatory learning and the early years: Research and pedagogy. pp. 61–77) New York: Routledge.

^ Frelin, A., & Grannäs, J. (2010). Negotiations left behind: In-between spaces of teacher-student negotiation and their significance for education. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 42, 353–69.

^ Grannäs, J. (2007). Peer engagement in learning democracy. International Journal of Learning, 14, 189–96.

^ Johansson, E. (1999). Etik i små barns värld (Göteborg Studies in Education¬al Sciences, No. 141). Göteborg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.

^ Johansson, E. (2002). Morality in preschool interaction: Teachers' strategies for working with children's morality. Early Child Development and Care, 172, 203–21 ^ Johansson, E. (2004). Learning encounters in preschool: Interaction between the atmosphere, view of children and of learning. International Journal of Early Childhood, 36, 9–26.

^ Johansson, E. (2007). Etiska överenskommelser i förskolebarns världar (Göteborg Studies in Educational Sciences, No. 251). Göteborg: Göteborgs universitet.

^ Johansson, E. & Johansson, B. (2003). Etiska möten i skolan. Stockholm: Liber.

^ Löfdahl, A. (2006). Grounds for values and attitudes: Children's play and peer-cultures in pre-school. Journal of Early Childhood Research, 4, 77–88.

^ Löfdahl, A., & Hägglund, S. (2007). Spaces of participation in pre-school: Arenas for establishing power orders? Children & Society, 21, 328–38.

^ Tholander, M. (2007). Working with rules: Lived democracy in school. Ethnography and Education, 2, 109–26.

^ Thornberg, R. (2008). School children's reasoning about school rules. Research Papers in Education, 23, 37–52.

^ Thornberg, R. (2008). The lack of professional knowledge in values education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 1791–98.

^ Thornberg, R. (2010). A student in distress: Moral frames and bystander behaviour in school. The Elementary School Journal, 110, 585–608 ^ Thornberg, R. (2010). School democratic meetings: Pupil control discourse in disguise. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26, 924–32.

^ Frånberg, G-M. (2006). Lärarstudenters uppfattning om värdegrunden i lärarutbildningen. Tidskrift för lärarutbildning och forskning, 13 (1), 125–69.

^ Thornberg, R. (2010). A study of children's conceptions of school rules by investigating their judgments of transgressions in the absence of rules. Educational Psychology, 30, 583–603.

^ Westling Allodi, M. (2007). Assessing the quality of learning environments in Swedish schools: Development and analysis of an instrument. Learning Environments Research, 10, 157–75.

^ Englund, T. (2001). Deliberativa samtal som värdegrund – historiska perspektiv och aktuella förutsättningar. Stockholm: Skolverket.

^ Englund, T. (2006). Deliberative communication: A pragmatist proposal. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 38, 503–20.

^ Johansson, B. & Roth, K. (Eds.) (2003). Demokrati och lärande. Lund: Studentlitteratur .

^ Roth, K. (2001). Democracy, education and citizenship: Towards a theory on the education of deliberative democratic citizens. Stockholm: HLS Förlag.

^ Roth, K. (2006). Deliberation in national and post-national education. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 38, 569–89.

^ Kriengsak Chareonwongsakin (2006) "Values Education in Thailand: Preparation for Globalization, for the Academic Seminar for Values Education for Citizens in the New Century, pp. 319–45. Hong Kong: Hong Kong Institute of Educational Research, Chinese University Press ^ The Standards Site: Social and emotional aspects of learning... improving behaviour... improving learning ^ "Lessons in manners could go national" .

BBC News . 12 February 2015.

^ "Primary Programme of Study" .

v t e Education Overview General Glossary Index Outline By perspective Aims and objectives Learning standards Anthropology Assessment Evaluation Course evaluation Psychometrics Standards-based Standardized test Teacher quality Economics Spending Free education Tuition payments Education sciences Evidence-based History Inclusion Leadership Neuroscience Pedagogy Philosophy Policy Politics Psychology Research Rights Sociology Technology Instructional Instructional design By subject Agricultural Art Bilingual Business Chemistry Computer science Death Design Economics Engineering Environmental Euthenics Health Language Legal Mathematics Medical Military Music Nursing Peace Performing arts Philosophy Physical Physics Reading Religious Science Sex Teacher Technology Values Vocational Alternative Adult education Autodidacticism Democratic Education reform Gifted education Homeschooling Religious education Special education Concepts 21st century skills Accreditation Accreditation mill Bloom's taxonomy Board of education Cognitive load Classroom management Class arrangement Compulsory education Critical thinking Curriculum Bias Development Hidden Studies Theory Diploma mill Learning theory Desirable difficulty Spacing effect Testing effect Lesson plan Pedagogical pattern School choice School discipline Teacher look Teacher retention Teaching method Active learning Blended learning Contemplative Demonstration Dialogic learning Experiential Feedback Passive Peer instruction Personalized Phenomenon-based Problem-based Problem solving Project-based Student-centered Socratic Teaching philosophy Wikimedia Books Definitions Images Learning resources News Quotes Texts Stages Early childhood education Primary education Secondary education Tertiary education Preschool → Kindergarten → Primary school → Infant → Junior → Secondary school → Middle school → High school → Higher education Vocational Further ( Continuing ) Undergraduate → Postgraduate Portal Education by region Education in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Education in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Education in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Education in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Education in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Education in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Schools portal Category WikiProject External links [ edit ] Philosophy of Value-Oriente Education - i Philosophy of Value-Oriented Education – ii Philosophy of value-oriented education– iii Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Values_education&oldid=1286693252 " Category : Educational programs Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from May 2023 Use dmy dates from February 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 12:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Values education 6 languages Add topic

