Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Models 3 Curvature 4 References Toggle the table of contents Horosphere 5 languages Español Italiano Română Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypersurface in hyperbolic space A horosphere within the Poincaré disk model tangent to the edges of a hexagonal tiling cell of a hexagonal tiling honeycomb Apollonian sphere packing can be seen as showing horospheres that are tangent to an outer sphere of a Poincaré disk model In hyperbolic geometry , a horosphere (or parasphere ) is a specific hypersurface in hyperbolic n -space . It is the boundary of a horoball , the limit of a sequence of increasing balls sharing (on one side) a tangent hyperplane and its point of tangency.  For n = 2 a horosphere is called a horocycle .

A horosphere can also be described as the limit of the hyperspheres that share a tangent hyperplane at a given point, as their radii go towards infinity. In Euclidean geometry, such a "hypersphere of infinite radius" would be a hyperplane, but in hyperbolic geometry it is a horosphere (a curved surface).

History [ edit ] The concept has its roots in a notion expressed by F. L. Wachter in 1816 in a letter to his teacher Gauss . Noting that in Euclidean geometry the limit of a sphere as its radius tends to infinity is a plane, Wachter affirmed that even if the fifth postulate were false, there would nevertheless be a geometry on the surface identical with that of the ordinary plane.

[ 1 ] The terms horosphere and horocycle are due to Lobachevsky , who established various results showing that the geometry of horocycles and the horosphere in hyperbolic space were equivalent to those of lines and the plane in Euclidean space.

[ 2 ] The term "horoball" is  due to William Thurston , who used it in his work on hyperbolic 3-manifolds .  The terms horosphere and horoball are often used in 3-dimensional hyperbolic geometry.

Models [ edit ] In the conformal ball model , a horosphere is represented by a sphere tangent to the horizon sphere.  In the upper half-space model , a horosphere can appear either as a sphere tangent to the horizon plane, or as a plane parallel to the horizon plane.  In the hyperboloid model , a horosphere is represented by a plane whose normal lies in the asymptotic cone.

Curvature [ edit ] A horosphere has a critical amount of (isotropic) curvature: if the curvature were any greater, the surface would close, yielding a sphere, and if the curvature were any less, the surface would be an ( N − 1)-dimensional hypercycle .

References [ edit ] ^ Roberto Bonola (1906), Non-Euclidean Geometry , translated by H.S. Carslaw , Dover, 1955; p. 63 ^ Roberto Bonola (1906), Non-Euclidean Geometry , translated by H.S. Carslaw, Dover, 1955; p. 88 Appendix, the theory of space Janos Bolyai, 1987, p.143 v t e Manifolds ( Glossary , List , Category ) Basic concepts Topological manifold Atlas Differentiable/Smooth manifold Differential structure Smooth atlas Submanifold Riemannian manifold Smooth map Submersion Pushforward Tangent space Differential form Vector field Main results (list) Atiyah–Singer index Darboux's De Rham's Frobenius Generalized Stokes Hopf–Rinow Noether's Sard's Whitney embedding Maps Curve Diffeomorphism Local Geodesic Exponential map in Lie theory Foliation Immersion Integral curve Lie derivative Section Submersion Types of manifolds Closed Collapsing Complete ( Almost ) Complex ( Almost ) Contact Fibered Finsler ( Almost ) Flat G-structure Hadamard Hermitian Hyperbolic Kähler Kenmotsu Lie group Lie algebra Manifold with boundary Nilmanifold Oriented Parallelizable Poisson Prime Quaternionic Hypercomplex ( Pseudo- , Sub- ) Riemannian Rizza Stein ( Almost ) Symplectic Tame Tensors Vectors Distribution Lie bracket Pushforward Tangent space bundle Torsion Vector field Vector flow Covectors Closed/Exact Covariant derivative Cotangent space bundle De Rham cohomology Differential form Vector-valued Exterior derivative Interior product Pullback Ricci curvature flow Riemann curvature tensor Tensor field density Volume form Wedge product Bundles Adjoint Affine Associated Cotangent Dual Fiber ( Co- ) Fibration Jet Lie algebra ( Stable ) Normal Principal Spinor Subbundle Tangent Tensor Vector Connections Affine Cartan Ehresmann Form Generalized Koszul Levi-Civita Principal Vector Parallel transport Related Classification of manifolds Gauge theory History Morse theory Moving frame Singularity theory Generalizations Banach manifold Diffeology Diffiety Fréchet manifold K-theory Orbifold Secondary calculus over commutative algebras Sheaf Stratifold Supermanifold Stratified space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Horosphere&oldid=1243622280 " Categories : 3-manifolds Curves Hyperbolic geometry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 September 2024, at 14:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Horosphere 5 languages Add topic

