Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Main elements Toggle Main elements subsection 1.1 Eligible activities 1.2 Policies and measures 1.3 Reference levels 1.4 Monitoring: measurement, reporting and verification 1.5 Safeguards 1.6 Additional issues 2 As a climate change mitigation measure Toggle As a climate change mitigation measure subsection 2.1 Reducing emissions 2.2 Enhancing removals 2.3 REDD+ and the carbon market 3 Implementing REDD+ Toggle Implementing REDD+ subsection 3.1 Readiness activities 3.2 Implementation phase 3.3 Results-based actions 4 Criticisms Toggle Criticisms subsection 4.1 Land tenure, carbon rights and benefit distribution 4.2 Indigenous Peoples 4.3 In the carbon market 4.4 Top-down design by large international institutions vs. bottom-up grassroots coalitions 4.5 Natural forests vs. high-density plantations 5 UN-REDD Programme Toggle UN-REDD Programme subsection 5.1 Support to Partner Countries 5.2 Governance 5.2.1 Executive Board 5.2.2 Assembly 5.2.3 National Steering Committees 5.2.4 Multi-Party Trust Fund Office 5.3 2016-2020 Strategic Framework 5.4 Donors 5.5 Transparency 5.6 Difference between REDD+ and the UN-REDD Programme 6 History Toggle History subsection 6.1 Terminology 6.2 REDD 6.3 REDD+ 6.3.1 Bali Action Plan 6.4 Definition of main elements 6.4.1 Warsaw Framework on REDD-plus 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents REDD and REDD+ 5 languages Español Hausa Igbo Norsk bokmål Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ) Climate change mitigation policy This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: The article is far too long and detailed: needs to be rewritten in summary style. Also not clear what the results were or whether it continues.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) NASA Earth Observatory , 2009. Deforestation in Malaysian Borneo .

REDD+ is a voluntary climate mitigation framework developed by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

[ 1 ] It aims to encourage developing countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and deforestation , enhance forest's removal of greenhouse gases , promote sustainable forest management, and financially incentivise these efforts.

[ 2 ] The acronym refers to "reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries." [ 3 ] The "+" refers the framework's forest conservation activities.

[ 2 ] Settlement and deforestation in Bolivia are seen here in the striking "herring bone" deforestation patterns that cut through the rainforest. NASA, 2016.

Main elements [ edit ] The principles of national sovereignty and subsidiarity imply that the UNFCCC can only provide guidelines for implementation, and require that reports are submitted in a certain format and open for review by the convention. A set of requirements has been elaborated to ensure that REDD+ programs contain key elements that reports from parties are consistent and comparable and that their content is open to review and function of the objectives of the convention.

[ citation needed ] Decision 1/CP.16 requests all developing countries aiming to undertake REDD+ to develop the following elements: [ 3 ] (a) A national strategy or action plan; (b) A national forest reference emission level and/or forest reference level or, if appropriate, as an interim measure, subnational forest reference emission levels and/or forest reference levels; (c) A robust and transparent national forest monitoring system for the monitoring and reporting on REDD+ activities (see below), with, if appropriate, subnational monitoring and reporting as an interim measure; (d) A system for providing information on how the social and environmental safeguards (included in an appendix to the decision) are being addressed and respected throughout the implementation of REDD+.

It further requests developing countries to address the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation , land tenure issues, forest governance issues, gender considerations and social and environmental safeguards, and ensure the full stakeholder participation.

Eligible activities [ edit ] The "5 eligible activities" of REDD+ are: (a) Reducing emissions from deforestation.

(b) Reducing emissions from forest degradation.

(c) Conservation of forest carbon stocks.

(d) Sustainable management of forests.

(e) Enhancement of forest carbon stocks.

[ 3 ] Policies and measures [ edit ] In the text of the convention repeated reference is made to national "policies and measures", the set of legal, regulatory and administrative instruments that parties develop and implement to achieve the objective of the convention. These policies can be specific to climate change mitigation or adaptation , or of a more generic nature but with an impact on greenhouse gas emissions. Many of the signatory parties to the UNFCCC have by now established climate change strategies and response measures.

Of specific interest to REDD+ are the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. The UNFCCC decisions call on countries to make an assessment of these drivers and to base the policies and measures on this assessment such that the policies and measures can be directed to where the impact is greatest.

Countries are encouraged to identify "national circumstances" that impact the drivers: specific conditions within the country that impact the forest resources. Hints for typical national circumstances can be found in preambles to various COP decisions, such as " Reaffirming that economic and social development and poverty eradication are global priorities" in the Bali Action Plan, [ 4 ] enabling developing countries to prioritize policies like poverty eradication through agricultural expansion or hydropower development over forest protection.

Reference levels [ edit ] Reference levels serve as a baseline for measuring the effectiveness of REDD+ programs in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The results measured against these baselines may be eligible for results-based payments.

The requirements and characteristics of reference levels are under the purview of the UNFCCC. Given the wide variety of ecological conditions and country-specific circumstances, every country will have a range of options in its definition of reference levels within its territory.

[ citation needed ] A reference level (RL) is expressed as an amount, derived by differencing a sequence of amounts over a period of time. For REDD+ purposes the amount is expressed in CO 2 -equivalents (CO 2 equivalent) of emissions or removals per year. If the amounts are emissions, the reference level becomes a reference emission level (REL). These RELs are seen by some as incomplete as they do not take into account removals. Reference levels are based on scope, scale, geographical area, and time period. A reference level can be based on observations or measurements of amounts in the past or can be  projection of amounts into the future.

[ 5 ] Reference levels have to eventually have national coverage, but they may be composed from a number of sub-national reference levels. For example, forest degradation may have a reference emission level for commercial selective logging and one for extraction of minor timber and firewood for subsistence use by rural communities. Effectively, every identified driver of deforestation or forest degradation has to be represented in one or more reference emission level(s). Similarly for reference levels for enhancement of carbon stocks, there may be a reference level for plantation timber species and one for natural regeneration , possibly stratified by ecological region or forest type.

[ citation needed ] Details on the reporting and technical assessment of reference levels are given in Decision 13/CP.19.

[ 6 ] Monitoring: measurement, reporting and verification [ edit ] In Decision 2/CP.15 of the UNFCCC countries are requested to develop national forest monitoring systems (NFMS) that support the functions of measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) of actions and achievements of the implementation of REDD+ activities.

[ 7 ] NFMS is the key component in the management of information for national REDD+ programs. A fully functional monitoring system can go beyond the requirements posted by the UNFCCC to include issues such as a registry of projects and participants, and evaluation of program achievements and policy effectiveness.

Measurements are suggested to be made using a combination of remote sensing and ground-based observations. Remote sensing is particularly suited to the assessment of areas of forest and stratification of different forest types. Ground-based observations involve forest surveys to measure the carbon pools used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [ 8 ] as well as other parameters of interest such as those related to safeguards and eligible activity implementation.

[ 9 ] The reporting has to follow the IPCC guidance, in particular the "Good Practice Guidance for Land use, land-use change, and forestry".

[ 10 ] The actual reporting of REDD+ results goes through the Biennial Update Reports (BURs), [ 11 ] instead of the National Communications of Parties.

The technical assessment of these results is an independent, external process that is managed by the Secretariat to the UNFCCC. The technical assessment is included within the broader process of International Consultation and Analysis (ICA), which is  peer-reviewed by a team composed of an expert from an Annex I Party and an expert from a non-Annex I Party which "will be conducted in a manner that is nonintrusive, non-punitive and respectful of national sovereignty".

[ 11 ] This "technical team of experts shall analyse the extent to which: (a) There is consistency in methodologies, definitions, comprehensiveness and the information provided between the assessed reference level and the results of the implementation of the [REDD+] activities (...); (b) The data and information provided in the technical annex is transparent, consistent, complete and accurate; (c) The data and information provided in the technical annex is consistent with the [UNFCCC] guidelines (...); (d) The results are accurate, to the extent possible." [ 6 ] The technical assessment cannot "approve" or "reject" the reference level, or the reported results measured against this reference level. It does provide clarity on potential areas for improvement.

Financing entities that seek to provide results-based payments typically seek a true verification of results by external experts, to provide assurance that the results for which they are paying are credible.

Safeguards [ edit ] UNFCCC established a list of safeguards that countries need to "address and respect" and "promote and support." These safeguards are: "(a) That actions complement or are consistent with the objectives of national forest programmes and relevant international conventions and agreements; (b) Transparent and effective national forest governance structures, taking into account national legislation and sovereignty; (c) Respect for the knowledge and rights of indigenous peoples and members of local communities, by taking into account relevant international obligations, national circumstances and laws, and noting that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; (d) The full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in particular indigenous peoples and local communities; (e) That actions are consistent with the conservation of natural forests and biological diversity, ensuring that the actions are not used for the conversion of natural forests, but are instead used to incentivize the protection and conservation of natural forests and their ecosystem services, and to enhance other social and environmental benefits; (f) Actions to address the risks of reversals; (g) Actions to reduce displacement of emissions".

[ 3 ] Countries have to regularly provide a summary of information on how these safeguards are addressed and respected.

[ citation needed ] Decision 12/CP.19 established that the "summary of information" on the safeguards will be provided in the National Communications to the UNFCCC, which for developing country Parties will be once every four years. On a voluntary basis, the summary of information may be posted on the UNFCCC REDD+ web platform.

[ 6 ] [ 12 ] Additional issues [ edit ] All pertinent issues that comprise REDD+ are exclusively those that are included in the decisions of the COP, as indicated in the above sections. There is, however, a large variety of concepts and approaches that are labelled (as being part of) REDD+ by their proponents, either being a substitute for UNFCCC decisions or complementary to those decisions. Below follows a – no doubt incomplete – list of such concepts and approaches.

[ citation needed ] Project-based REDD+, voluntary market REDD+ . As the concept of REDD+ was being defined, many organizations began promoting REDD+ projects at the scale of a forest area (e.g. large concession, National Park) with reduction of emissions or enhancement of removals vetted by an external organization using a established standard (e.g.

CCBA , VCS ) and with carbon credits traded on the international voluntary carbon market.

[ 7 ] [ 3 ] Benefit distribution . The UNFCCC decisions on REDD+ are silent on the issue of rewarding countries and participants for their verified net emission reductions or enhanced removals of greenhouse gases. It is not very likely that specific requirements for sub-national implementation of the distribution of benefits will be adopted, as this will be perceived to be an issue of national sovereignty. Countries may decide to channel any benefits through an existing program or pay local stakeholders directly.

FPIC .

Free, prior and informed consent is included in the U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples . The REDD+ decisions under the UNFCCC do not have this as an explicit requirement. However, the safeguard on respect for notes "that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples " (UNDRIP).

[ 3 ] Article 19 of UNDRIP requires that "States shall consult and cooperate in good faith with the Indigenous peoples concerned through their own representative institutions in order to obtain their free, prior and informed consent before adopting and implementing legislative or administrative measures that may affect them." [ 13 ] Leakage refers to detrimental effects outside of the project area attributable to project activities. Many initiatives require leakage be taken into account in program design, so that potential leakage of emissions, including across borders, can be minimized.

As a climate change mitigation measure [ edit ] Deforestation and forest degradation account for 17–29% of global greenhouse gas emissions, [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] the reduction of which is estimated to be one of the most cost-efficient climate change mitigation strategies.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Regeneration of forest on degraded or deforested lands can remove CO 2 from the atmosphere through the build-up of biomass, making forest lands a sink of greenhouse gases .

Reducing emissions [ edit ] Emissions of greenhouse gases from forest land can be reduced by slowing down the rates of deforestation and forest degradation, covered by REDD+ eligible activities . Another option would be some form of reduced-impact logging in commercial logging, under the REDD+ eligible activity of sustainable management of forests.

[ 19 ] Enhancing removals [ edit ] Removals of greenhouse gases (specifically CO 2 ) from the atmosphere can be achieved through various forest management options, such as replanting degraded or deforested areas or enrichment planting , but also by letting forest land regenerate naturally. Care must be taken to differentiate between what is a purely ecological process of regrowth and what is induced or enhanced through some management intervention.

[ 19 ] REDD+ and the carbon market [ edit ] In 2009, at COP 15 in Copenhagen, the Copenhagen Accord was reached, noting in section 6 the recognition of the crucial role of REDD and REDD+ and the need to provide positive incentives for such actions by enabling the mobilization of financial resources from developed countries. The Accord goes on to note in section 8 that the collective commitment by developed countries for new and additional resources, including forestry and investments through international institutions, will approach US$30 billion for the period 2010–2012.

[ 20 ] The Green Climate Fund (GCF) was established at COP 17 to function as the financial mechanism for the UNFCCC, thereby including REDD+ finance. The Warsaw Framework on REDD-plus makes various references to the GCF, instructing developing country Parties to apply to the GCF for result-based finance .

[ 6 ] The GCF currently finances REDD+ programs in phase 1 (design of national strategies or action plans, capacity building) and phase 2 (implementation of national strategies or action plans, demonstration programs). It is currently finalizing an approach to REDD+ results-based payments.

REDD+ is also eligible for inclusion under CORSIA , the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)'s market-based greenhouse gas offset mechanism.

Implementing REDD+ [ edit ] Decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 73, suggests that national capacity for implementing REDD+ is built up in phases, "beginning with the development of national strategies or action plans, policies and measures, and capacity-building, followed by the implementation of national policies and measures and national strategies or action plans that could involve further capacity-building, technology development and transfer and results-based demonstration activities, and evolving into results-based actions that should be fully measured, reported and verified".

[ 3 ] The initial phase of the development of national strategies, action, and capacity building is typically referred to as the "Readiness phase." There is a very substantial number of REDD+ projects globally and this section lists only a selection. One of the more comprehensive online tools with up-to-date information on REDD+ projects is the Voluntary REDD+ Database .

Readiness activities [ edit ] UN-REDD Programme : UNDP , UNEP and FAO jointly established the UN-REDD Programme (see below #UN-REDD Programme ) in 2007, a partnership aimed at assisting developing countries in addressing certain measures needed in order to effectively participate in the REDD+ mechanism. These measures include capacity development, governance, engagement of Indigenous Peoples and technical needs. The initial set of supported countries were Bolivia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Indonesia, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Tanzania, Vietnam, and Zambia. By March 2014 the Programme counted 49 participants, 18 of which are receiving financial support to kick start or complement a variety of national REDD+ readiness activities.

[ 21 ] The other 31 partner countries may receive targeted support and knowledge sharing , be invited to attend meetings and training workshops, have observer status at the Policy Board meetings, and "may be invited to submit a request to receive funding for a National Programme in the future, if selected through a set of criteria to prioritize funding for new countries approved by the Policy Board".

[ 22 ] The Programme operates in six work areas: [ 23 ] MRV and Monitoring (led by FAO) National REDD+ Governance (UNDP) Engagement of Indigenous Peoples, Local Communities and Other Relevant Stakeholders (UNDP) Ensuring multiple benefits of forests and REDD+ (UNEP) Transparent, Equitable and Accountable Management of REDD+ Payments (UNDP) REDD+ as a Catalyst for Transformations to a Green Economy (UNEP) Forest Carbon Partnership Facility : The World Bank plays an important role in the development of REDD+ activities.The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) was presented to the international community at COP 13 in Bali, December 2007. Recipient countries can apply $3.6 million towards: the development of national strategies; stakeholder consultation; capacity building; development of reference levels; development of a national forest monitoring system; and social and environmental safeguards analysis.

[ 24 ] Those countries that successfully achieve a state of readiness can apply to the related Carbon Fund, for support towards national implementation of REDD+.

[ 25 ] Norwegian International Climate and Forest Initiative : At the 2007 Bali Conference, the Norwegian government announced their International Climate and Forests Initiative (NICFI), which provided US$1 billion towards the Brazilian REDD scheme [ 26 ] and US$500 million towards the creation and implementation of national-based, REDD+ activities in Tanzania.

[ 27 ] In addition, with the United Kingdom, $200 million was contributed towards the Congo Basin Forest Fund to aid forest conservation activities in Central Africa.

[ 28 ] In 2010, Norway signed a Letter of Intent with Indonesia to provide the latter country with up to US$1 billion "assuming that Indonesia achieves good results".

[ 29 ] United States : The United States has provided more than $1.5 billion in support for REDD+ and other sustainable landscape activities since 2010.

[ citation needed ] It supports several multilateral partnerships including the FCPF, as well as flagship global programs such as SilvaCarbon, which provides support to REDD+ countries in measuring and monitoring forests and forest-related emissions. The United States also provides significant regional and bilateral support to numerous countries implementing REDD+.

ITTO : The International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) has launched a thematic program on REDD+ and environmental services with an initial funding of US$3.5 million from Norway. In addition, the 45th session of the ITTO Council held in November 2009, recommended that efforts relating REDD+ should focus on promoting "sustainable forest management".

[ citation needed ] Finland : In 2009, the Government of Finland and the FAO signed a US$17 million partnership agreement to provide tools and methods for multi-purpose forest inventories, REDD+ monitoring and climate change adaptation in five pilot countries: Ecuador, Peru, Tanzania, Vietnam and Zambia.

[ 30 ] As part of this programme, the Government of Tanzania will soon complete the country's first comprehensive forest inventory to assess its forest resources including the size of the carbon stock stored within its forests. A forest soil carbon monitoring program to estimate soil carbon stock, using both survey and modelling-based methods, has also been undertaken.

[ 31 ] Australia : Australia established a A$200 million International Forest Carbon Initiative, focused on developing REDD+ activities in its vicinity, i.e., in areas like Indonesia, and Papua New Guinea.

[ 32 ] Interim REDD+ Partnership : In 2010, national governments of developing and developed countries joined efforts to create the Interim REDD+ Partnership as means to enhance implementation of early action and foster fast start finance for REDD+ actions.

[ 33 ] Implementation phase [ edit ] Some countries are already implementing aspects of a national forest monitoring system and activities aimed at reducing emissions and enhancing removals that go beyond REDD+ readiness. For example, the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility has 19 countries in the pipeline of the Carbon Fund, which will provide payments to these countries based on verified REDD+ emissions reductions achieved under national or subnational programs.

[ 34 ] Results-based actions [ edit ] Following the Warsaw Framework on REDD-plus, the first country had submitted a Biennial Update Report with a Technical Annex containing the details on emission reductions from REDD+ eligible activities. Brazil submitted its first Biennial Update Report on 31 December 2014.

[ 35 ] The Technical Annex covers the Amazon biome within Brazil's territory, a little under half of the national territory, reporting emission reductions against Brazil's previously submitted reference emission level of 2,971.02 MtCO 2 equivalent from a reduction in deforestation. This Technical Annex was reviewed through the International Consultation and Analysis process and on 22 September 2015 a technical report was issued by the UNFCCC which states that "the LULUCF experts consider that the data and information provided in the technical annex are transparent, consistent, complete and accurate" (paragraph 38).

[ 36 ] (a) Continuation in updating and improving the carbon density map, including through the use of improved ground data from Brazil's first national forest inventory, possibly prioritizing geographic areas where deforestation is more likely to occur; (b) Expansion of the coverage of carbon pools, including improving the understanding of soil carbon dynamics after the conversion of forests to non-forests; (c) Consideration of the treatment of non-CO 2 gases to maintain consistency with the GHG inventory; (d) Continuation of the improvements related to monitoring of forest degradation; (e) Expansion of the forest monitoring system to cover additional biomes.

Criticisms [ edit ] REDD+ has drawn many criticisms as a climate mitigation strategy.

Land tenure, carbon rights and benefit distribution [ edit ] According to some critics [ who?

] , REDD+ is another extension of green capitalism , subjecting the forests and its inhabitants to new ways of expropriation and enclosure at the hands of polluting companies and market speculators.

[ citation needed ] So-called "carbon cowboys" – unscrupulous entrepreneurs who attempt to acquire rights to carbon in rainforest for small-scale projects – have signed on indigenous communities to unfair contracts, often with a view to on-selling the rights to investors for a quick profit. In 2012 an Australian businessman operating in Peru was revealed to have signed 200-year contracts with an Amazon tribe, the Yagua, many members of which are illiterate, giving him a 50 per cent share in their carbon resources. The contracts allow him to establish and control timber projects and palm oil plantations in Yagua rainforest.

[ 37 ] This risk is largely negated by the focus on national and subnational REDD+ programs, and by government ownership of these initiatives.

There are risks that the local inhabitants and the communities that live in the forests will be bypassed and that they will not be consulted and so they will not actually receive any revenues.

[ 38 ] Fair distribution of REDD+ benefits will not be achieved without a prior reform in forest governance and more secure tenure systems in many countries.

[ 39 ] The UNFCCC has repeatedly called for full and effective participation of Indigenous Peoples and local communities without becoming any more specific. The ability of local communities to effectively contribute to REDD+ field activities and the measurement of forest properties for estimating reduced emissions and enhanced emissions of greenhouse gases has been clearly demonstrated in various countries.

[ 40 ] In some project-based REDD+, disreputable companies have taken advantage of low governance.

[ 41 ] Indigenous Peoples [ edit ] The International Indigenous Peoples Forum on Climate Change (IIPFCC) was explicit at the Bali climate negotiations in 2007: "REDD/REDD+ will not benefit Indigenous Peoples, but in fact will result in more violations of Indigenous Peoples' rights. It will increase the violation of our human rights, our rights to our lands, territories and resources, steal our land, cause forced evictions, prevent access and threaten indigenous agricultural practices, destroy biodiversity and cultural diversity and cause social conflicts. Under REDD/REDD+, states and carbon traders will take more control over our forests." [ 42 ] REDD+ has also been criticised for placing a commercial value on forests, neglecting the  spiritual value they hold for Indigenous Peoples and local communities.

[ 15 ] 32 Indigenous organisations and NGOs protested in 2008 the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues final report on climate change and its endorsement of REDD+.

[ 43 ] Indigenous Peoples' groups in Panama broke off their collaboration with the national UN-REDD Programme in 2012 over allegations of a failure of the government to properly respect the rights of the Indigenous groups.

A study conducted by the Center for International Forestry Research in 2017 found that "most REDD+ did not apply Free, Prior, and Informed Consent " and "purposefully withheld information to manage community expectations." [ 44 ] Other REDD+ that have been criticised for failing to uphold indigenous rights include REDD+ Baka Rokarire in Colombia, [ 45 ] and  Southern Cardamom REDD+ Project in Cambodia.

[ 46 ] In the carbon market [ edit ] When REDD+ was first discussed by the UNFCCC, no indication was given of the positive incentives that would support developing countries in their efforts to implement REDD+. In the absence of guidance from the COP, two options were debated by the international community at large: a market-based approach; a fund-based approach where Annex I countries would deposit substantial amounts of money into a fund administered by some multi-lateral entity.

Under the market-based approach, REDD+ would act as an "offset scheme" in which verified results-based actions translate into some form of carbon credits, analogous to the market for Certified Emission Reductions (CER). Such carbon credits could then offset emissions in the country or company of the buyer of the carbon credits. This would require Annex I countries to agree to deeper cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases in order to create a market for the carbon credits from REDD+, which is unlikely to happen soon given the current state of negotiations in the COP, but even then there is the fear that the market will be flooded with carbon credits, depressing the price to levels where REDD+ is no longer an economically viable option.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Some developing countries, such as Brazil and China, maintain that developed countries must commit to real emissions reductions, independent of any offset mechanism.

[ 49 ] Since COP 17, however, it has become clear that the REDD+ may be financed by a variety of sources, market and non-market. The newly established Green Climate Fund already is supporting phase 1 and 2 REDD+ programs, and is finalizing rules to allow disbursement of result-based finance to developing countries that submit verified reports of emission reductions and enhanced removals of greenhouse gases.

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] Top-down design by large international institutions vs. bottom-up grassroots coalitions [ edit ] Mapuche people protesting against REDD+ at 2019 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Madrid While the COP decisions emphasize national ownership and stakeholder consultation, there are concerns that some of the larger institutional organizations are driving the process.. For example, the World Bank and the UN-REDD Programme, the two largest sources of funding and technical assistance for readiness activities and therefore unavoidable for most developing countries, place requirements upon recipient countries that are  not mandated by the COP decisions. As of 2016, REDD+ has only had a limited effect on local political realities.

[ citation needed ] Issues that  determine who makes decisions about land use and deforestation have not been adequately addressed by REDD+, and there is no clear consensus on how complex political issues can be easily resolved through a top-down mechanism like REDD+.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] While a single, harmonized, global system that accounts for and rewards emissions reductions from forests and land use has been elusive, diverse context-specific projects have emerged that support a variety of activities including community-based forest management, enforcement of protected areas, sustainable charcoal production, and agroforestry.

[ 55 ] Although it is not clear whether these diverse projects are genuinely different from older integrated conservation and development initiatives that pre-date REDD+, there is evidence that REDD+ has altered global policy conversations, possibly elevating issues like Indigenous peoples' land rights to higher levels, or conversely threatening to bypass safeguards for Indigenous rights. Debate surrounding these issues is ongoing.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Although the World Bank declares its commitment to fight against climate change, many civil society organisations and grassroots movements around the world view with scepticism the processes being developed under the various carbon funds.

[ citation needed ] Among some of the most worrying reasons are the weak (or inexistent) consultation processes with local communities; the lack of criteria to determine when a country is ready to implement REDD+ projects (readiness); the negative impacts such as deforestation and loss of biodiversity (due to fast agreements and lack of planning); the lack of safeguards to protect Indigenous Peoples' rights; and the lack of regional policies to stop deforestation. A growing coalition of civil society organization, social movement, and other actors critical of REDD+ emerged between 2008 and 2011, criticizing the mechanism on climate justice grounds.

[ 59 ] During the UN climate negotiations in Copenhagen (2009) and Cancun (2010) strong civil society and social movements coalitions formed a strong front to fight the World Bank out of the climate.

[ citation needed ] However, this concern has largely died down as the World Bank initiatives have been more full developed, and some of these same actors are now participating in implementation of REDD+.

ITTO has been criticized for appearing to support above all the inclusion of forest extraction inside REDD+ under the guise of "sustainable management" in order to benefit from carbon markets while maintaining business-as-usual.

[ 42 ] Natural forests vs. high-density plantations [ edit ] The UNFCCC does not define what constitutes a forest; it only requires that Parties communicate to the UNFCCC on how they define a forest. The UNFCCC does suggest using a definition in terms of minimal area, minimal crown coverage and minimal height at maturity of perennial vegetation.

[ citation needed ] Countries can include plantations of commercial tree species, agricultural tree crops, or even non-tree species.

[ 60 ] FAO forest definitions date from 1948 and define forest only by the number, height, and canopy cover of trees in an area.

[ 61 ] Similarly, there is a lack of a consistent definition for forest degradation.

[ 62 ] A national REDD+ strategy need not refer solely to the establishment of national parks or protected areas; by the careful design of rules and guidelines, REDD+ could include land use practices such as shifting cultivation by Indigenous communities and reduced-impact-logging, provided sustainable rotation and harvesting cycles can be demonstrated.

[ 63 ] Some argue [ who?

] that this is opening the door to logging operations in primary forests, displacement of local populations for and increase of tree plantations.

UN-REDD Programme [ edit ] United Nations Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation UN-REDD National Programmes UN-REDD Partner Countries Established September 24, 2008 ; 16 years ago ( 2008-09-24 ) Headquarters Geneva, Switzerland Membership 65 Partner Countries Head, UN-REDD Programme Secretariat Mario Boccucci Parent organization Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Website www .un-redd .org The United Nations Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (or UN-REDD Programme) is a multilateral body that partners with countries to help them establish the technical capacities to implement REDD+ [ 1 ] (see below #Difference between REDD+ and the UN-REDD Programme ).

The programme's goal is "to reduce forest emissions and enhance carbon stocks in forests while contributing to national sustainable development".

[ 64 ] The UN-REDD Programme supports nationally led REDD+ processes and promotes the informed and meaningful involvement of all stakeholders, including indigenous peoples and other forest-dependent communities, in national and international REDD+ implementation.

[ 65 ] The programme is a collaboration between FAO , UNDP and UNEP under which a trust fund established in July 2008 allows donors to pool resources to generate the requisite transfer flow of resources to significantly reduce global emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.

[ 66 ] The Programme has expanded steadily since its establishment and now has over 60 official Partner Countries spanning Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America-Caribbean.

[ 67 ] In addition to the UN-REDD Programme, other initiatives assisting countries that are engaged in REDD+ include the World Bank's Forest Carbon Partnership Facility, Norway's International Climate and Forest Initiative, the Global Environment Facility, Australia's International Forest Carbon Initiative, the Collaborative Partnership on Forests, and the Green Climate Fund.

The UN-REDD Programme publicly releases each year an Annual Programme Progress Report and a Semi-Annual Report.

[ 67 ] Support to Partner Countries [ edit ] The UN-REDD Programme supports its Partner Countries through: [ 65 ] Direct funding and technical support to the design and implementation of National REDD+ Programmes; Complementary tailored funding and technical support to national REDD+ actions; and Technical country capacity enhancing support through sharing of expertise, common approaches, analyses, methodologies, tools, data, best practices and facilitated South-South knowledge sharing.

Governance [ edit ] The UN-REDD Programme is a collaborative programme of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), created in 2008 in response to the UNFCCC decisions on the Bali Action Plan and REDD at COP 13 .

[ 65 ] The UN-REDD Programme's 2016-2020 governance arrangements allow for the full and effective participation of all UN-REDD Programme stakeholders – partner countries, donors, Indigenous peoples, civil society organizations, participating UN agencies – while ensuring streamlined decision-making processes and clear lines of accountability.

[ 64 ] The governance arrangements are built on and informed by five principles: inclusiveness, transparency, accountability, consensus-based decisions and participation.

[ 64 ] UN-REDD Programme 2016-2020 governance arrangements include: Executive Board [ edit ] The UN-REDD Programme Executive Board [ usurped ] has general oversight for the Programme, taking decisions on the allocation of the UN-REDD Programme fund resources. It meets bi-annually, or more frequently as required to efficiently carry out its roles and responsibilities.

[ 64 ] Assembly [ edit ] The UN-REDD Programme Assembly [ usurped ] is a broad multi-stakeholder forum with the role to foster consultation, dialogue and knowledge exchange among UN-REDD Programme stakeholders.

[ 64 ] National Steering Committees [ edit ] National Steering Committees facilitate strong country ownership and shared/common decision-making for National REDD+ Programmes, and include representatives of civil society and indigenous peoples. Each National Steering Committee provides oversight for National Programmes, addressing any delays, changes or reorientation of a programme and ensuring alignment with and delivery of results as expected and approved by the executive board.

[ 64 ] Multi-Party Trust Fund Office [ edit ] The Multi-Party Trust Fund Office provides real-time funding administration to the UN-REDD Programme.

[ 64 ] 2016-2020 Strategic Framework [ edit ] The work of the UN-REDD Programme is guided by its 2016-2020 Strategic Framework [ usurped ] , with the goal to: Reduce forest emissions and enhance carbon stocks in forests while contributing to national sustainable development.

[ 64 ] In order to realize its goal and target impacts, the Programme has set three outcomes and supporting outputs for its 2016-2020 work programme: [ 64 ] Contributions of REDD+ to the mitigation of climate change as well as to the provision of additional benefits have been designed.

Country contributions to the mitigation of climate change though REDD+ are measured, reported and verified and necessary institutional arrangements are in place.

REDD+ contributions to the mitigation of climate change are implemented and safeguarded with policies and measures that constitute results-based actions, including the development of appropriate and effective institutional arrangements.

Additionally, the Programme has identified four important cross-cutting themes as being particularly significant in order to ensure that the outcomes and outputs of the Programme will achieve results as desired: Stakeholder Engagement, Forest Governance, Tenure Security and Gender Equality.

[ 64 ] Donors [ edit ] The UN-REDD Programme depends entirely on voluntary funds. Donors to the UN-REDD Programme have included the European Commission and governments of Denmark, Japan, Luxembourg, Norway, Spain and Switzerland—with Norway providing a significant portion of the funds.

[ 65 ] Transparency [ edit ] The UN-REDD Programme adheres to the belief that information is fundamental to the effective participation of all stakeholders, including the public, in the advancement of REDD+ efforts around the world. Information sharing promotes transparency and accountability and enables public participation in REDD+ activities.

[ 65 ] The collaborating UN agencies of the UN-REDD Programme – FAO, UNEP and UNDP – are committed to making information about the Programme and its operations available to the public in the interest of transparency.

[ 65 ] As part of this commitment, the Programme publishes annual and semi-annual programme progress reports [ usurped ] and provides online public access to real-time funding administration .

[ 65 ] Difference between REDD+ and the UN-REDD Programme [ edit ] REDD+ is a voluntary climate change mitigation approach that has been developed by Parties to the UNFCCC . The  UN-REDD Programme is a multilateral body. It partners with developing countries to support them in establishing the technical capacities needed to implement REDD+ and meet UNFCCC requirements for REDD+ results-based payments.

History [ edit ] Terminology [ edit ] The approach detailed under the UNFCCC is commonly referred to as "reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation", abbreviated as REDD+. This title and the acronyms, however, are not used by the COP itself.

The original submission by Papua New Guinea and Costa Rica, on behalf of the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, dated 28 July 2005, was entitled "Reducing Emissions from Deforestation in Developing Countries: Approaches to Stimulate Action".

[ 68 ] COP 11 entered the request to consider the document as agenda item 6: "Reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries: approaches to stimulate action", again written here exactly as in the official text.

[ 69 ] The name for the agenda item was also used at COP 13 i n Bali, December 2007. By COP 15 in Copenhagen, December 2009, the scope of the agenda item was broadened to "Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries", [ 7 ] moving to "Policy approaches and positive incentives on issues relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries; and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries" by COP 16.

[ 3 ] At COP 17 the title of the decision simply referred back to an earlier decision: "Guidance on systems for providing information on how safeguards are addressed and respected and modalities relating to forest reference emission levels and forest reference levels as referred to in decision 1/CP.16".

[ 11 ] At COP 19 the titles of decisions 9 and 12 refer back to decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70 and appendix I respectively, while the other decisions only mention the topic under consideration.

[ 6 ] None of these decisions use an acronym for the title of the agenda item; the acronym is not coined by the COP of the UNFCCC. The set of decisions on REDD+ that were adopted at COP 19 in Warsaw, December 2013, was coined the Warsaw Framework on REDD-plus in a footnote to the title of each of the decisions [ 6 ] creating the acronyms: REDD originally referred to "reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries" the title of the original document on REDD.

[ 69 ] It was superseded in the negotiations by REDD+.

REDD+ (or REDD-plus ) refers to "reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries, and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries" (emphasis added); the most recent, elaborated terminology used by the COP.

[ 3 ] Most of the key REDD+ decisions were completed by 2013, with the final pieces of the rulebook finished in 2015.

REDD [ edit ] REDD was first discussed in 2005 by the UNFCCC at its 11th session of the Conference of the Parties to the convention (COP) at the request of Costa Rica and Papua New Guinea, on behalf of the Coalition for Rainforest Nations, when they submitted the document "Reducing Emissions from Deforestation in Developing Countries: Approaches to Stimulate Action", [ 68 ] with a request to create an agenda item to discuss consideration of reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in natural forests as a mitigation measure. COP 11 entered the request to consider the document as agenda item 6: Reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries: approaches to stimulate action .

[ 69 ] In December 2007, after a two-year debate on a proposal from Papua New Guinea and Costa Rica , state parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) agreed to explore ways of reducing emissions from deforestation and to enhance forest carbon stocks in developing nations.

[ 70 ] The underlying idea is that developing nations should be financially compensated if they succeed in reducing their levels of deforestation (through valuing the carbon that is stored in forests ); a concept termed 'avoided deforestation (AD) or, REDD if broadened to include reducing forest degradation.

[ citation needed ] Under the free market model advocated by the countries who have formed the Coalition of Rainforest Nations , developing nations with rainforests would sell carbon sink credits under a free market system to Kyoto Protocol Annex I states who have exceeded their emissions allowance.

[ 71 ] : 434 Brazil (the state with the largest area of tropical rainforest) however, opposes including avoided deforestation in a carbon trading mechanism and instead favors creation of a multilateral development assistance fund created from donations by developed states.

[ 71 ] : 434 For REDD to be successful science and regulatory infrastructure related to forests will need to increase so nations may inventory all their forest carbon, show that they can control land use at the local level and prove that their emissions are declining.

[ 72 ] REDD+ [ edit ] Subsequent to the initial donor nation response, the UN established REDD Plus, or REDD+, expanding the original program's scope to include increasing forest cover through both reforestation and the planting of new forest cover, as well as promoting sustainable forest resource management.

[ 73 ] Bali Action Plan [ edit ] REDD received substantial attention from the UNFCCC – and the attending community – at COP 13 , December 2007, where the first substantial decision on REDD+ was adopted, Decision 2/CP.13: "Reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries: approaches to stimulate action", [ 4 ] calling for demonstration activities to be reported upon two years later and assessment of drivers of deforestation. REDD+ was also referenced in decision 1/CP.13, the "Bali Action Plan", with reference to all five eligible activities for REDD+ (with sustainable management of forests, conservation of forest carbon stocks and enhancement of forest carbon stocks constituting the "+" in REDD+).

[ 4 ] The call for demonstration activities in decision 2/CP.13 led to a very large number of programs and projects, including the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) of the World Bank , the UN-REDD Programme , and a number of smaller projects financed by the Norwegian International Climate and Forest Initiative (NICFI), the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germany, among many others. All of these were based on substantive guidance from the UNFCCC.

[ 74 ] Definition of main elements [ edit ] In 2009 at COP 15 , decision 4/CP.15: "Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries" [ 7 ] provided more substantive information on requirements for REDD+. Specifically, the national forest monitoring system was introduced, with elements of measurement, reporting and verification (MRV). Countries were encouraged to develop national strategies, develop domestic capacity, establish reference levels, and establish a participatory approach with "full and effective engagement of Indigenous peoples and local communities in (…) monitoring and reporting".

[ 75 ] A year later at COP 16 decision 1/CP.16 was adopted.

[ 3 ] In section C: "Policy approaches and positive incentives on issues relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries; and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries" environmental and social safeguards were introduced, with a reiteration of requirements for the national forest monitoring system. These safeguards were introduced to ensure that implementation of REDD+ at the national level would not lead to detrimental effects for the environment or the local population. Countries are required to provide summaries of information on how these safeguards are implemented throughout the three "phases" of REDD+.

In 2011 decision 12/CP.17 was adopted at COP 17 : "Guidance on systems for providing information on how safeguards are addressed and respected and modalities relating to forest reference emission levels and forest reference levels as referred to in decision 1/CP.16".

[ 11 ] Details are provided on preparation and submission of reference levels and guidance on providing information on safeguards.

Warsaw Framework on REDD-plus [ edit ] In December 2013, COP 19 produced seven decisions on REDD+, which are jointly known as the "Warsaw Framework on REDD-plus".

[ 6 ] These decisions address a work program on results-based finance; coordination of support for implementation; modalities for national forest monitoring systems; presenting information on safeguards; technical assessment of reference (emission) levels; modalities for measuring, reporting and verifying (MRV); and information on addressing the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. Requirements to be eligible access to "results-based finance" have been specified: through submission of reports for which the contents have been specified; technical assessment through International Consultation and Analysis (ICA) for which procedures have been specified. With these decisions the overall framework for REDD+ implementation was completed, although many details still needed to be provided.

COP 20 in December 2014 did not produce any new decisions on REDD+. A reference was made to REDD+ in decision 8/CP.20 "Report of the Green Climate Fund to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Green Climate Fund", where in paragraph 18 the COP " requests the Board of the Green Climate Fund (...) (b) to consider decisions relevant to REDD-plus", referring back to earlier COP decisions on REDD+.

[ 76 ] The remaining outstanding decisions on REDD+ were completed at COP 21 in 2015. With the conclusion of decisions on reporting on the safeguards, non-market approaches, and non-carbon benefits, the UNFCCC rulebook on REDD+ was completed. All countries were also encouraged to implement and support REDD+ in Article 5 of the Paris Agreement. This was part of a broader Article that specified that all countries should take action to protect and enhance their greenhouse gas sinks and reservoirs (stores of sequestered carbon).

See also [ edit ] Deforestation and climate change Deforestation by region Emissions trading Illegal logging CDM excluding Forest Conservation Natural Forest Standard Tree credits Tree planting United Nations Forum on Forests References [ edit ] ^ a b UN-REDD Programme (February 2016).

"About REDD+" (PDF) .

www.un-redd.org .

^ a b UNFCCC.

"What is REDD+?" .

unfccc.int . Retrieved 1 April 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its sixteenth session, held in Cancun from 29 November to 10 December 2010" (PDF) .

Framework Convention on Climate Change . Retrieved 21 February 2014 .

^ a b c "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its thirteenth session, held in Bali from 3 to 15 December 2007" (PDF) . Retrieved 21 February 2014 .

^ "Guidelines for REDD+ Reference Levels: Principles and Recommendations" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 27 February 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g h "UNFCCC document FCCC/CP/2013/10/Add.1" (PDF) . Retrieved 21 February 2014 .

^ a b c d "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its fifteenth session, held in Copenhagen from 7 to 19 December 2009" (PDF) .

Framework Convention on Climate Change . Retrieved 21 February 2014 .

^ "IPCC — Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" . Retrieved 11 December 2022 .

^ "Integrating remote-sensing and ground-based observations for estimation of emissions and removals of greenhouse gases in forests" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2014.

^ "Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry" .

^ a b c d e "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its seventeenth session, held in Durban from 28 November to 11 December 2011" (PDF) . 15 March 2012.

^ "UNFCCC REDD+ web platform" .

^ "UN-REDD Guidelines on Free, Prior and Informed Consent" . Archived from the original on 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 27 February 2014 .

^ Fearnside, Philip (2000). "Global warming and tropical land-use change: Greenhouse gas emissions from biomass burning, decomposition and soils in forest conversion, shifting cultivation and secondary vegetation".

Climatic Change .

46 ( 1– 2): 115– 158.

Bibcode : 2000ClCh...46..115F .

doi : 10.1023/a:1005569915357 .

S2CID 28422361 .

^ a b Myers, Erin C. (December 2007).

"Policies to Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) in Tropical Forests" .

Resources Magazine : 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2009 . Retrieved 24 November 2009 .

^ van der Werf, G.R.; Morton, D. C.; DeFries, R. S.; Olivier, J. G. J.; Kasibhatla, P. S.; Jackson, R. B.; Collatz, G. J.; Randerson, J. T. (November 2009). "CO2 emissions from forest loss".

Nature Geoscience .

2 (11): 737– 738.

Bibcode : 2009NatGe...2..737V .

doi : 10.1038/ngeo671 .

S2CID 129188479 .

^ Stern Review ^ "Eliasch Review" (PDF) .

^ a b "Key decisions relevant for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD+)" (PDF) . June 2014.

^ "Copenhagen Accord of 18 December 2009" (PDF) . UNFCC. 2009 . Retrieved 28 December 2009 .

^ "UN-REDD Programme - Support to Partner Countries" . Un-redd.org. Archived from the original on 14 February 2014 . Retrieved 2 March 2014 .

^ "National Programmes2" . Archived from the original on 19 February 2014 . Retrieved 9 March 2014 .

^ "UN-REDD Programme Strategy 2011-2015" . Archived from the original on 20 December 2013 . Retrieved 9 March 2014 .

^ "FCPF template to apply for funding" . Archived from the original on 8 August 2012 . Retrieved 9 March 2014 .

^ "FCPF Carbon Fund" .

As the first country to apply for funding under the FCPF Carbon Fund, Costa Rica submitted its revised ER-PIN on 15 February 2013. Apparently only five submissions are currently envisaged.

^ "Amazon Fund website" .

^ "The Government of Norway's International Climate and Forest Initiative" . Ministry of Environment. 19 May 2009. Archived from the original on 10 October 2012 . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ Butler, Rhett (22 July 2009).

"Are We on The Brink of Saving Rainforests?" . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ "Indonesia" . 27 March 2017.

^ "FAO Finland Forestry Programme - GCP /GLO/194/MUL" (PDF) . Fao.org. March 2012 . Retrieved 6 February 2025 .

^ "Soil carbon monitoring using surveys and modelling" . Fao.org . Retrieved 18 December 2013 .

^ "Reducing Emission from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries" (PDF) . UNFCC . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ "REDD+ Partnership website" . Reddpluspartnership.org . Retrieved 18 December 2013 .

^ "The Carbon Fund | Forest Carbon Partnership Facility" .

www.forestcarbonpartnership.org . Retrieved 8 April 2020 .

^ "First Biennial Update Report of Brazil" (PDF) . 2014.

^ United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (22 September 2015).

"Technical report on the technical analysis of the technical annex to the first biennial update report of Brazil submitted in accordance with decision 14/CP.19, paragraph 7, on 31 December 2014" (PDF) .

^ Rice, Stephen & Bartlett, Liam (6 July 2012).

"The Carbon Cowboy" . 60 Minutes, Nine Network Australia. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012 . Retrieved 25 November 2012 .

^ Espinoza Llanos, Roberto & Feather, Conrad (November 2011).

"The reality of REDD+ in Peru: Between theory and practice - Indigenous Amazonian Peoples' analyses and alternatives" (PDF) . AIDESEP and Forest Peoples Programme . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ Vickers, Ben (April 2008).

"REDD: a Steep learning Curve" (PDF) . Asia-Pacific Forestry Week. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2009 . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ In a multi-year research project the engagement of local communities in REDD+ field activity implementation in 7 developing countries was studied and found to be highly effective. See multiple papers at [1] under the Resources & Publications link on the left.

^ "Carbon offsetting scheme open to corruption, report warns" . Abc.net.au. 1 November 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2010 . Retrieved 18 December 2013 .

^ a b "No Redd!" (PDF) . Noredd.makenoise.org. November 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2014 . Retrieved 11 December 2014 .

^ Administrator.

"PROTEST: Indigenous Peoples "2nd MAY REVOLT" at the UNPFII - carbon trade watch" .

www.carbontradewatch.org . Retrieved 16 February 2017 .

^ Center for International Forestry Research (10 November 2017).

"REDD+ potential for abuses indicates need for indigenous rights-based approach" (PDF) .

UNFCCC .

^ CLIP, Andrés Bermúdez (26 October 2022).

"El territorio de los jaguares de Yuruparí dividido por un proyecto de bonos de carbono" .

El Clip (in Spanish) . Retrieved 10 May 2025 .

^ Chávez, Luciana Téllez (28 February 2024).

"Carbon Offsetting's Casualties" .

Human Rights Watch .

^ Butler, Rhett (5 March 2008).

"Why Europe Torpedoed the REDD Forest-For-Carbon Credits Initiative" . Archived from the original on 13 July 2009 . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ Karsenty, Alain (November 2009).

"What the (carbon) market cannot do..." CIRAD. Archived from the original on 28 October 2012 . Retrieved 15 February 2012 .

^ von der Goltz, Jan (10 August 2009), High Stakes in a Complex Game: A Snapshot of the Climate Change Negotiating Positions of Major Developing Country Emitters (PDF) , Center for Global Development , archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 , retrieved 10 January 2013 ^ Ravikumar, Ashwin; Larson, Anne M.; Duchelle, Amy E.; Myers, Rodd; Gonzales Tovar, Jazmin (2015).

"Multilevel governance challenges in transitioning towards a national approach for REDD+: Evidence from 23 subnational REDD+ initiatives" .

International Journal of the Commons .

9 (2): 909.

Bibcode : 2015IJCom...9..909R .

doi : 10.18352/ijc.593 .

hdl : 10535/9924 .

^ Larson, Anne M. (2011).

"Forest tenure reform in the age of climate change: Lessons for REDD+" .

Global Environmental Change .

21 (2): 540– 549.

Bibcode : 2011GEC....21..540L .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.11.008 .

^ Di Gregorio, Monica; Brockhaus, Maria; Cronin, Tim; Muharrom, Efrian (2012). "Politics and power in national REDD+ policy processes". In Angelsen, Arild (ed.).

Analysing REDD+: Challenges and choices (PDF) . CIFOR.

ISBN 978-602-8693-80-6 .

^ Sunderlin, William D.; Larson, Anne M.; Duchelle, Amy E.; Resosudarmo, Ida Aju Pradnja; Huynh, Thu Ba; Awono, Abdon; Dokken, Therese (2014). "How are REDD+ Proponents Addressing Tenure Problems? Evidence from Brazil, Cameroon, Tanzania, Indonesia, and Vietnam".

World Development .

55 : 37– 52.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.01.013 .

^ "REDD+ on the ground: Global insights from local contexts | REDD+ on the ground - CIFOR" .

^ Sunderlin, William D.; Ekaputri, Andini Desita; Sills, Erin O.; Duchelle, Amy E.; Kweka, Demetrius; Diprose, Rachael; Doggart, Nike; Ball, Steve; Lima, Rebeca; Enright, Adrian; Torres, Jorge; Hartanto, Herlina; Toniolo, Angélica (2014).

The challenge of establishing REDD+ on the ground: Insights from 23 subnational initiatives in six countries (PDF) . Center for International Forestry Research.

^ Angelsen, Arild, ed. (2012). "REDD+ safeguards in national policy discourse and pilot projects".

Analysing REDD+: Challenges and choices (PDF) . Indonesia: CIFOR.

ISBN 978-602-8693-80-6 .

^ Dressler, Wolfram; McDermott, Melanie; Smith, Will; Pulhin, Juan (2012). "REDD Policy Impacts on Indigenous Property Rights Regimes on Palawan Island, the Philippines".

Human Ecology .

40 (5): 679– 691.

Bibcode : 2012HumEc..40..679D .

doi : 10.1007/s10745-012-9527-y .

S2CID 153840627 .

^ Jagger, Pamela; Brockhaus, Maria; Duchelle, Amy; Gebara, Maria; Lawlor, Kathleen; Resosudarmo, Ida; Sunderlin, William (2014).

"Multi-Level Policy Dialogues, Processes, and Actions: Challenges and Opportunities for National REDD+ Safeguards Measurement, Reporting, and Verification (MRV)" .

Forests .

5 (9): 2136– 2162.

Bibcode : 2014Fore....5.2136J .

doi : 10.3390/f5092136 .

^ den Besten, Jan Willem; Arts, Bas; Verkooijen, Patrick (2014). "The evolution of REDD+: an analysis of discursive-institutional dynamics".

Environmental Science & Policy .

35 : 40– 48.

Bibcode : 2014ESPol..35...40D .

doi : 10.1016/j.envsci.2013.03.009 .

^ "The need for improved forest plantation data" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 18 May 2023 .

^ "How does the FAO Forest definition harm people and forests? An open letter to the FAO" .

^ "Special Report on Climate Change and Land — IPCC site" . Retrieved 11 December 2022 .

^ Mathai, J. (5 October 2009). "Peat Portal | Learn about peatlands and why they matter".

Seeing REDD over deforestation . Archived from the original on 13 January 2012 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "UN-REDD Programme 2016-2020 Strategic Framework" . Archived from the original on 18 August 2022.

^ a b c d e f g UN-REDD Programme official website.

^ United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries * Official UN-REDD Programme Website Archived 2018-11-19 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b "UN-REDD Programme Online Collaborative Workspace" . Archived from the original on 12 October 2022.

^ a b "United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Conference of the Parties - Eleventh Session" (PDF) . 11 November 2005 . Retrieved 21 February 2014 .

^ a b c "UNFCCC document FCCC/CP/2005/5" (PDF) . Retrieved 21 February 2014 .

^ United Nations. 2007.

Reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries: approaches to stimulate action .

Archived 2009-08-05 at the Wayback Machine accessed 10 November 2009.

^ a b Humphreys, D (1 September 2008).

"The politics of Avoided Deforestation: historical context and contemporary issues" .

International Forestry Review .

10 (3): 433– 442.

doi : 10.1505/ifor.10.3.433 .

ISSN 1465-5489 .

S2CID 154430556 .

^ "On the road to REDD" .

Nature .

462 (7269): 11. November 2009.

Bibcode : 2009Natur.462Q..11.

.

doi : 10.1038/462011a .

PMID 19890280 .

^ "UD Redd: Can the program save our tropical forests?" . Thomaswhite.com. 11 May 2011. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016 . Retrieved 1 May 2013 .

^ "UNFCCC documents relevant for REDD+ - REDD+" .

redd.unfccc.int . Retrieved 8 April 2020 .

^ "Principles and Guidelines for Engagement with Indigenous Peoples" (PDF) . Global Environment Facility. October 2012.

^ "Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twentieth session, held in Lima from 1 to 14 December 2014" (PDF) . 2 February 2015 . Retrieved 20 April 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] Goetz, S.; Hansen, M.; Houghton, R.; Walker, W.; Laporte, N.; Busch, J. (2015).

"Measurement and monitoring needs, capabilities and potential for addressing reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation under REDD+" .

Environmental Research Letters .

10 (12): 123001.

Bibcode : 2015ERL....10l3001G .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/123001 .

Lu, H.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Yan, W.; Zhang, J. (2012).

"Modelling Forest Fragmentation and Carbon Emissions for REDD plus" .

Procedia Engineering .

37 : 333– 338.

doi : 10.1016/j.proeng.2012.04.249 .

Probert, C.; Sharrock, S.; Ali, N. (2011).

A REDD+ manual for botanic gardens (PDF) . Botanic Gardens Conservation International (BGCI).

Pan, Y.; Birdsey, R.; Fang, J.; Hougton, R.; Kauppi, P.; Kurz, W.; Phillips, O.

; Shvidenko, A.; Canadell, J.; Ciais, P.; Jackson, R.; Lewis, S.; McGuire, D.; Pacala, S.; Piao, S.; Rautiainen, A.; Sitch, S.; Hayes, D. (2011).

"A large and persistent carbon sink in the world's forests" .

Science .

333 (6045): 988– 993.

Bibcode : 2011Sci...333..988P .

doi : 10.1126/science.1201609 .

PMID 21764754 .

S2CID 42458151 .

Entenmann, Steffen Karl; Schmitt, Christine Brigitte (2013). " 'Actors' perceptions of forest biodiversity values and policy issues related to REDD plus implementation in Peru".

Biodiversity and Conservation .

22 (5): 1229–p1254.

doi : 10.1007/s10531-013-0477-5 .

S2CID 16140886 .

: 26 Asiyanbi, A.; Lund, J. F. (2020).

"Policy persistence: REDD+ between stabilization and contestation" .

Journal of Political Ecology .

27 (1): 378– 400.

External links [ edit ] Official UN-REDD Programme Website Official UN-REDD Programme Online Collaborative Workspace [ usurped ] Official UNFCCC Website UN-REDD Programme Multi-Partner Trust Fund Factsheet UNFCCC REDD Web Platform REDD+ Partnership, including financing database Forest Carbon Partnership Facility, hosted by the World Bank REDD+ profile on database of Market Governance Mechanisms UN-REDD Programme Code REDD: A campaign to promote REDD+ projects and the corporations who have pledged support REDD-Monitor - Critical analysis and news about REDD Archived 14 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine Partners: Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Global Environment Facility (GEF) Forest Investment Program (FIP) Archived 9 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine v t e Deforestation Deforestation by continent Africa Angola DR Congo Ethiopia Kenya Madagascar Nigeria Americas Amazon Argentina Brazil Canada ( British Columbia ) Central America Colombia Costa Rica Haiti Mexico United States Asia Borneo Cambodia China India Indonesia ( Kalimantan ) Laos Malaysia ( East Malaysia ) Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Philippines Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Vietnam Europe Roman Empire Russia United Kingdom Oceania Australia ( Victoria ) New Zealand Papua New Guinea Related Deforestation and climate change Forest degradation Forestation Forestry Illegal logging Logging Category Commons WikiProject Forestry v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=REDD_and_REDD%2B&oldid=1305400708 " Categories : Emissions reduction Carbon finance Reforestation Forest governance Deforestation World forestry Forest certification Forest conservation Environmental controversies Sustainable forest management Food and Agriculture Organization International forestry organizations United Nations Development Programme United Nations Environment Programme United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from December 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from December 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from December 2021 Use dmy dates from March 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 21:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents REDD and REDD+ 5 languages Add topic

