Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms Toggle Signs and symptoms subsection 1.1 Labour pain 1.2 Psychological 2 Vaginal birth Toggle Vaginal birth subsection 2.1 Onset of labour 2.2 Stages of labour 2.2.1 First stage 2.2.2 Second stage 2.2.3 Third stage 2.2.4 Postpartum period 2.3 Early skin-to-skin contact 2.4 Discharge 3 Management Toggle Management subsection 3.1 Natural childbirth 3.2 Coping 3.3 Aid 3.4 Preparation 3.5 Labour induction 3.6 Forceps or vacuum assisted delivery 3.7 Pain control 3.7.1 Non-pharmaceutical 3.7.2 Pharmaceutical 3.8 Augmentation 3.9 Episiotomy 3.10 Multiple births 3.11 Fetal monitoring 3.12 Caesarean section 4 Complications Toggle Complications subsection 4.1 Labour and delivery complications 4.1.1 Obstructed labour 4.1.2 Eclampsia 4.2 Maternal complications 4.2.1 Postpartum bleeding 4.2.2 Postpartum infections 4.2.3 Psychological complications 4.3 Fetal complications 4.3.1 Stillbirth 4.3.2 Preterm birth 4.3.3 Post-term birth 4.3.4 Neonatal infection 4.3.5 Perinatal asphyxia 4.3.6 Mechanical fetal injury 5 Accommodation Toggle Accommodation subsection 5.1 Location 5.2 Hospitals 5.2.1 Baby Friendly Hospitals 5.3 Facilities 5.4 Associated occupations 5.4.1 Birth attendants 5.5 Role of males 6 Economics Toggle Economics subsection 6.1 Costs 7 Mortality Toggle Mortality subsection 7.1 Maternal mortality 7.1.1 United States 7.2 Infant mortality 7.2.1 United States 8 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 8.1 Placentophagy 8.2 Variation 9 Research directions 10 History Toggle History subsection 10.1 Giving birth in hospitals 10.2 Pain medication in labour 10.3 Cesarean section 10.4 Outdated methods 10.5 Role of males 10.6 Childbed fever 11 See also 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Childbirth 104 languages العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Chi-Chewa ChiShona Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Naijá Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Scots Seediq Sesotho Shqip Simple English SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conclusion of the human pregnancy This article is about birth in humans. For birth in non-human mammals and other animals, see Birth . For the band Childbirth, see Childbirth (band) .

Medical condition Childbirth Other names Labour and delivery, partus, giving birth, parturition, birth, confinement [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Mother with neonate covered in vernix caseosa Specialty Obstetrics , midwifery Complications Obstructed labour , postpartum bleeding , eclampsia , postpartum infection , birth asphyxia , neonatal hypothermia [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Types Vaginal delivery , C-section [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Causes Pregnancy Prevention Birth control , elective abortion Frequency 135 million (2015) [ 8 ] Deaths 500,000 maternal deaths a year [ 5 ] Childbirth , also known as labour , parturition and delivery , is the completion of pregnancy , where one or more fetuses exits the internal environment of the mother via vaginal delivery or caesarean section [ 7 ] and becomes a newborn to the world. In 2019, there were about 140.11 million human births globally.

[ 9 ] In developed countries , most deliveries occur in hospitals , [ 10 ] [ 11 ] while in developing countries most are home births .

[ 12 ] The most common childbirth method worldwide is vaginal delivery.

[ 6 ] It involves four stages of labour : the shortening and opening of the cervix during the first stage, descent and birth of the baby during the second, the delivery of the placenta during the third, and the recovery of the mother and infant during the fourth stage, which is referred to as the postpartum . The first stage is characterised by abdominal cramping or also back pain in the case of back labour , [ 13 ] that typically lasts half a minute and occurs every 10 to 30 minutes.

[ 14 ] Contractions gradually become stronger and closer together.

[ 15 ] Since the pain of childbirth correlates with contractions, the pain becomes more frequent and strong as the labour progresses. The second stage ends when the infant is fully expelled. The third stage is the delivery of the placenta .

[ 16 ] The fourth stage of labour involves the recovery of the mother, delayed clamping of the umbilical cord , and monitoring of the neonate .

[ 17 ] All major health organisations advise that immediately after giving birth, regardless of the delivery method, that the infant be placed on the mother's chest (termed skin-to-skin contact ), and to delay any other routine procedures for at least one to two hours or until the baby has had its first breastfeeding .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Vaginal delivery is generally recommended as a first option. Cesarean section can lead to increased risk of complications and a significantly slower recovery. There are also many natural benefits of a vaginal delivery in both mother and baby. Various methods may help with pain, such as relaxation techniques , opioids , and spinal blocks .

[ 15 ] It is best practice to limit the amount of interventions that occur during labour and delivery such as an elective cesarean section. However in some cases a scheduled cesarean section must be planned for a successful delivery and recovery of the mother. An emergency cesarean section may be recommended if unexpected complications occur or little to no progression through the birthing canal is observed in a vaginal delivery.

Each year, complications from pregnancy and childbirth result in about 500,000 birthing deaths , seven million women have serious long-term problems, and 50 million women giving birth have negative health outcomes following delivery, most of which occur in the developing world .

[ 5 ] Complications in the mother include obstructed labour , postpartum bleeding , eclampsia , and postpartum infection .

[ 5 ] Complications in the baby include lack of oxygen at birth (birth asphyxia), birth trauma , and prematurity .

[ 4 ] [ 22 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] The most prominent sign of labour is strong repetitive uterine contractions . Pain in contractions has been described as feeling similar to very strong menstrual cramps . Crowning, when the baby's head becomes visible, may be experienced as an intense stretching and burning.

[ 23 ] Back labour is a complication that occurs during childbirth when the feet or the bottom of the baby is visible first ( bottom-first presentation ), instead of the being born head down ( head-first presentation ).

[ 24 ] This leads to more intense contractions, and causes pain in the lower back that persists between contractions as the back of the fetus’ head exerts pressure on the mother's sacrum .

[ 25 ] Another prominent sign of labour is the rupture of membranes , commonly known as "water breaking".  During pregnancy, a baby is surrounded and cushioned by a fluid-filled sac (the amniotic sac ). Usually the sac ruptures at the beginning of or during labour.  It may cause a gush of fluid or leak in an intermittent or constant flow of small amounts from a woman's vagina. The fluid is clear or pale yellow.   If the amniotic sac has not yet broken during labour the health care provider may break it in a technique called an amniotomy . In an amniotomy a thin plastic hook is used to make a small opening in the sac, causing the water to break.

[ 26 ] If the sac breaks before labour starts, it's called a prelabour rupture of membranes .   Contractions will typically start within 24 hours after the water breaks. If not, the care provider will generally begin labour induction within 24 to 48 hours.  If the baby is preterm (less than 37 weeks of pregnancy), the healthcare provider may use a medication to delay delivery.

[ 27 ] Labour pain [ edit ] See also: Pain management during childbirth Labor pains have both visceral and somatic components.

[ 23 ] During the first and second stages of labour, uterine contractions cause stretching and opening of the cervix . This in turn triggers visceral pain in the inner cervix and lower segment of the spine.

[ 28 ] Somatic pain is triggered at the end of the first and second stages of labour by pain receptors that supply the nerves on the vaginal surface of the cervix, resulting from stretching, distention, and tearing of the vagina, perineum , and pelvic floor . Compared to visceral pain, somatic pain is more resistant to opioid pain medication.

Nitrous oxide may be used in hospitals and birthing centers for this reason.

[ 29 ] Beyond physical pain, there are also well-documented biocultural and psychosocial aspects of labour pain and pain management.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Pain is experienced distinctly by different cultures and there are various culturally-relevant interventions than can lessen labour pain, such as having extended female family members present during childbirth.

[ 33 ] Labour might be less painful in subsequent births, and this has been associated with lessened fear.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Pain management techniques during labour can include pain relief with medication (such as an epidural injection ) or coping techniques (such as the Lamaze breathing ).

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Psychological [ edit ] During the later stages of gestation , there is an increase in abundance of oxytocin , a hormone that is known to evoke feelings of contentment, reductions in anxiety, and feelings of calmness.

[ 39 ] Oxytocin is further released during labour when the fetus stimulates the cervix and vagina, and it is believed that it plays a major role in the bonding of a mother to her infant and in the establishment of maternal behaviour. The father of the child also has an increase in oxytocin levels following contact with the infant and parents with higher oxytocin levels show being more responsivene and " in synch " in their interactions with their infant.  The act of nursing a child also causes a release of oxytocin to help the baby get milk more easily from the nipple.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Vaginal birth [ edit ] Further information: Vaginal delivery Sequence of images showing the stages of ordinary childbirth Station refers to the relationship of the fetal presenting part to the level of the ischial spines . When the presenting part is at the ischial spines the station is 0 (synonymous with engagement). If the presenting fetal part is above the spines, the distance is measured and described as minus stations, which range from −1 to −4 cm . If the presenting part is below the ischial spines, the distance is stated as plus stations ( +1 to +4 cm). At +3 and +4 the presenting part is at the perineum and can be seen.

[ 42 ] The baby's head may temporarily change shape (becoming more elongated or cone shaped) as it moves through the birth canal. This change in the shape of the fetal head is called molding and is much more prominent in women having their first vaginal delivery.

[ 43 ] Cervical ripening is the physical and chemical changes in the cervix to prepare it for the stretching that will take place as the fetus moves out of the uterus and into the birth canal. A scoring system called a Bishop score can be used to judge the degree of cervical ripening to predict the timing of labour and delivery of the infant or for women at risk for preterm labour .  It is also used to judge when a woman will respond to induction of labour for a postterm pregnancy or other medical reasons. There are several methods of inducing cervical ripening which will allow the uterine contractions to effectively dilate the cervix.

[ 44 ] Vaginal delivery involves four stages of labour: the shortening and opening of the cervix during the first stage, descent and birth of the baby during the second, the delivery of the placenta during the third, and the fourth stage of recovery which lasts until two hours after the delivery. The first stage is characterised by abdominal cramping or back pain that typically lasts around half a minute and occurs every 10 to 30 minutes.

[ 14 ] The contractions (and pain) gradually becomes stronger and closer together.

[ 15 ] The second stage ends when the infant is fully expelled. In the third stage, the delivery of the placenta.

[ 16 ] The fourth stage of labour involves recovery, the uterus beginning to contract to pre-pregnancy state, delayed clamping of the umbilical cord , and monitoring of the neonatal tone and vitals.

[ 17 ] All major health organisations advise that immediately following a live birth , regardless of the delivery method, that the infant be placed on the mother's chest, termed skin-to-skin contact , and delaying routine procedures for at least one to two hours or until the baby has had its first breastfeeding .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Onset of labour [ edit ] The hormones initiating labour Definitions of the onset of labour include: Regular uterine contractions at least every six minutes with evidence of change in cervical dilation or cervical effacement between consecutive digital examinations.

[ 45 ] Regular contractions occurring less than 10 minutes apart and progressive cervical dilation or cervical effacement.

[ 46 ] At least three painful regular uterine contractions during a 10-minute period, each lasting more than 45 seconds.

[ 47 ] Common signs that labour is about to begin may include what is known as lightening , which is the process of the baby moving down from the rib cage with the head of the baby engaging deep in the pelvis. The pregnant woman may then find breathing easier, since her lungs have more room for expansion, but pressure on her bladder may cause more frequent need to urinate. Lightening may occur a few weeks or a few hours before labour begins, or even not until labour has begun.

[ 48 ] Some women also experience an increase in vaginal discharge several days before labour begins when the " mucus plug ", a thick plug of mucus that blocks the opening to the uterus, is pushed out into the vagina.  The mucus plug may become dislodged days before labour begins or not until the start of labour.

[ 48 ] While inside the uterus the baby is enclosed in a fluid-filled membrane called the amniotic sac .  Shortly before, at the beginning of, or during labour the sac ruptures , commonly known as the "water breaking". Once the sac ruptures the baby is at risk for infection and the mother's medical team will assess the need to induce labour if it has not started within the time they believe to be safe for the infant.

[ 48 ] Stages of labour [ edit ] First stage [ edit ] The first stage of labour is divided into latent and active phases, where the latent phase is sometimes included in the definition of labour, [ 49 ] and sometimes not.

[ 50 ] The latent phase is generally defined as beginning at the point at which the woman perceives regular uterine contractions .

[ 51 ] In contrast, Braxton Hicks contractions , which are contractions that may start around 26 weeks gestation and are sometimes called "false labour", are infrequent, irregular, and involve only mild cramping.

[ 52 ] Braxton Hicks contractions are the uterine muscles preparing to deliver the infant.

Cervical effacement , which is the thinning and stretching of the cervix , and cervical dilation occur during the closing weeks of pregnancy .  Effacement is usually complete or near-complete and dilation is about 5 cm by the end of the latent phase.

[ 53 ] The degree of cervical effacement and dilation may be felt during a vaginal examination.

Engagement of the fetal head The active phase of labour has geographically differing definitions.  The World Health Organization describes the active first stage as "a period of time characterised by regular painful uterine contractions, a substantial degree of cervical effacement and more rapid cervical dilatation from 5 cm until full dilatation for first and subsequent labours”.

[ 54 ] In the US, the definition of active labour was changed from 3 to 4 cm, to 5 cm of cervical dilation for mothers who had given birth previously, and at 6 cm for those who had not given birth before.

[ 55 ] This was done in an effort to increase the rates of vaginal delivery.

[ 56 ] Health care providers may assess the mother's progress in labour by performing a cervical exam to evaluate the cervical dilation, effacement, and station. These factors form the Bishop score . The Bishop score can also be used as a means to predict the success of an induction of labour .

During effacement, the cervix becomes incorporated into the lower segment of the uterus. During a contraction, uterine muscles contract causing shortening of the upper segment and drawing upwards of the lower segment, in a gradual expulsive motion.

[ 57 ] The presenting fetal part then is permitted to descend. Full dilation is reached when the cervix has widened enough to allow passage of the baby's head, around 10 cm dilation for a term baby.

A standard duration of the latent first stage has not been established and can vary widely from one woman to another. However, the duration of active first stage (from 5 cm until full cervical dilatation) usually does not extend beyond 12 hours in the labour of first-time mothers, and usually does not extend beyond 10 hours in subsequent pregnancies.

[ 58 ] Second stage [ edit ] The second stage begins when the cervix is fully dilated, and ends when the baby is born. As pressure on the cervix increases, a sensation of pelvic pressure is experienced, and, with it, an urge to begin pushing. At the beginning of the normal second stage, the head is fully engaged in the pelvis; the widest diameter of the head has passed below the level of the pelvic inlet . The fetal head then continues descent into the pelvis, below the pubic arch and out through the vaginal opening . This is assisted by the additional maternal efforts of pushing, or bearing down, similar to defecation . The appearance of the fetal head at the vaginal opening is termed crowning. At this point, the mother will feel an intense burning or stinging sensation.

When the amniotic sac has not ruptured during labour or pushing, the infant can be born with the membranes intact. This is referred to as "delivery en caul ".

Complete expulsion of the baby signals the successful completion of the second stage of labour.  Some babies, especially preterm infants, are born covered with a waxy or cheese-like white substance called vernix .  It is thought to have some protective roles during fetal development and for a few hours after birth.

The second stage varies from one woman to another. In first labours, birth is usually completed within three hours whereas in subsequent
labours, birth is usually completed within two hours.

[ 59 ] Second-stage labours longer than three hours are associated with declining rates of spontaneous vaginal delivery and increasing rates of infection, perineal tears , and obstetric haemorrhage, as well as the need for intensive care of the neonate.

[ 60 ] Third stage [ edit ] Further information: Umbilical cord and Placental expulsion The period from just after the fetus is expelled until just after the placenta is expelled is called the third stage of labour or the involution stage .

Placental expulsion begins as a physiological separation from the wall of the uterus. The average time from delivery of the baby until complete expulsion of the placenta is estimated to be 10–12 minutes dependent on whether active or expectant management is employed.

[ 61 ] In as many as 3% of all vaginal deliveries, the duration of the third stage is longer than 30 minutes and raises concern for retained placenta .

[ 62 ] Placental expulsion can be managed actively or it can be managed expectantly, allowing the placenta to be expelled without medical assistance. Active management is the administration of a uterotonic drug within one minute of fetal delivery, controlled traction of the umbilical cord and fundal massage after delivery of the placenta, followed by performance of uterine massage every 15 minutes for two hours.

[ 63 ] Active management of the third stage of labour in vaginal deliveries helps to prevent postpartum haemorrhage .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] Delaying the clamping of the umbilical cord for at least one minute or until it ceases to pulsate, which may take several minutes, improves outcomes as long as there is the ability to treat jaundice if it occurs. For many years it was believed that late cord cutting led to a mother's risk of experiencing significant bleeding after giving birth, called postpartum bleeding . However, delaying cord cutting in healthy full-term infants results in early haemoglobin concentration and higher birthweight and increased iron reserves up to six months after birth with no change in the rate of postpartum bleeding.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Postpartum period [ edit ] Further information: Postpartum period , Postpartum physiological changes , and Parental leave Newborn rests as caregiver checks breath sounds.

Postpartum , sometimes termed the fourth stage of labour, is the period beginning immediately after childbirth, and extends for about six weeks. The terms postpartum and postnatal are often used for this period.

[ 69 ] The woman's body, including hormone levels and uterus size, return to a non-pregnant state and the newborn adjusts to life outside the mother's body.  The World Health Organization (WHO) describes the postnatal period as the most critical and yet the most neglected phase in the lives of mothers and babies; most deaths occur during the postnatal period.

[ 70 ] Following the birth, if the mother had an episiotomy or a tearing of the perineum , it is stitched. This is also an optimal time for uptake of long-acting reversible contraception (LARC), such as the contraceptive implant or intrauterine device (IUD), both of which can be inserted immediately after delivery while the woman is still in the delivery room.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] The mother has regular assessments for uterine contraction and fundal height , [ 73 ] vaginal bleeding, heart rate and blood pressure, and temperature, for the first 24 hours after birth. Some women may experience an uncontrolled episode of shivering or postpartum chills following the birth. The first passing of urine should be documented within six hours.

[ 70 ] Afterpains (pains similar to menstrual cramps), contractions of the uterus to prevent excessive blood flow, continue for several days. Vaginal discharge, termed " lochia ", can be expected to continue for several weeks; initially bright red, it gradually becomes pink, changing to brown, and finally to yellow or white.

[ 74 ] At one time babies born in hospitals were removed from their mothers shortly after birth and brought to the mother only at feeding times.

[ 75 ] Mothers were told that their newborns would be safer in the nursery and that the separation would offer the mothers more time to rest.  As attitudes began to change, some hospitals offered a "rooming in" option wherein after a period of routine hospital procedures and observation, the infant could be allowed to share the mother's room. As of 2020, rooming-in has increasingly become standard practice in maternity wards.

[ 76 ] Early skin-to-skin contact [ edit ] Kangaroo care by father in Cameroon Skin-to-skin contact (SSC), sometimes also called kangaroo care , is a technique of newborn care where babies are kept chest-to-chest and skin-to-skin with a parent, typically their mother or possibly the father. This means without the shirt or undergarments on the chest of both the baby and parent. Early skin-to-skin contact results in a decrease in infant crying, improves cardio-respiratory stability and blood glucose levels, and improves breastfeeding duration and effectiveness.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Early postpartum SSC is endorsed by all major organisations that are responsible for the well-being of infants.

[ 19 ] The World Health Organization (WHO) states that "the process of
childbirth is not finished until the baby has safely transferred from placental to mammary nutrition."  It is advised that the newborn be placed skin-to-skin with the mother following vaginal birth, or as soon as the mother is alert and responsive after a Caesarean section, postponing any routine procedures for at least one to two hours or until the baby has had its first breastfeeding.  The baby's father or other support person may also choose to hold the baby SSC until the mother recovers from the anaesthetic.

[ 80 ] The WHO suggests that any initial observations of the infant can be done while the infant remains close to the mother, saying that even a brief separation before the baby has had its first feed can disturb the bonding process.  They further advise frequent skin-to-skin contact as much as possible during the first days after delivery, especially if it were interrupted for some reason after the delivery.

[ 81 ] [ 20 ] La Leche League advises women to have a delivery team which includes a support person who will advocate to assure that: The mother and her baby are not separated unnecessarily The baby will receive only her milk The baby will receive no supplementation without a medical reason All testing, bathing or other procedures are done in the parent's room [ 82 ] It has long been known that a mother's level of the hormone oxytocin elevates when she interacts with her infant. The oxytocin level in fathers that engage in SSC is increased as well and SSC reduces stress and anxiety in parents after interaction." [ 83 ] Discharge [ edit ] See also: Early postnatal hospital discharge For births that occur in hospitals the WHO recommends a hospital stay of at least 24 hours following an uncomplicated vaginal delivery and 96 hours for a Cesarean section.  Looking at length of stay (in 2016) for an uncomplicated delivery around the world shows an average of less than 1 day in Egypt to 6 days in (pre-war) Ukraine.  Averages for Australia are 2.8 days and 1.5 days in the UK.

[ 84 ] While this number is low, two-thirds of women in the UK have midwife-assisted births and in some cases the mother may choose a hospital setting for birth to be closer to the wide range of assistance available for an emergency situation.  However, women with midwife care may leave the hospital shortly after birth and her midwife will continue her care at her home.

[ 85 ] In the U.S. the average length of stay has gradually dropped from 4.1 days in 1970 to a current stay of 2 days.  The CDC attributed the drop to the rise in health care costs, saying people could not afford to stay in the hospital any longer. To keep it from dropping any lower, in 1996 Congress passed the Newborns' and Mothers' Health Protection Act that requires insurers to cover at least 48 hours for uncomplicated delivery.

[ 84 ] Management [ edit ] See also: Prenatal care Natural childbirth [ edit ] Main article: Natural childbirth The reemergence of "natural childbirth" began in Europe and was adopted by some in the US as early as the late 1940s. Early supporters believed that the drugs used during deliveries interfered with "happy childbirth" and could negatively impact the newborn's "emotional wellbeing". By the 1970s, the call for natural childbirth was spread nationwide, in conjunction with the second-wave of the feminist movement .

[ 86 ] While it is still most common for American women to deliver in the hospital, supporters of natural birth still widely exist, especially in the UK where midwife-assisted home births have gained popularity.

[ 87 ] Coping [ edit ] Distress levels vary widely during pregnancy as well as during labour and delivery. They appear to be influenced by fear and anxiety levels, experience with prior childbirth, cultural ideas of childbirth pain, mobility during labour, and the support received during labour.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Personal expectations, the amount of support from caregivers, quality of the caregiver-patient relationship, and involvement in decision-making are more important in the mother's overall satisfaction with the birthing experience than are other influencing factors such as age, socioeconomic status , ethnicity, preparation, physical environment, pain, immobility, or medical interventions.

[ 90 ] Aid [ edit ] Obstetric care frequently subjects women to institutional routines, which may have adverse effects on the progress of labour. Supportive care during labour may involve emotional support, comfort measures, and information and advocacy which may promote the physical process of labour as well as women's feelings of control and competence, thus reducing the need for obstetric intervention. The continuous support may be provided either by hospital staff such as nurses or midwives, doulas , or by companions of the woman's choice from her social network.

[ citation needed ] Continuous labour support may help women to give birth spontaneously, that is, without caesarean or vacuum or forceps , with slightly shorter labours, and to have more positive feelings regarding their experience of giving birth. Continuous labour support may also reduce women's use of pain medication during labour and reduce the risk of babies having low five-minute Apgar scores .

[ 91 ] The participation of the child's father in the birth contributes to a better birth experience for the mother, promotes paternal bonding and makes the transition to fatherhood easier.

[ 92 ] Preparation [ edit ] Eating or drinking during labour is an area of ongoing debate. While some have argued that eating in labour has no harmful effects on outcomes, [ 93 ] others continue to have concern regarding the increased possibility of an aspiration event (choking on recently eaten foods) in the event of an emergency delivery due to the increased relaxation of the oesophagus in pregnancy, upward pressure of the uterus on the stomach, and the possibility of general anaesthetic in the event of an emergency cesarean.

[ 94 ] However with good obstetrical anaesthesia there is no additional harm from allowing eating and drinking during labour in those who are unlikely to need surgery. Additionally, not eating does not necessarily mean that the mother's stomach is empty or that its contents are not as acidic.

[ 95 ] At one time shaving of the area around the vagina , was common practice due to the belief that hair removal reduced the risk of infection, made an episiotomy (a surgical cut to enlarge the vaginal entrance) easier, and helped with instrumental deliveries. It is currently less common, though it is still a routine procedure in some countries even though there is no scientific evidence to recommend shaving.

[ 96 ] Side effects appear later, including irritation, redness, and multiple superficial scratches from the razor. Another effort to prevent infection has been the use of the antiseptic chlorhexidine or providone-iodine solution in the vagina. However it is unclear if chlorhexidine offers any benefits in preventing infections.

[ 97 ] Providone-iodine decreases the risk of infection when a cesarean section is to be performed.

[ 98 ] Labour induction [ edit ] Main article: Labour induction Labor induction is the procedure where a medical professional starts the process of labor instead of letting it start on its own. Labor may be induced (started) if the health of the mother or the baby is at risk. Induction of labor can be accomplished with medication or mechanical methods.

[ 99 ] Medical guidelines recommend a full evaluation of the maternal-fetal status, the status of the cervix, and at least a 39 completed weeks (full term) of gestation for optimal health of the newborn when considering elective induction of labour. Indications for induction may include: [ 99 ] Problems with the placenta Health issues with the fetus Maternal conditions such as gestational diabetes or chronic kidney disease Preeclampsia , eclampsia or gestational hypertension Premature rupture of membranes Postterm pregnancy Induction may also be considered for logistical reasons, such as the distance from hospital or psychosocial conditions. In these instances gestational age confirmation must be done, and the maturity of the fetal lung must be confirmed by testing. The contraindications for induced labour are the same as for spontaneous vaginal delivery, including vasa previa , complete placenta praevia , umbilical cord prolapse or active genital herpes infection , in which cases a cesarean section is the safest delivery method.

[ 100 ] Women often do not receive clear and detailed information about the process of labor induction, its benefits and risks.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] For example women might not know how long the process will last, how long they need to stay in the hospital and how strong the pain caused by the procedure would be.

[ 102 ] Providing up-to-date information about the procedure allows women to make an informed choice and give an informed consent or refuse the induction.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Forceps or vacuum assisted delivery [ edit ] Main article: Operative vaginal delivery An assisted delivery is used in about 1 in 8 births, and may be needed if either mother or infant appears to be at risk during a vaginal delivery.  The methods used are termed obstetrical forceps extraction and vacuum extraction , also called ventouse extraction.  Done properly, they are both safe with some preference for forceps rather than vacuum, and both are seen as preferable to an unexpected C-section.  While considered safe, some risks for the mother include vaginal tearing, including a higher chance of having a more major vaginal tear that involves the muscle or wall of the anus or rectum.  For women undergoing operative vaginal delivery with vacuum extraction or forceps, there is strong evidence that prophylactic antibiotics help to reduce the risk of infection.

[ 106 ] There is a higher risk of blood clots forming in the legs or pelvis – anti-clot stockings or medication may be ordered to avoid clots.

Urinary incontinence is not unusual after childbirth but it is more common after an instrument delivery.  Certain exercises and physiotherapy will help the condition to improve.

[ 107 ] Pain control [ edit ] Main article: Pain management during childbirth Non-pharmaceutical [ edit ] Some women prefer to avoid analgesic medication during childbirth. Psychological preparation may be beneficial. Relaxation techniques, immersion in water, massage, and acupuncture may provide pain relief.  Acupuncture and relaxation were found to decrease the number of caesarean sections required.

[ 37 ] Immersion in water has been found to relieve pain during the first stage of labour, reduce the need for anaesthesia, and shorten the duration of labour.

[ 108 ] Additionally, water birth is associated with a decreased risk of postpartum hemorrhaging, low Apgar scores, neonatal infections, requirement for neonatal resuscitation, and neonatal admission to intensive care. However, there is a higher chance of cord avulsion.

[ 109 ] Most women like to have someone to support them during labour and birth; such as a midwife, nurse, or doula ; or a lay person such as the father of the baby, a family member, or a close friend.  Studies have found that continuous support during labour and delivery reduce the need for medication and a caesarean or operative vaginal delivery, and result in an improved Apgar score for the infant.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Pharmaceutical [ edit ] Different measures for pain control have varying degrees of success and side effects to the woman and her baby. In some countries of Europe, doctors commonly prescribe inhaled nitrous oxide gas for pain control, especially as 53% nitrous oxide, 47% oxygen, known as Entonox ; in the UK, midwives may use this gas without a doctor's prescription.

[ 112 ] Opioids such as fentanyl may be used, but if given too close to birth there is a risk of respiratory depression in the infant.

[ needs update ] [ 113 ] Popular medical pain control in hospitals include the regional anaesthetics epidurals (EDA), and spinal anaesthesia . Epidural analgesia is a generally safe and effective method of relieving pain in labour, but has been associated with longer labour, more operative intervention (particularly instrument delivery), and increases in cost.

[ 114 ] However, a more recent (2017) Cochrane review suggests that the new epidural techniques have no effect on labour time and the use of instruments or the need for C-section deliveries.

[ 115 ] Generally, pain and stress hormones rise throughout labour for women without epidurals, while pain, fear, and stress hormones decrease upon administration of epidural analgesia, but rise again later.

[ 116 ] Medicine administered via epidural can cross the placenta and enter the bloodstream of the fetus.

[ 117 ] Epidural analgesia has no statistically significant impact on the risk of caesarean section, and does not appear to have an immediate effect on neonatal status as determined by Apgar scores.

[ 115 ] Augmentation [ edit ] Oxytocin facilitates labour and will follow a positive feedback loop.

Augmentation is the process of stimulating the uterus to increase the intensity and duration of contractions after labour has begun. Several methods of augmentation are commonly been used to treat slow progress of labour (dystocia) when uterine contractions are assessed to be too weak.

Oxytocin is the most common method used to increase the rate of vaginal delivery.

[ 118 ] The World Health Organization recommends its use either alone or with amniotomy (rupture of the amniotic membrane) but advises that it must be used only after it has been correctly confirmed that labour is not proceeding properly if harm is to be avoided.  The WHO does not recommend the use of antispasmodic agents for prevention of delay in labour.

[ 119 ] Episiotomy [ edit ] Further information: Episiotomy For years an episiotomy was thought to help prevent more extensive vaginal tears and heal better than a natural tear.

Perineal tears can occur at the vaginal opening as the baby's head passes through, especially if the baby descends quickly. Tears can involve the perineal skin or extend to the muscles and the anal sphincter and anus. Once common, they are now recognised as generally not needed.

[ 15 ] When needed, the midwife or obstetrician makes a surgical cut in the perineum to prevent severe tears that can be difficult to repair. Conducting episiotomy when necessary (restrictive episiotomy) appears to give a number of benefits compared to using routine episiotomy. Women experience less severe perineal trauma, less posterior perineal trauma, less suturing and fewer healing complications at seven days. Furthermore it does not cause a higher occurrence of pain, urinary incontinence, painful sex or severe vaginal/perineal trauma after birth.

[ 120 ] Multiple births [ edit ] Main article: Multiple birth In cases of a head first-presenting first twin, twins can often be delivered vaginally. In some cases twin delivery is done in a larger delivery room or in an operating theatre, in the event of complication e.g.

Both twins born vaginally – this can occur both presented head first or where one comes head first and the other is breech and/or helped by a forceps/ventouse delivery One twin born vaginally and the other by caesarean section.

If the twins are joined at any part of the body – called conjoined twins , delivery is mostly by caesarean section.

Fetal monitoring [ edit ] For external monitoring of the fetus during childbirth, a simple pinard stethoscope or doppler fetal monitor (" doptone ") can be used.
A method of external (noninvasive) fetal monitoring (EFM) during childbirth is cardiotocography (CTG), using a cardiotocograph that consists of two sensors: The heart (cardio) sensor is an ultrasonic sensor , similar to a Doppler fetal monitor , that continuously emits ultrasound and detects motion of the fetal heart by the characteristic of the reflected sound. The pressure-sensitive contraction transducer, called a tocodynamometer (toco) has a flat area that is fixated to the skin by a band around the belly. The pressure required to flatten a section of the wall correlates with the internal pressure, thereby providing an estimate of contraction.

[ 121 ] Monitoring with a cardiotocograph can either be intermittent or continuous.

[ 122 ] The World Health Organization (WHO) advises that for healthy women undergoing spontaneous labour continuous cardiotocography is not recommended for assessment of fetal well-being. The WHO states: "In countries and settings where continuous CTG is used defensively to protect against litigation, all stakeholders should be made aware that this practice is not evidence-based and does not improve birth outcomes." [ 123 ] A mother's water has to break before internal (invasive) monitoring can be used. More invasive monitoring can involve a fetal scalp electrode to give an additional measure of fetal heart activity, and/or intrauterine pressure catheter (IUPC). It can also involve fetal scalp pH testing .

[ medical citation needed ] Caesarean section [ edit ] Main articles: Caesarean section and delivery after previous caesarean section Caesarean section is the removal of the neonate through a surgical incision in the abdomen, rather than through vaginal birth.  During the procedure the patient is usually numbed with an epidural or a spinal block, but general anaesthesia can be used as well. A cut is made in the patient's abdomen and then in the uterus to remove the baby.

[ 124 ] Before the 1970s, once a woman delivered one baby via C-section, it was recommended that all of her future babies be delivered by C-section, but that recommendation has changed. Unless there is some other indication, mothers can attempt a trial of labour and most are able to have a vaginal birth after C-section (VBAC).

[ 125 ] Induced births and elective cesarean before 39 weeks can be harmful to the neonate as well as harmful or without benefit to the mother. Therefore, many guidelines recommend against non-medically required induced births and elective cesarean before 39 weeks.

[ 126 ] The WHO recommends a C-section rate of between 10 and 15% because C-sections rates higher than 10% are not associated with a decrease in morbidity and mortality.

[ 127 ] In 2018, a group of medical professionals called the rates of increase around the world "alarming".  In a Lancet report, C-sections were found to have more than tripled from about 6% of all births to 21%.  In a statement by the maternal and child health organisation, the March of Dimes , the increase is largely due to an increase of elective C-sections rather than when it is really necessary or indicated.

[ 128 ] Complications [ edit ] Main article: Complications of pregnancy See also: Pre-existing disease in pregnancy and High-risk pregnancy Labour and delivery complications [ edit ] Main article: Obstetric labour complication Obstructed labour [ edit ] Main article: Obstructed labour Obstructed labour also called "dysfunctional labour" or "labour dystocia", is difficult labour or abnormally slow progress of labour, involving progressive cervical dilatation or lack of descent of the fetus. The second stage of labour may be delayed or lengthy due to poor or uncoordinated uterine action, an abnormal uterine position such as breech or shoulder dystocia , and cephalopelvic disproportion (a small pelvis or large infant).  Prolonged labour may result in maternal exhaustion, fetal distress, and other complications including obstetric fistula .

[ 129 ] Eclampsia [ edit ] Main article: Eclampsia Eclampsia is the onset of seizures (convulsions) in a woman with pre-eclampsia . Pre-eclampsia is a disorder of pregnancy in which there is high blood pressure and either large amounts of protein in the urine or other organ dysfunction. Pre-eclampsia is routinely screened for during prenatal care.  Onset may be before, during, or rarely, after delivery. Around 1% of women with eclampsia die.

[ medical citation needed ] Maternal complications [ edit ] Main article: Puerperal disorder A puerperal disorder or postpartum disorder is a complication which presents primarily during the puerperium, or postpartum period. The postpartum period can be divided into three distinct stages; the initial or acute phase, six to 12 hours after childbirth; subacute postpartum period, which lasts two to six weeks, and the delayed postpartum period, which can last up to six months.  In the subacute postpartum period, 87% to 94% of women report at least one health problem.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Long-term health problems (persisting after the delayed postpartum period) are reported by 31% of women.

[ 132 ] Postpartum bleeding [ edit ] Main article: Postpartum bleeding Bleeding (haemorrhage) is the leading cause of maternal death worldwide accounting for approximately 27.1% of maternal deaths.

[ 133 ] Within maternal deaths due to haemorrhage, two-thirds are caused by postpartum haemorrhage.

[ 133 ] The causes of postpartum haemorrhage can be separated into four main categories: tone, trauma, tissue, and thrombin. Tone represents uterine atony , the failure of the uterus to contract adequately following delivery. Trauma includes lacerations or uterine rupture. Tissue includes conditions that can lead to a retained placenta.

Thrombin , which is a molecule used in the human body's blood clotting system, represents all coagulopathies.

[ 134 ] Postpartum infections [ edit ] Main article: Postpartum infections Postpartum infections , also historically known as childbed fever and medically as puerperal fever, are any bacterial infections of the reproductive tract following childbirth or miscarriage.  Signs and symptoms usually include a fever greater than 38.0 °C (100.4 °F), chills, lower abdominal pain, and possibly bad-smelling vaginal discharge.  The infection usually occurs after the first 24 hours and within the first ten days following delivery.  Infection remains a major cause of maternal deaths and morbidity in the developing world .

[ 135 ] Psychological complications [ edit ] Main articles: Psychiatric disorders of childbirth , Postpartum psychosis , Postpartum depression , Childbirth-related posttraumatic stress disorder , and Maternity blues Childbirth can be an intense event and strong emotions, both positive and negative, can be brought to the surface. Abnormal and persistent fear of childbirth is known as tokophobia . The prevalence of fear of childbirth around the world ranges between 4–25%, with 3–7% of pregnant women having clinical fear of childbirth.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] Although pain may be seen as a self-evident and indisputable fact, in reality pain is only one sensation of childbirth. There are many other sensations such as bliss, joy and satisfaction which can be more powerful than pain. Negative expectations can actually increase sensitivity to pain through the process of nocebo hyperalgesia . At the same time positive expectations can reduce pain through placebo analgesia .

[ 138 ] Most new mothers may experience mild feelings of unhappiness and worry after giving birth.  Babies require a lot of care, so it is normal for mothers to be worried about, or tired from, providing that care.  The feelings, often termed the "baby blues" , affect up to 80% of mothers.  They are somewhat mild, last a week or two, and usually go away on their own.

[ 139 ] Postpartum depression is different from the "baby blues".  With postpartum depression, feelings of sadness and anxiety can be extreme and might interfere with a woman's ability to care for herself or her family. Because of the severity of the symptoms, postpartum depression usually requires treatment. The condition, which occurs in nearly 15% of births, may begin shortly before or any time after childbirth, but commonly begins between a week and a month after delivery.

[ 139 ] Childbirth-related post-traumatic stress disorder is a psychological disorder that can develop in women who have recently given birth.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] Causes include issues such as an emergency C-section, preterm labour, inadequate care during labour,
lack of social support following childbirth, and others.  Examples of symptoms include intrusive symptoms , flashbacks and nightmares , as well as symptoms of avoidance (including amnesia for the whole or parts of the event), problems in developing a mother-child attachment , and others similar to those commonly experienced in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  Many women who are experiencing symptoms of PTSD after childbirth are misdiagnosed with postpartum depression or adjustment disorders .  These diagnoses can lead to inadequate treatment.

[ 143 ] Postpartum psychosis is a rare psychiatric emergency in which symptoms of high mood and racing thoughts ( mania ), depression, severe confusion, loss of inhibition, paranoia, hallucinations and delusions set in, beginning suddenly in the first two weeks after childbirth. The symptoms vary and can change quickly.

[ 144 ] It usually requires hospitalisation. The most severe symptoms last from two to 12 weeks, and recovery takes six months to a year.

[ 144 ] Fetal complications [ edit ] Mechanical fetal injury may be caused by improper rotation of the fetus.

Five causes make up about 80% of newborn deaths globally: prematurity , low-birth-weight , infections, lack of oxygen at birth , and trauma during birth .

[ 22 ] Stillbirth [ edit ] Main article: Stillbirth Stillbirth is typically defined as fetal death at or after 20 to 28 weeks of pregnancy.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] It results in a baby born without signs of life .

[ 146 ] Worldwide prevention of most stillbirths is possible with improved health systems.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] About half of stillbirths occur during childbirth, and stillbirth is more common in the developing than developed world .

[ 146 ] Otherwise depending on how far along the pregnancy is, medications may be used to start labour or a type of surgery known as dilation and evacuation may be carried out.

[ 148 ] Following a stillbirth, women are at higher risk of another one; however, most subsequent pregnancies do not have similar problems.

[ 149 ] Worldwide in 2019 there were about 2 million stillbirths that occurred after 28 weeks of pregnancy, this equates to 1 in 72 total births or one every 16 seconds.

[ 150 ] Still births are more common in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa .

[ 146 ] Stillbirth rates have declined, though more slowly since the 2000s.

[ 151 ] Preterm birth [ edit ] Main article: Preterm birth Preterm birth is the birth of an infant at fewer than 37 weeks gestational age . Globally, about 15 million infants were born before 37 weeks of gestation .

[ 152 ] Premature birth is the leading cause of death in children under five years of age though many that survive experience disabilities including learning defects and visual and hearing problems. Causes for early birth may be unknown or may be related to certain chronic conditions such as diabetes, infections, and other known causes.  The World Health Organization has developed guidelines with recommendations to improve the chances of survival and health outcomes for preterm infants.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] If a pregnant woman enters preterm labour, delivery can be delayed by giving medications called tocolytics . Tocolytics delay labour by inhibiting contractions of the uterine muscles that progress labour. The most widely used tocolytics include beta agonists, calcium channel blockers, and magnesium sulfate. The goal of administering tocolytics is not to delay delivery to the point that the child can be delivered at term, but instead to postponing delivery long enough for the administration of glucocorticoids which can help the fetal lungs to mature enough to reduce morbidity and mortality from infant respiratory distress syndrome .

[ 154 ] Post-term birth [ edit ] Main article: Postterm pregnancy The term postterm pregnancy is used to describe a condition in which a woman has not yet delivered her baby after 42 weeks of gestation , two weeks beyond the usual 40-week duration of pregnancy.

[ 155 ] Postmature births carry risks for both the mother and the baby, including meconium aspiration syndrome , fetal malnutrition, and stillbirths .

[ 156 ] The placenta , which supplies the baby with oxygen and nutrients, begins to age and will eventually fail after the 42nd week of gestation. Induced labour is indicated for postterm pregnancy.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] Neonatal infection [ edit ] Main article: Neonatal infection Disability-adjusted life year for neonatal infections and other (perinatal) conditions per 100,000 inhabitants in 2004. Excludes prematurity and low birth weight, birth asphyxia and birth trauma which have their own maps/data.

[ 160 ] no data less than 150 150–300 300–450 450–600 600–750 750–900 900–1050 1050–1200 1200–1350 1350–1500 1500–1850 more than 1850 Newborns are prone to infection in the first month of life. The pathogenic bacterium Streptococcus agalactiae (a group B streptococcus) is most often the cause of these occasionally fatal infections. The baby contracts the infection from the mother during labour. In 2014 it was estimated that about one in 2000 newborn babies had a group B streptococcus infection within the first week of life, usually evident as respiratory disease , general sepsis , or meningitis .

[ 161 ] Untreated sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are associated with birth defects , and infections in newborn babies, particularly in the areas where rates of infection remain high. The majority of STIs have no symptoms or only mild symptoms that may not be recognised.  Mortality rates resulting from some infections may be high, for example the overall perinatal mortality rate associated with untreated syphilis is 30%.

[ 162 ] Perinatal asphyxia [ edit ] Main article: Perinatal asphyxia Perinatal asphyxia is the medical condition resulting from deprivation of oxygen to a newborn infant that lasts long enough during the birth process to cause physical harm.

[ 163 ] Hypoxic damage can also occur to most of the infant's organs ( heart , lungs , liver , gut , kidneys ), but brain damage is of most concern and perhaps the least likely to quickly or completely heal.

[ 163 ] Oxygen deprivation can lead to permanent disabilities in the child, such as cerebral palsy .

[ 164 ] Mechanical fetal injury [ edit ] Main article: Birth trauma (physical) Risk factors for fetal birth injury include fetal macrosomia (big baby), maternal obesity , the need for instrumental delivery, and an inexperienced attendant. Specific situations that can contribute to birth injury include breech presentation and shoulder dystocia . Most fetal birth injuries resolve without long term harm, but brachial plexus injury may lead to Erb's palsy or Klumpke's paralysis .

[ 165 ] Accommodation [ edit ] Location [ edit ] Further information: Home birth Childbirth routinely occurs in hospitals in many developed countries . Before the 20th century and in some countries to the present day, such as the Netherlands , it has more typically occurred at home.

[ 166 ] In rural and remote communities of many countries, hospitalised childbirth may not be readily available or the best option. Maternal evacuation is the predominant risk management method for assisting mothers in these communities.

[ 167 ] Maternal evacuation is the process of relocating pregnant women in remote communities to deliver their babies in a nearby urban hospital setting.

[ 167 ] This practice is common in Indigenous Inuit and Northern Manitoban communities in Canada as well as Australian aboriginal communities. Maternal evacuation, due to a lack of social support provided to these women, can have negative effects on mothers. These negative effects include an increase in maternal newborn complications and postpartum depression, and decreased breastfeeding rates.

[ 167 ] The exact location in which childbirth takes place is an important factor in determining nationality, in particular for birth aboard aircraft and ships .

[ citation needed ] Hospitals [ edit ] Baby Friendly Hospitals [ edit ] In 1991 the World Health Organization (WHO) launched a global programme, the Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative (BFHI), that urges birthing centres and hospitals to institute procedures that encourage mother/baby bonding and breastfeeding.  The Johns Hopkins Hospital describes the process of receiving the Baby Friendly designation: It involves changing long-standing policies, protocols and behaviors. The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative includes a very rigorous credentialing process that includes a two-day site visit, where assessors evaluate policies, community partnerships and education plans, as well as interview patients, physicians and staff members.

[ 168 ] Every major health organisation, such as the CDC , supports the BFHI.  As of 2019, 28% of hospitals in the US have been accredited by the WHO.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] Facilities [ edit ] A maternity ward in Britain, 1918 Facilities for childbirth include: A maternity ward , also called maternity unit , labour ward or delivery ward , is generally a hospital department that provides health care to women and their children during childbirth. It is generally closely linked to the hospital's neonatal intensive care unit and/or obstetric surgery unit if present. It usually includes facilities both for childbirth and for postpartum rest and observation of mothers in normal as well as complicated cases.

A maternity hospital is a hospital that specialises in caring for women while they are pregnant and during childbirth and provide care for newborn babies, A birthing centre is a midwife -led unit that generally presents a more home-like environment. Birthing centres may be located on hospital grounds or "free standing" (that is, not affiliated with a hospital).

A home birth is usually accomplished with the assistance of a midwife. Some women choose to give birth at home without any professionals present, termed an unassisted childbirth .

Associated occupations [ edit ] Model of pelvis used in the beginning of the 19th century to teach technical procedures for a successful childbirth. Museum of the History of Medicine, Porto Alegre , Brazil Medical doctors who practise in the field of childbirth include categorically specialised obstetricians , family practitioners and general practitioners whose training, skills and practices include obstetrics, and in some contexts general surgeons . These physicians and surgeons variously provide care across the whole spectrum of normal and abnormal births and pathological labour conditions. Categorically specialised obstetricians are qualified surgeons , so they can undertake surgical procedures relating to childbirth. Some family practitioners or general practitioners also perform obstetrical surgery. Obstetrical procedures include cesarean sections , episiotomies , and assisted delivery. Categorical specialists in obstetrics are commonly trained in both obstetrics and gynaecology (OB/GYN), and may provide other medical and surgical gynaecological care, and may incorporate more general, well-woman, primary care elements in their practices.

Maternal–fetal medicine specialists are obstetrician/gynecologists subspecialised in managing and treating high-risk pregnancy and delivery.

[ citation needed ] Anaesthetists or anaesthetists are medical doctors who specialise in pain relief and the use of drugs to facilitate surgery and other painful procedures. They may contribute to the care of a woman in labour by performing an epidural or by providing anaesthesia (often spinal anaesthesia ) for Cesarean section or forceps delivery . They are experts in pain management during childbirth .

[ citation needed ] Obstetric nurses assist midwives, doctors, women, and babies before, during, and after the birth process, in the hospital system. They hold various nursing certifications and typically undergo additional obstetric training in addition to standard nursing training .

[ citation needed ] Paramedics are healthcare providers that are able to provide emergency care to both the mother and infant during and after delivery using a wide range of medications and tools on an ambulance. They are capable of delivering babies but can do very little for infants that become "stuck" and are unable to be delivered vaginally.

[ citation needed ] Lactation consultants assist the mother and newborn to breastfeed successfully. A health visitor comes to see the mother and baby at home, usually within 24 hours of discharge, and checks the infant's adaptation to extrauterine life and the mother's postpartum physiological changes .

[ citation needed ] Birth attendants [ edit ] Different categories of birth attendants may provide support and care during pregnancy and childbirth, although there are important differences across categories based on professional training and skills, practice regulations, and the nature of care delivered. Many of these occupations are highly professionalised, but other roles exist on a less formal basis.

[ citation needed ] Midwives are autonomous practitioners who provide basic and emergency health care before, during and after pregnancy and childbirth, generally to women with low-risk pregnancies. Midwives are trained to assist during labour and birth, either through direct-entry or nurse-midwifery education programmes. Jurisdictions where midwifery is a regulated profession will typically have a registering and disciplinary body for quality control, such as the American Midwifery Certification Board in the United States, [ 170 ] the College of Midwives of British Columbia in Canada [ 171 ] [ 172 ] or the Nursing and Midwifery Council in the United Kingdom.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] In the past, midwifery played a crucial role in childbirth throughout most indigenous societies. Although western civilisations attempted to assimilate their birthing technologies into certain indigenous societies, like Turtle Island , and get rid of the midwifery, the National Aboriginal Council of Midwives brought back the cultural ideas and midwifery that were once associated with indigenous birthing.

[ 175 ] In jurisdictions where midwifery is not a regulated profession, traditional birth attendants , also known as traditional or lay midwives, may assist women during childbirth, although they do not typically receive formal health care education and training.

[ citation needed ] Childbirth educators are instructors who aim to teach pregnant women and their partners about the nature of pregnancy, labour signs and stages, techniques for giving birth, breastfeeding and newborn baby care. Training for this role can be found in hospital settings or through independent certifying organisations. Each organisation teaches its own curriculum and each emphasises different techniques. The Lamaze technique is one well-known example.

[ citation needed ] Doulas are assistants who support mothers during pregnancy, labour, birth, and postpartum. They are not medical attendants; rather, they provide emotional support and non-medical pain relief for women during labour. Like childbirth educators and other unlicensed assistive personnel , certification to become a doula is not compulsory, thus, anyone can call themself a doula or a childbirth educator.

[ citation needed ] Confinement nannies are individuals who are employed to provide assistance and stay with the mothers at their home after childbirth. They are usually experienced mothers who took courses on how to take care of mothers and newborn babies.

[ citation needed ] Role of males [ edit ] See also: Men's role in childbirth Both preterm and full term infants benefit from skin to skin contact, sometimes called kangaroo care , immediately following birth and for the first few weeks of life. Some fathers have begun to hold their newborns skin to skin; the new baby is familiar with the father's voice and it is believed that contact with the father helps the infant to stabilise and promotes father to infant bonding. Looking at recent studies, a 2019 review found that the level of oxytocin was found to increase not only in mothers who had experienced early skin to skin attachment with their infants but in the fathers as well, suggesting a neurobiological connection.

[ 83 ] If the infant's mother had a caesarean birth, the father can hold their baby in skin-to-skin contact while the mother recovers from the anaesthetic.

[ 80 ] Economics [ edit ] Share of births attended by skilled health staff [ 176 ] Costs [ edit ] Cost of childbirth in several countries in 2012 [ 177 ] The cost of childbirth varies dramatically by country.

According to a 2013 analysis, in the United States the average amount actually paid by insurance companies or other payers in 2012 averaged $9,775 for an uncomplicated conventional delivery and $15,041 for a caesarean birth.

[ 177 ] A 2013 study found varying costs by facility for childbirth expenses in California , varying from $3,296 to $37,227 for a vaginal birth and from $8,312 to $70,908 for a caesarean birth.

[ 178 ] Reporting on costs in 2023, Forbes gave an average cost of $18,865 ($14,768 for vaginal and
$26,280 for cesarean) which included pregnancy, delivery and postpartum care.  However, many factors determined the costs, including where the woman lived, the type of birth, and whether or not they had insurance.  Even with insurance, average out of the pocket expenses for a vaginal delivery were $2,655 and $3,214 for a cesarean birth.  Variables which determined charges included length of hospital stay, which averaged 48 hours for vaginal birth and 96 hours for a cesarean.  There could be charges for any complications before or after the birth, for example an induced labour costs more than a spontaneous birth.  Babies that had a difficult birth may need special tests and monitoring, adding to the costs of childbirth.

[ 179 ] Beginning in 2014, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence began recommending that women with low-risk pregnancies give birth at home under the care of a midwife rather than an obstetrician, citing lower expenses and better healthcare outcomes.

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] The median cost associated with home birth was estimated to be about $1,500 vs. about $2,500 in hospital.

[ 182 ] Mortality [ edit ] Maternal mortality [ edit ] Main article: Maternal mortality Share of women that are expected to die from pregnancy-related causes Causes for maternal mortality range from severe bleeding to obstructed labour , [ 183 ] for which there are highly effective interventions.

810 women die every day from preventable causes related to pregnancy and childbirth. 94% occur in low and lower middle-income countries.

In 2008 at least seven million mothers experienced serious health problems while 50 million more had adverse health consequences after childbirth.

The United Nations Population Fund estimated that 303,000 women died of pregnancy or childbirth related causes in 2015.

[ 184 ] Additionally postpartum infections , most often transmitted by the dirty hands and tools of doctors, [ 86 ] used to be one of the main causes of maternal mortality until germ theory was accepted in the mid-1800s and adopted thereafter. Before that it was assumed that puerperal fever was caused by a variety of sources, including the leakage of breast milk into the body and anxiety. Still, home births facilitated by trained midwives produced the best outcomes from 1880 to 1930 in the US and Europe, whereas physician-facilitated hospital births produced the worst. When antibiotics were discovered in the 1930s, rates of puerperal fever started to decrease significantly.

[ 185 ] The change in trend of maternal mortality can be attributed with the widespread use of antibiotics along with the progression of medical technology, more extensive physician training, and less medical interference with normal deliveries.

[ 185 ] The World Health Organization (WHO) has urged midwife training to strengthen maternal and newborn health services. To support the upgrading of midwifery skills the WHO established a midwife training programme, Action for Safe Motherhood.

[ 5 ] There was a 44% decline in the maternal death rate between 1990 and 2015. However, 830 women died every day in 2015 from causes related to pregnancy or childbirth and for every woman who dies, 20 or 30 encounter injuries, infections or disabilities. Most of these deaths and injuries are preventable.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] In the decades since 1990 the global maternal mortality ratio has fallen from 385 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in 1990 to 216 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2015, and it was reported in 2017 that many countries had halved their maternal death rates in the last 10 years, [ 184 ] as women have gained access to family planning and skilled birth attendants with backup emergency obstetric care.

United States [ edit ] Main articles: Maternal mortality in the United States and Black maternal mortality in the United States Since the US began recording childbirth statistics in 1915, the US has had historically poor maternal mortality rates in comparison to other developed countries.

The rising maternal death rate in the US is of concern. In 1990 the US ranked 12th of the 14 developed countries that were analysed.  However, since that time the rates of every country have steadily continued to improve while the US rate has spiked dramatically.  While every other developed nation of the 14 analysed in 1990 shows a 2017 death rate of less than 10 deaths per every 100,000 live births, the US rate has risen to 26.4. By comparison, the United Kingdom ranks second highest at 9.2 and Finland is the safest at 3.8.

[ 188 ] In 2022, the WHO reported that the US had the highest maternal death rate of any developed nation while other nations continued to experience declines.  The death rate of black women has also continued to climb with a 2020 CDC report showing the maternal death rate at 55.3 deaths per 100,000 live births – 2.9 times the rate for white women.

[ 189 ] In 2023, a study reported that deaths among Native American women were even higher, at 3.5 times the rate for White women. The report attributed the high rate in part to the fact that Native American women are cared for under a poorly funded Federal Health Care System that is so stretched that the average monthly visit lasts only from three to seven minutes. Such a short visit allows neither time for performing an adequate health assessment nor time for the patient to discuss any problems she may be experiencing.

[ 190 ] Infant mortality [ edit ] Main article: Neonatal death Looking at 168 countries around the world, a 2015 Save the Children 's report found that each day about 8,000 newborns die during the first month of life. Worldwide, more than 1 million babies die during their first day even though simple measures such as antibiotics, hand-held breathing masks and other simple interventions could prevent the deaths of 70% of infants.

[ 191 ] United States [ edit ] The United States had the highest first-day infant death rate of all the industrialised nations in the world.  In the US, each year about 11,300 newborns die within 24 hours of their birth, 50% more first-day deaths than all other industrialised countries combined.

[ 191 ] Compared to other developed nations, the United States also has high infant mortality rates.  The Trust for America's Health reports that as of 2011, about one-third of American births have some complications; many are directly related to the mother's health including increasing rates of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and physical inactivity.  The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has led an initiative to improve woman's health previous to conception in an effort to improve both neonatal and maternal death rates.

[ 192 ] Culture [ edit ] A Luristan bronze fibula showing a woman giving birth between two antelopes , ornamented with flowers . From Iran, 1000 to 650 BC, at the Louvre museum .

Medieval woman, having given birth, enjoying her lying-in ( postpartum confinement ). France, 14th century.

Some communities rely heavily on religion for their birthing practices. It is believed that if certain acts are carried out, then it will allow the child for a healthier and happier future. One example of this is the belief in the Chillihuani that if a knife or scissors are used for cutting the umbilical cord , it will cause for the child to go through clothes very quickly. To prevent this, a jagged ceramic tile is used to cut the umbilical cord.

[ 193 ] Comfort and proximity to extended family and social support systems may be a childbirth priority of many communities in developing countries, such as the Chillihuani in Peru and the Mayan town of San Pedro La Laguna.

[ 194 ] [ 193 ] Home births can help women in these cultures feel more comfortable as they are in their own home with their family around them helping out in different ways.

[ 194 ] Traditionally, it has been rare in these cultures for the mother to lie down during childbirth, opting instead for standing, kneeling, or walking around prior to and during birthing.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] In contemporary Mayan societies, ceremonial gifts are presented to the mother throughout pregnancy and childbirth to help her into the beginning of her child's life.

[ 194 ] Maya women who work in agricultural fields of some rural communities will usually continue to work in a similar function to how they normally would throughout pregnancy, in some cases working until labour begins.

[ 194 ] Placentophagy [ edit ] In some cultures the placenta may be consumed as a nutritional boost, but it may also be seen as a special part of birth and eaten by the newborn's family ceremonially.

[ 195 ] In the developed world the placenta may be eaten believing that it reduces postpartum bleeding, increases milk supply, provides micronutrients such as iron, and improves mood and boosts energy.  The CDC advises against this practice, saying it has not been shown to promote health but has been shown to possibly transmit disease organisms that were passed from the placenta into the mother's breastmilk and then infecting the baby.

[ 196 ] Variation [ edit ] Cultural values, assumptions, and practices of pregnancy and childbirth vary across cultures and time.

See; Childbirth in Benin Childbirth in China Childbirth in Ghana Childbirth in Haiti Childbirth in India Childbirth in Iraq Childbirth in Japan Childbirth in Mexico Childbirth in Nepal Childbirth in Sri Lanka Childbirth in Thailand Childbirth in Trinidad and Tobago Childbirth in Zambia Research directions [ edit ] It is currently possible to collect two types of stem cells during childbirth: amniotic stem cells and umbilical cord blood stem cells.

[ 197 ] They are being studied as possible treatments of a number of conditions.

[ 197 ] History [ edit ] Giving birth in hospitals [ edit ] Historically, most women gave birth at home without emergency medical care available. In the early days of hospitalisation for childbirth, a 17th-century maternity ward in Paris was incredibly congested, with up to five pregnant women sharing one bed. At this hospital, one in five women died during the birthing process.

[ 86 ] At the onset of the Industrial Revolution , giving birth at home became more difficult due to congested living spaces and dirty living conditions. That drove urban and lower-class women to newly available hospitals, while wealthy and middle-class women continued to labour at home.

[ 198 ] Consequently, wealthier women experienced lower maternal mortality rates than those of a lower social class.

[ 185 ] Throughout the 1900s, there was an increasing availability of hospitals, and more women began going into the hospital for labour and delivery.

[ 199 ] In the United States, 5% of women gave birth in hospitals in 1900. By 1930, 50% of all women and 75% of urban-dwelling women delivered in hospitals.

[ 86 ] By 1960, this number increased to 96%.

[ 200 ] By the 1970s, home birth rates fell to approximately 1%.

[ 87 ] In the United States, the middle classes were especially receptive to the medicalisation of childbirth, which promised a safer and less painful labour.

[ 199 ] Accompanied by the shift from home to hospital was the shift from midwife to physician. Male physicians began to replace female midwives in Europe and the United States in the 1700s. The rise in status and popularity of this new position was accompanied by a drop in status for midwives. By the 1800s, affluent families were primarily calling male doctors to assist with their deliveries, and female midwives were seen as a resource for women who could not afford better care. That completely removed women from assisting in labour, as only men were eligible to become doctors at the time. Additionally, it privatised the birthing process as family members and friends were often banned from the delivery room.

[ citation needed ] There was opposition to the change from both progressive feminists and religious conservatives. The feminists were concerned about job security for a role that had traditionally been held by women. The conservatives argued that it was immoral for a woman to be exposed in such a way in front of a man. For that reason, many male obstetricians performed deliveries in dark rooms or with their patient fully covered with a drape.

[ citation needed ] Pain medication in labour [ edit ] The use of pain medication in labour has been a controversial issue for hundreds of years. A Scottish woman was burned at the stake in 1591 for requesting pain relief in the delivery of twins. Medication became more acceptable in 1852, when Queen Victoria used chloroform as pain relief during labour. The use of morphine and scopolamine , also known as " twilight sleep ", was first used in Germany and popularised by German physicians Bernard Kronig and Karl Gauss. This concoction offered minor pain relief but mostly allowed women to completely forget the entire delivery process. Under twilight sleep, mothers were often blindfolded and restrained as they experienced the immense pain of childbirth. The cocktail came with severe side effects, such as decreased uterine contractions and altered mental state. Additionally, babies delivered with the use of childbirth drugs often experienced temporarily ceased breathing. The feminist movement in the United States openly and actively supported the use of twilight sleep, which was introduced to the country in 1914. Some physicians, many of whom had been using painkillers for the past fifty years, including opium, cocaine, and quinine, embraced the new drug. Others were hesitant.

[ 86 ] Cesarean section [ edit ] The proportion of pregnancies delivered by C section between 1976 and 1996 in the U.S. increased from 6.7% in 1976 to 14.2% in 1996, with maternal choice the most frequent reason given.

[ 201 ] By 2018 the rate had climbed to one-third of all births.

[ 202 ] Outdated methods [ edit ] Friedman's Curve, developed in 1955, was for many years used to determine obstructed labour. However, more recent medical research suggests that the Friedman curve may not be applicable any more.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] Role of males [ edit ] Historically, women have been attended and supported by other women during labour and birth. Midwife training in European cities began in the 1400s, but rural women were usually assisted by female family or friends.

[ 86 ] However, it was not simply a ladies' social bonding event as some historians have portrayed – fear and pain often filled the atmosphere, as death during childbirth was a common occurrence.

[ 200 ] In the United States before the 1950s, a father would not be in the birthing room. It did not matter if it was a home birth ; the father would be waiting downstairs or in another room in the home. If it was in a hospital, then the father would wait in the waiting room.

[ 206 ] Fathers were only permitted in the room if the life of the mother or baby was severely at-risk. In 1522, a German physician was sentenced to death for sneaking into a delivery room dressed as a woman.

[ 86 ] The majority of guidebooks related to pregnancy and childbirth were written by men who had never been involved in the birthing process.

[ according to whom?

] A Greek physician, Soranus of Ephesus , wrote a book about obstetrics and gynaecology in the second century, which was referenced for the next thousand years. The book contained endless home remedies for pregnancy and childbirth, many of which would be considered heinous by modern women and medical professionals.

[ 86 ] Childbed fever [ edit ] The work of Ignaz Semmelweis was seminal in the pathophysiology and treatment of childbed fever (postpartum infection) and his work saved many lives.

[ 207 ] See also [ edit ] Abuse during childbirth Advanced maternal age , when a woman is of an older age at reproduction Antinatalism Asynclitic birth , an abnormal birth position Birth defect Childbirth positions Coffin birth Ferguson reflex List of countries by number of births Maternal health Multiple birth Obstetrical bleeding Naegele's rule , to calculate the due date for a pregnancy Natalism Obstetrical Dilemma Perineal massage Pre- and perinatal psychology Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition Unassisted childbirth Vernix caseosa Natural birth topics: Bradley method of natural childbirth Lamaze Natural childbirth Water birth References [ edit ] ^ "confinement – Definition of confinement in English by Oxford Dictionaries" .

Oxford Dictionaries – English . Archived from the original on 23 November 2018 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 .

^ "Confinement – meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary" .

Cambridge Dictionary .

^ Lunze K, Bloom DE, Jamison DT, Hamer DH (January 2013).

"The global burden of neonatal hypothermia: systematic review of a major challenge for newborn survival" .

BMC Medicine .

11 (1) 24.

doi : 10.1186/1741-7015-11-24 .

PMC 3606398 .

PMID 23369256 .

^ a b Martin RJ, Fanaroff AA, Walsh MC (2014).

Fanaroff and Martin's Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine: Diseases of the Fetus and Infant . Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 116.

ISBN 978-0-323-29537-6 .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2017.

^ a b c d e Education material for teachers of midwifery: midwifery education modules (PDF) (2nd ed.). Geneva [Switzerland]: World Health Organization. 2008.

hdl : 10665/44145 .

ISBN 978-92-4-154666-9 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 February 2015.

^ a b Memon HU, Handa VL (May 2013).

"Vaginal childbirth and pelvic floor disorders" .

Women's Health .

9 (3): 265– 77, quiz 276–77.

doi : 10.2217/whe.13.17 .

PMC 3877300 .

PMID 23638782 .

^ a b Martin E (2015).

Concise Colour Medical l.p.Dictionary . Oxford University Press. p. 375.

ISBN 978-0-19-968799-2 .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2017.

^ "The World Factbook" .

www.cia.gov . 11 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2016 .

^ "Number of births and deaths per year" .

Our World in Data .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2022 . Retrieved 24 June 2022 .

^ Co-Operation, Organisation for Economic; Development (2009).

Doing better for children . Paris: OECD. p. 105.

ISBN 978-92-64-05934-4 .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2017.

^ Olsen, Ole; Clausen, Jette A. (8 March 2023).

"Planned hospital birth compared with planned home birth for pregnant women at low risk of complications" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2023 (3): CD000352.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD000352.pub3 .

ISSN 1469-493X .

PMC 9994459 .

PMID 36884026 .

^ Fossard Ed, Bailey M (2016).

Communication for Behavior Change: Volume lll: Using Entertainment–Education for Distance Education . Sage Publications India.

ISBN 978-93-5150-758-1 .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2017 . Retrieved 31 July 2016 .

^ "What Are the Different Types of Contractions?" .

Parents . Retrieved 16 March 2024 .

^ a b "Birth" .

The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia (6 ed.).

Columbia University Press . 2016.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 July 2016 – via Encyclopedia.com.

^ a b c d "Pregnancy Labor and Birth" .

Women's Health . 27 September 2010.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2016 . Retrieved 31 July 2016 .

The first stage begins with the onset of labour and ends when the cervix is fully opened. It is the longest stage of labour, usually lasting about 12 to 19 hours ..

The second stage involves pushing and delivery of your baby. It usually lasts 20 minutes to two hours.

^ a b McDonald SJ, Middleton P, Dowswell T, Morris PS (July 2013).

"Effect of timing of umbilical cord clamping of term infants on maternal and neonatal outcomes" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

7 (7): CD004074.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD004074.pub3 .

PMC 6544813 .

PMID 23843134 .

^ a b "Stages of Labor" .

www.bidmc.org .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 June 2022 .

^ a b Brimdyr, Kajsa; Stevens, Jeni; Svensson, Kristin; Blair, Anna; Turner-Maffei, Cindy; Grady, Julie; Bastarache, Louise; al Alfy, Abla; Crenshaw, Jeannette T.; Giugliani, Elsa Regina Justo; Ewald, Uwe; Haider, Rukhsana; Jonas, Wibke; Kagawa, Mike; Lilliesköld, Siri (11 May 2023).

"Skin-to-skin contact after birth: Developing a research and practice guideline" .

Acta Paediatrica .

112 (8): 1633– 1643.

doi : 10.1111/apa.16842 .

hdl : 20.500.11815/4374 .

ISSN 0803-5253 .

PMID 37166443 .

^ a b c Phillips, Raylene.

"Uninterrupted Skin-to-Skin Contact Immediately After Birth" .

Medscape .

Archived from the original on 3 April 2015 . Retrieved 21 December 2014 .

^ a b c "Care of healthy women and their babies during childbirth" .

National Collaborating Centre for Women's and Children's Health . National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. December 2014. Archived from the original on 12 February 2015 . Retrieved 21 December 2014 .

^ a b "Skin-to-skin contact" .

UNICEF Baby Friendly Initiative . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ a b World Health Organization.

"Newborns: reducing mortality" . World Health Organization.

Archived from the original on 3 April 2017 . Retrieved 1 February 2017 .

^ a b Labor, Simona; Maguire, Simon (1 December 2008).

"The Pain of Labour" .

Reviews in Pain .

2 (2): 15– 19.

doi : 10.1177/204946370800200205 .

ISSN 2042-1249 .

PMC 4589939 .

PMID 26526404 .

^ "What is back labor? Signs, pain relief, and more" .

BabyCenter . Archived from the original on 25 September 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2024 .

^ "Back Labor" .

American Pregnancy Association . 27 April 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2024 .

^ "Labor and delivery, postpartum care" .

Mayo Clinic .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2018 . Retrieved 16 March 2023 .

^ "Water Breaking" .

Cleveland Clinic .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2023 .

^ Lowe, Nancy K. (1996).

"The Pain and Discomfort of Labor and Birth" .

Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing .

25 (1): 82– 92.

doi : 10.1111/j.1552-6909.1996.tb02517.x .

ISSN 1552-6909 .

PMID 8627407 .

^ Rooks, Judith P. (2012).

"Labor Pain Management Other Than Neuraxial: What Do We Know and Where Do We Go Next?" .

Birth .

39 (4): 318– 322.

doi : 10.1111/birt.12009 .

ISSN 1523-536X .

PMID 23281953 .

^ Alehagen, Siw; Wijma, Klaas; Wijma, Barbro (2001).

"Fear during labor" .

Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica .

80 (4): 315– 320.

doi : 10.1034/j.1600-0412.2001.080004315.x .

ISSN 1600-0412 .

PMID 11264605 .

^ Rooks, Judith P. (2012).

"Labor Pain Management Other Than Neuraxial: What Do We Know and Where Do We Go Next?" .

Birth .

39 (4): 318– 322.

doi : 10.1111/birt.12009 .

ISSN 1523-536X .

PMID 23281953 .

^ Lowe, Nancy K. (1996).

"The Pain and Discomfort of Labor and Birth" .

Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, & Neonatal Nursing .

25 (1): 82– 92.

doi : 10.1111/j.1552-6909.1996.tb02517.x .

ISSN 1552-6909 .

PMID 8627407 .

^ Callister, Lynn Clark; Khalaf, Inaam; Semenic, Sonia; Kartchner, Robin; Vehvilainen-Julkunen, Katri (1 December 2003).

"The pain of childbirth: perceptions of culturally diverse women" .

Pain Management Nursing .

4 (4): 145– 154.

doi : 10.1016/S1524-9042(03)00028-6 .

ISSN 1524-9042 .

PMID 14663792 .

^ Lowe, N. K. (1 January 1992).

"Differences in first and second stage labor pain between nulliparous and multiparous women" .

Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics & Gynecology .

13 (4): 243– 253.

doi : 10.3109/01674829209009197 .

ISSN 0167-482X .

^ Huang, Yue; Zhong, Yuehua; Chen, Qiaozhu; Zhou, Jun; Fu, Bailing; Deng, Yongfang; Tu, Xianfang; Wu, Yingfang (31 May 2024).

"A comparison of childbirth self-efficacy, fear of childbirth, and labor pain intensity between primiparas and multiparas during the latent phase of labor: a cross-sectional study" .

BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth .

24 (1): 400.

doi : 10.1186/s12884-024-06571-3 .

ISSN 1471-2393 .

PMC 11143632 .

PMID 38822235 .

^ Smith, Caroline A; Levett, Kate M; Collins, Carmel T; Armour, Mike; Dahlen, Hannah G; Suganuma, Machiko (28 March 2018).

"Relaxation techniques for pain management in labour" .

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2018 (3): CD009514.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD009514.pub2 .

PMC 6494625 .

PMID 29589650 .

^ a b Jones L, Othman M, Dowswell T, Alfirevic Z, Gates S, Newburn M, Jordan S, Lavender T, Neilson JP (March 2012).

"Pain management for women in labour: an overview of systematic reviews" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

3 (3): CD009234.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD009234.pub2 .

PMC 7132546 .

PMID 22419342 .

^ Thomson, Gill; Feeley, Claire; Moran, Victoria Hall; Downe, Soo; Oladapo, Olufemi T. (30 May 2019).

"Women's experiences of pharmacological and non-pharmacological pain relief methods for labour and childbirth: a qualitative systematic review" .

Reproductive Health .

16 (1): 71.

doi : 10.1186/s12978-019-0735-4 .

ISSN 1742-4755 .

PMC 6543627 .

PMID 31146759 .

^ Uvnäs-Moberg, Kerstin; Ekström-Bergström, Anette; Berg, Marie; Buckley, Sarah; Pajalic, Zada; Hadjigeorgiou, Eleni; Kotłowska, Alicja; Lengler, Luise; Kielbratowska, Bogumila; Leon-Larios, Fatima; Magistretti, Claudia Meier; Downe, Soo; Lindström, Bengt; Dencker, Anna (9 August 2019).

"Maternal plasma levels of oxytocin during physiological childbirth – a systematic review with implications for uterine contractions and central actions of oxytocin" .

BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth .

19 (1): 285.

doi : 10.1186/s12884-019-2365-9 .

ISSN 1471-2393 .

PMC 6688382 .

PMID 31399062 .

^ Bowen R (12 July 2010).

"Oxytocin" .

Hypertexts for Biomedical Sciences .

Archived from the original on 29 August 2014 . Retrieved 18 August 2013 .

^ Scatliffe, N.; Casavant, S.; Vittner, D.; Cong, X. (2019).

"Oxytocin and early parent-infant interactions: A systematic review" .

International Journal of Nursing Sciences .

6 (4): 445– 453.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijnss.2019.09.009 .

PMC 6838998 .

PMID 31728399 .

^ Pillitteri A (2010).

"Chapter 15: Nursing Care of a Family During Labor and Birth" .

Maternal & Child Health Nursing: Care of the Childbearing & Childrearing Family . Hagerstown, Maryland: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 350.

ISBN 978-1-58255-999-5 .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2014 . Retrieved 18 August 2013 .

^ "Baby's head shape: Cause for concern?" . Mayo Clinic. 10 March 2022 . Retrieved 9 July 2023 .

^ Goldberg AE (2 March 2018).

"Cervical Ripening" .

Medscape .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2018 .

^ Kupferminc M, Lessing JB, Yaron Y, Peyser MR (December 1993). "Nifedipine versus ritodrine for suppression of preterm labour".

British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

100 (12): 1090– 94.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0528.1993.tb15171.x .

PMID 8297841 .

S2CID 24521943 .

^ Jokic M, Guillois B, Cauquelin B, Giroux JD, Bessis JL, Morello R, Levy G, Ballet JJ (March 2000).

"Fetal distress increases interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 and decreases tumour necrosis factor-alpha cord blood levels in noninfected full-term neonates" .

BJOG .

107 (3): 420– 25.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2000.tb13241.x .

PMID 10740342 .

^ Lyrenäs S, Clason I, Ulmsten U (February 2001). "In vivo controlled release of PGE2 from a vaginal insert (0.8 mm, 10 mg) during induction of labour".

BJOG .

108 (2): 169– 78.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2001.00039.x .

PMID 11236117 .

S2CID 45247771 .

^ a b c "Labor and delivery, postpartum care" .

Mayo Clinic .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2018 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .

^ Giacalone PL, Vignal J, Daures JP, Boulot P, Hedon B, Laffargue F (March 2000).

"A randomised evaluation of two techniques of management of the third stage of labour in women at low risk of postpartum haemorrhage" .

BJOG .

107 (3): 396– 400.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2000.tb13236.x .

PMID 10740337 .

^ Hantoushzadeh S, Alhusseini N, Lebaschi AH (February 2007). "The effects of acupuncture during labour on nulliparous women: a randomised controlled trial".

The Australian & New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology .

47 (1): 26– 30.

doi : 10.1111/j.1479-828X.2006.00674.x .

PMID 17261096 .

S2CID 23495692 .

^ Satin AJ (1 July 2013).

"Latent phase of labor" .

UpToDate . Wolters Kluwer.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.

(subscription required) ^ Murray LJ, Hennen L, Scott J (2005).

The BabyCenter Essential Guide to Pregnancy and Birth: Expert Advice and Real-World Wisdom from the Top Pregnancy and Parenting Resource . Emmaus, Pennsylvania: Rodale Books. pp.

294 –295.

ISBN 978-1-59486-211-3 . Retrieved 18 August 2013 .

^ Mayo clinic staff.

"Cervical effacement and dilation" . Mayo Clinic.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2017 .

^ "WHO recommendations Intrapartum care for a positive childbirth experience (Recommendation 5)" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ Obstetric Data Definitions Issues and Rationale for Change Archived 6 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine , 2012 by ACOG .

^ Boyle A, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, Huang CC, Driggers RW, Laughon SK (July 2013).

"Primary cesarean delivery in the United States" .

Obstetrics and Gynecology .

122 (1): 33– 40.

doi : 10.1097/AOG.0b013e3182952242 .

PMC 3713634 .

PMID 23743454 .

^ "Birth (Parturition) | Boundless Anatomy and Physiology" .

courses.lumenlearning.com .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2021 .

^ "WHO recommendations Intrapartum care for a positive childbirth experience (item #3.2.2.)" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ "WHO recommendations Intrapartum care for a positive childbirth experience (item #33)" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ Rouse DJ, Weiner SJ, Bloom SL, Varner MW, et al. (October 2009).

"Second-stage labor duration in nulliparous women: relationship to maternal and perinatal outcomes" .

American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology .

201 (4): 357.e1–7.

doi : 10.1016/j.ajog.2009.08.003 .

PMC 2768280 .

PMID 19788967 .

^ Jangsten E, Mattsson LÅ, Lyckestam I, Hellström AL, et al. (February 2011).

"A comparison of active management and expectant management of the third stage of labour: a Swedish randomised controlled trial" .

BJOG .

118 (3): 362– 69.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2010.02800.x .

PMID 21134105 .

^ Weeks AD (December 2008). "The retained placenta".

Best Practice & Research. Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecology .

22 (6): 1103– 17.

doi : 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2008.07.005 .

PMID 18793876 .

^ Ball H (June 2009).

"Active management of the third state of labour is rare in some developing countries" .

International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health .

35 (2).

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.

^ Stanton C, Armbruster D, Knight R, Ariawan I, et al. (March 2009).

"Use of active management of the third stage of labour in seven developing countries" .

Bulletin of the World Health Organization .

87 (3): 207– 15.

doi : 10.2471/BLT.08.052597 .

PMC 2654655 .

PMID 19377717 .

^ International Confederation of Midwives ; International Federation of Gynaecologists Obstetricians (2004). "Joint statement: management of the third stage of labour to prevent post-partum haemorrhage".

Journal of Midwifery & Women's Health .

49 (1): 76– 77.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmwh.2003.11.005 .

PMID 14710151 .

^ Mathai M, Gülmezoglu AM, Hill S (2007).

WHO recommendations for the prevention of postpartum haemorrhage (PDF) (Report). Geneva: World Health Organization , Department of Making Pregnancy Safer. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2009.

^ McDonald SJ, Middleton P, Dowswell T, Morris PS (July 2013). McDonald SJ (ed.).

"Effect of timing of umbilical cord clamping of term infants on maternal and neonatal outcomes" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

7 (7): CD004074.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD004074.pub3 .

PMC 6544813 .

PMID 23843134 .

^ Campbell D (10 July 2013).

"Hospitals warned to delay cutting umbilical cords after birth" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 11 June 2018 .

^ Gjerdingen DK, Froberg DG (January 1991). "The fourth stage of labor: the health of birth mothers and adoptive mothers at six-weeks postpartum".

Family Medicine .

23 (1): 29– 35.

PMID 2001778 .

^ a b WHO (2013).

"WHO recommendations on postnatal care of the mother and newborn" . World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 22 December 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2014 .

^ Whitaker, Amy K.; Chen, Beatrice A. (5 October 2017).

"Society of Family Planning Guidelines: Postplacental insertion of intrauterine devices" .

Contraception .

97 (1) (published January 2018): 2– 13.

doi : 10.1016/j.contraception.2017.09.014 .

ISSN 0010-7824 .

PMID 28987293 .

^ "Immediate Postpartum Long-Acting Reversible Contraception" .

www.acog.org .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ "Postpartum Assessment" . ATI Nursing Education. Archived from the original on 24 December 2014 . Retrieved 24 December 2014 .

^ Mayo clinic staff.

"Postpartum care: What to expect after a vaginal delivery" . Mayo Clinic.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2014 . Retrieved 23 December 2014 .

^ "Rooming-in: An Essential Evolution in American Maternity Care" .

NICHO . 28 April 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 May 2022 . Retrieved 7 June 2022 .

^ "Rooming-in: An Essential Evolution in American Maternity Care", By Jennifer Usianov.

National Institute for Children's Health Quality .

"Rooming-in: An Essential Evolution in American Maternity Care" . 28 April 2016. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021.

Retrieved 1 November 2021.

^ Saloojee H (4 January 2008).

"Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy newborn infants" .

The WHO Reproductive Health Library . WHO. Archived from the original on 21 December 2014 . Retrieved 23 December 2014 .

^ Crenshaw J (2007).

"Care practice #6: no separation of mother and baby, with unlimited opportunities for breastfeeding" .

The Journal of Perinatal Education .

16 (3): 39– 43.

doi : 10.1624/105812407X217147 .

PMC 1948089 .

PMID 18566647 .

^ Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, Medley N (November 2016).

"Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy newborn infants" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2016 (11): CD003519.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD003519.pub4 .

PMC 3979156 .

PMID 27885658 .

^ a b "Fathers and skin-to-skin contact" . Kangaroo Mother Care. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013 . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .

^ "Essential Antenatal, Perinatal and Postpartum Care" (PDF) .

Promoting Effective Perinatal Care . WHO.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 21 December 2014 .

^ "Birth and Breastfeeding" .

La Leche League .

Archived from the original on 17 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 April 2022 .

^ a b Scatliffe, N.; Casavant, S.; Vittner, D.; Cong, X. (2019).

"Oxytocin and early parent-infant interactions: A systematic review" .

International Journal of Nursing Sciences .

6 (4): 445– 453.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijnss.2019.09.009 .

PMC 6838998 .

PMID 31728399 .

^ a b Harrington, Rebecca.

"American women giving birth leave the hospital as quickly as women in Haiti and Kenya" .

Insider .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 March 2022 .

^ "Where to give birth: the options" .

NHS . December 2020.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 May 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h Hutter Epstein, M.D., Randi (2011).

Get Me Out: A History of Childbirth from the Garden of Eden to the Sperm Bank . New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.

^ a b A natural process? Women, men and the medicalisation of childbirth".

broughttolife.sciencemuseum.org.uk . Retrieved 3 December 2018.

^ Weber SE (January 1996).

"Cultural aspects of pain in childbearing women" .

Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing .

25 (1): 67– 72.

doi : 10.1111/j.1552-6909.1996.tb02515.x .

PMID 8627405 .

^ Callister LC, Khalaf I, Semenic S, Kartchner R, et al. (December 2003). "The pain of childbirth: perceptions of culturally diverse women".

Pain Management Nursing .

4 (4): 145– 54.

doi : 10.1016/S1524-9042(03)00028-6 .

PMID 14663792 .

^ Hodnett ED (May 2002). "Pain and women's satisfaction with the experience of childbirth: a systematic review".

American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology .

186 (5 Suppl Nature): S160-72.

doi : 10.1016/S0002-9378(02)70189-0 .

PMID 12011880 .

S2CID 33672391 .

^ Bohren, MA; Hofmeyr, GJ; Sakala, C; Fukuzawa, RK; Cuthbert, A (6 July 2017).

"Continuous support for women during childbirth" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

7 (8): CD003766.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD003766.pub6 .

PMC 6483123 .

PMID 28681500 .

^ Kothari, Alka; Khuu, Alvin; Dulhunty, Joel; Bruxner, George; Ballard, Emma; Callaway, Leonie (5 May 2023).

"Fathers attending the birth of their baby: Views, intentions and needs" .

Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

63 (5): 689– 695.

doi : 10.1111/ajo.13692 .

ISSN 0004-8666 .

PMID 37145387 .

^ Tranmer JE, Hodnett ED, Hannah ME, Stevens BJ (2005). "The effect of unrestricted oral carbohydrate intake on labor progress".

Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing .

34 (3): 319– 28.

doi : 10.1177/0884217505276155 .

PMID 15890830 .

^ O'Sullivan G, Scrutton M (March 2003). "NPO during labor. Is there any scientific validation?".

Anesthesiology Clinics of North America .

21 (1): 87– 98.

doi : 10.1016/S0889-8537(02)00029-9 .

PMID 12698834 .

^ Singata M, Tranmer J, Gyte GM (August 2013). Singata M (ed.).

"Restricting oral fluid and food intake during labour" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2013 (8). Pregnancy and Childbirth Group: CD003930.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD003930.pub3 .

PMC 4175539 .

PMID 23966209 .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 August 2013 .

^ Basevi V, Lavender T (November 2014).

"Routine perineal shaving on admission in labour" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2014 (11): CD001236.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD001236.pub2 .

PMC 7076285 .

PMID 25398160 .

^ Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, Thinkhamrop B, Tolosa JE (September 2014).

"Vaginal chlorhexidine during labour for preventing maternal and neonatal infections (excluding Group B Streptococcal and HIV)" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2014 (9): CD004070.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD004070.pub3 .

PMC 7104295 .

PMID 25218725 .

^ Haas, David M.; Morgan, Sarah; Contreras, Karenrose; Kimball, Savannah (26 April 2020).

"Vaginal preparation with antiseptic solution before cesarean section for preventing postoperative infections" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2020 (4): CD007892.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD007892.pub7 .

ISSN 1469-493X .

PMC 7195184 .

PMID 32335895 .

^ a b "Labor Induction" .

www.acog.org . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ ACOG District II Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Committee (December 2011).

"Oxytocin for Induction" (PDF) .

Optimizing Protocols in Obstetrics . Series 1.

American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 June 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ "Maternity services: research can improve safety and quality of care" .

NIHR Evidence (Plain language summary). National Institute for Health and Care Research. 27 March 2024.

doi : 10.3310/nihrevidence_62672 .

^ a b Coates, Rose; Cupples, Georgina; Scamell, Amanda; McCourt, Christine (1 November 2018).

"Women's experiences of induction of labour: Qualitative systematic review and thematic synthesis" .

Midwifery .

69 : 17– 28.

doi : 10.1016/j.midw.2018.10.013 .

PMID 30390463 .

^ Coates, Dominiek; Makris, Angela; Catling, Christine; Henry, Amanda; Scarf, Vanessa; Watts, Nicole; Fox, Deborah; Thirukumar, Purshaiyna; Wong, Vincent; Russell, Hamish; Homer, Caroline (29 January 2020). Mastrolia, Salvatore Andrea (ed.).

"A systematic scoping review of clinical indications for induction of labour" .

PLOS ONE .

15 (1): e0228196.

Bibcode : 2020PLoSO..1528196C .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0228196 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 6988952 .

PMID 31995603 .

^ Coates, Dominiek; Goodfellow, Alison; Sinclair, Lynn (24 January 2020).

"Induction of labour: Experiences of care and decision-making of women and clinicians" .

Women and Birth .

33 (1): e1 – e14 .

doi : 10.1016/j.wombi.2019.06.002 .

PMID 31208865 .

^ Rydahl, Eva; Eriksen, Lena; Juhl, Mette (February 2019).

"Effects of induction of labor prior to post-term in low-risk pregnancies: a systematic review" .

JBI Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports .

17 (2): 170– 208.

doi : 10.11124/JBISRIR-2017-003587 .

ISSN 2202-4433 .

PMC 6382053 .

PMID 30299344 .

^ Liabsuetrakul, T; Choobun, T; Peeyananjarassri, K; Islam, QM (26 March 2020).

"Antibiotic prophylaxis for operative vaginal delivery" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2020 (3): CD004455.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD004455.pub5 .

PMC 7096725 .

PMID 32215906 .

^ "Forceps or vacuum delivery" .

NHS .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 November 2020 .

^ American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus Newborn; American College of Obstetricians Gynecologists Committee on Obstetric Practice (April 2014).

"Immersion in water during labor and delivery" .

Pediatrics .

133 (4): 758– 61.

doi : 10.1542/peds.2013-3794 .

hdl : 11573/1473752 .

PMID 24652300 .

^ McKinney, Jordan; Vilchez, Gustavo; Jowers, Alicia; Atchoo, Amanda; Lin, Lifeng; Kaunitz, Andrew; Lewis, Kendall; Sanchez-Ramos, Luis (March 2024).

"Water birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis of maternal and neonatal outcomes" .

American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology .

230 (3): S961–S979.e33.

doi : 10.1016/j.ajog.2023.08.034 .

PMID 38462266 . Retrieved 14 March 2024 .

^ Bohren MA, Hofmeyr GJ, Sakala C, Fukuzawa RK, Cuthbert A (July 2017).

"Continuous support for women during childbirth" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

7 (8): CD003766.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD003766.pub6 .

PMC 6483123 .

PMID 28681500 .

^ Caughey AB, Cahill AG, Guise JM, Rouse DJ (March 2014). "Safe prevention of the primary cesarean delivery".

American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology .

210 (3): 179– 93.

doi : 10.1016/j.ajog.2014.01.026 .

PMID 24565430 .

^ Lancashire, Liz (9 July 2018).

"Medicine Administration for Midwives" .

Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals . Archived from the original on 16 June 2019 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ Kumar, Manoj; Paes, Bosco (July 2003).

"Epidural Opioid Analgesia and Neonatal Respiratory Depression" .

Journal of Perinatology .

23 (5): 425– 27.

doi : 10.1038/sj.jp.7210905 .

ISSN 1476-5543 .

PMID 12847541 .

^ Thorp JA, Breedlove G (June 1996). "Epidural analgesia in labor: an evaluation of risks and benefits".

Birth .

23 (2): 63– 83.

doi : 10.1111/j.1523-536X.1996.tb00833.x .

PMID 8826170 .

^ a b Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RM, Cyna AM, Cuthbert A (May 2018).

"Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia for pain management in labour" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2018 (5): CD000331.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD000331.pub4 .

PMC 6494646 .

PMID 29781504 .

^ Alehagen S, Wijma B, Lundberg U, Wijma K (September 2005). "Fear, pain and stress hormones during childbirth".

Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

26 (3): 153– 65.

doi : 10.1080/01443610400023072 .

PMID 16295513 .

S2CID 44646591 .

^ Loftus JR, Hill H, Cohen SE (August 1995).

"Placental transfer and neonatal effects of epidural sufentanil and fentanyl administered with bupivacaine during labor" .

Anesthesiology .

83 (2): 300– 08.

doi : 10.1097/00000542-199508000-00010 .

PMID 7631952 .

^ Wei SQ, Luo ZC, Xu H, Fraser WD (September 2009). "The effect of early oxytocin augmentation in labor: a meta-analysis".

Obstetrics and Gynecology .

114 (3): 641– 49.

doi : 10.1097/AOG.0b013e3181b11cb8 .

PMID 19701046 .

S2CID 29571476 .

^ "Recommendations for Augmentation of Labour" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2018 . Retrieved 9 May 2018 .

^ Jiang H, Qian X, Carroli G, Garner P (February 2017).

"Selective versus routine use of episiotomy for vaginal birth" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2017 (2): CD000081.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD000081.pub3 .

PMC 5449575 .

PMID 28176333 .

^ Hammond P, Johnson A (1986).

"Tocodynamometer" . In Brown M (ed.).

The Medical Equipment Dictionary . London: Chapman & Hall.

ISBN 978-0-412-28290-4 .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2013 .

Online version accessed.

^ Alfirevic, Zarko; Gyte, Gillian ML; Cuthbert, Anna; Devane, Declan (2017).

"Continuous cardiotocography (CTG) as a form of electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) for fetal assessment during labour" .

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2 (5): CD006066.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD006066.pub3 .

PMC 6464257 .

PMID 28157275 .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ "WHO recommendations Intrapartum care for a positive childbirth experience (Recommendation 17)" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2018 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .

^ "Rates for total cesarean section, primary cesarean section, and vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC), United States, 1989–2010" (PDF) .

Childbirth Connection website . Relentless Rise in Cesarian Rate. August 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ Trojano, Giuseppe; Damiani, Gianluca Raffaello; Olivieri, Claudiana; Villa, Mario; Malvasi, Antonio; Alfonso, Raffaello; Loverro, Matteo; Cicinelli, Ettore (6 September 2019).

"VBAC: antenatal predictors of success" .

Acta Bio-Medica: Atenei Parmensis .

90 (3): 300– 309.

doi : 10.23750/abm.v90i3.7623 .

ISSN 2531-6745 .

PMC 7233729 .

PMID 31580319 .

^ Main E, Oshiro B, Chagolla B, Bingham D, Dang-Kilduff L, Kowalewski L (July 2010).

"Elimination of Non-medically Indicated (Elective) Deliveries Before 39 Weeks Gestational Age" (PDF) .

Patient Safety Council (1st ed.).

March of Dimes . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2012 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ World Health Organization Human Reproduction Programme, 10 April 2015 (January 2015).

"WHO Statement on caesarean section rates" .

Reproductive Health Matters .

23 (45): 149– 150.

doi : 10.1016/j.rhm.2015.07.007 .

hdl : 11343/249912 .

ISSN 0968-8080 .

PMID 26278843 .

S2CID 40829330 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Doucleff, Michaeleen (12 October 2018).

"Rate Of C-Sections Is Rising At An 'Alarming' Rate, Report Says" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2023 .

^ Education material for teachers of midwifery: midwifery education modules (PDF) (2nd ed.). Geneva: World Health Organisation. 2008. pp.

38– 44.

ISBN 978-9241546669 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 February 2015.

^ Glazener CM, Abdalla M, Stroud P, Naji S, Templeton A, Russell IT (April 1995). "Postnatal maternal morbidity: extent, causes, prevention and treatment".

British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

102 (4): 282– 87.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0528.1995.tb09132.x .

PMID 7612509 .

S2CID 38872754 .

^ Thompson JF, Roberts CL, Currie M, Ellwood DA (June 2002). "Prevalence and persistence of health problems after childbirth: associations with parity and method of birth".

Birth .

29 (2): 83– 94.

doi : 10.1046/j.1523-536X.2002.00167.x .

PMID 12051189 .

^ Borders N (2006). "After the afterbirth: a critical review of postpartum health relative to method of delivery".

Journal of Midwifery & Women's Health .

51 (4): 242– 48.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmwh.2005.10.014 .

PMID 16814217 .

^ a b Say, Lale; Chou, Doris; Gemmill, Alison; Tunçalp, Özge; Moller, Ann-Beth; Daniels, Jane; Gülmezoglu, A. Metin; Temmerman, Marleen; Alkema, Leontine (1 June 2014).

"Global causes of maternal death: a WHO systematic analysis" .

The Lancet Global Health .

2 (6): e323 – e333 .

doi : 10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70227-X .

hdl : 1854/LU-5796925 .

ISSN 2214-109X .

PMID 25103301 .

S2CID 8706769 .

^ Bienstock, Jessica L.; Eke, Ahizechukwu C.; Hueppchen, Nancy A. (29 April 2021).

"Postpartum Hemorrhage" .

The New England Journal of Medicine .

384 (17): 1635– 1645.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMra1513247 .

ISSN 1533-4406 .

PMC 10181876 .

PMID 33913640 .

S2CID 233447661 .

^ "37".

Williams Obstetrics (24th ed.). McGraw-Hill Professional. 2014. pp. Chapter 37.

ISBN 978-0-07-179893-8 .

^ Jaju S, Al Kharusi L, Gowri V (2015).

"Antenatal prevalence of fear associated with childbirth and depressed mood in primigravid women" .

Indian Journal of Psychiatry .

57 (2): 158– 61.

doi : 10.4103/0019-5545.158152 .

PMC 4462784 .

PMID 26124521 .

^ Lukasse M, Schei B, Ryding EL (October 2014). "Prevalence and associated factors of fear of childbirth in six European countries".

Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare .

5 (3): 99– 106.

doi : 10.1016/j.srhc.2014.06.007 .

hdl : 10642/2246 .

PMID 25200969 .

^ Carlino, Elisa; Frisaldi, Elisa; Benedetti, Fabrizio (June 2014).

"Pain and the Context" .

Nature Reviews Rheumatology .

10 (6): 348– 355.

doi : 10.1038/nrrheum.2014.17 .

PMID 24567065 .

^ a b "Postpartum Depression Facts" .

National Institute of Mental Health .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2017 . Retrieved 4 May 2018 .

^ Lapp LK, Agbokou C, Peretti CS, Ferreri F (September 2010). "Management of post traumatic stress disorder after childbirth: a review".

Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

31 (3): 113– 22.

doi : 10.3109/0167482X.2010.503330 .

PMID 20653342 .

S2CID 23594561 .

^ Condon J (February 2010). "Women's mental health: a "wish-list" for the DSM V".

Archives of Women's Mental Health .

13 (1): 5– 10.

doi : 10.1007/s00737-009-0114-1 .

PMID 20127444 .

S2CID 1102994 .

^ Martin C (2012).

Perinatal Mental Health: a Clinical Guide . Cumbria England: M & K Pub. p. 26.

ISBN 978-1907830495 .

^ Alder J, Stadlmayr W, Tschudin S, Bitzer J (June 2006). "Post-traumatic symptoms after childbirth: what should we offer?".

Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

27 (2): 107– 12.

doi : 10.1080/01674820600714632 .

PMID 16808085 .

S2CID 21859634 .

^ a b Jones I, Chandra PS, Dazzan P, Howard LM (November 2014). "Bipolar disorder, affective psychosis, and schizophrenia in pregnancy and the post-partum period".

Lancet .

384 (9956): 1789– 99.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61278-2 .

PMID 25455249 .

S2CID 44481055 .

^ "Stillbirth: Overview" .

NICHD . 23 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 October 2016 .

^ a b c d e "Stillbirths" .

World Health Organization . Archived from the original on 2 October 2016 . Retrieved 29 September 2016 .

^ "Ending preventable stillbirths An Executive Summary for The Lancet's Series" (PDF) .

The Lancet . January 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ "How do health care providers manage stillbirth?" .

NICHD . 23 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 October 2016 .

^ "Stillbirth: Other FAQs" .

NICHD . 23 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 October 2016 .

^ "Stillbirths and stillbirth rates" .

UNICEF DATA .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2022 .

^ Draper, Elizabeth S.; Manktelow, Bradley N.; Smith, Lucy; Rubayet, Sayed; Hirst, Jane; Neuman, Melissa; King, Carina; Osrin, David; Prost, Audrey (6 February 2016).

"Stillbirths: rates, risk factors, and acceleration towards 2030" .

The Lancet .

387 (10018): 587– 603.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00837-5 .

ISSN 0140-6736 .

PMID 26794078 .

^ "Preterm birth Fact sheet N°363" .

WHO . November 2015.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2015 . Retrieved 30 July 2016 .

^ "Preterm Birth" .

World Health Organization .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2015 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .

^ a b Tsatsaris, Vassilis; Cabrol, Dominique; Carbonne, Bruno (2004). "Pharmacokinetics of tocolytic agents".

Clinical Pharmacokinetics .

43 (13): 833– 844.

doi : 10.2165/00003088-200443130-00001 .

ISSN 0312-5963 .

PMID 15509182 .

S2CID 43377674 .

^ Kendig, James W (March 2007).

"Postmature Infant" .

The Merck Manuals Online Medical Library .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2012 . Retrieved 6 October 2008 .

^ Muglu, J; Rather, H; Arroyo-Manzano, D; Bhattacharya, S; Balchin, I; Khalil, A; Thilaganathan, B; Khan, KS; Zamora, J; Thangaratinam, S (July 2019).

"Risks of stillbirth and neonatal death with advancing gestation at term: A systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies of 15 million pregnancies" .

PLOS Medicine .

16 (7): e1002838.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002838 .

PMC 6605635 .

PMID 31265456 .

^ "Practice Bulletin No. 146: Management of Late-Term and Postterm Pregnancies" .

Obstetrics & Gynecology .

124 (2 PART 1): 390– 396. August 2014.

doi : 10.1097/01.AOG.0000452744.06088.48 .

ISSN 0029-7844 .

PMID 25050770 .

S2CID 7149045 .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 September 2022 .

^ Neff, Matthew J. (1 December 2004).

"ACOG Releases Guidelines on Management of Post-term Pregnancy" .

American Family Physician .

70 (11): 2221– 2225.

Archived from the original on 11 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 September 2022 .

^ Wang, Mary; Fontaine, Patricia (1 August 2014).

"Common Questions About Late-Term and Postterm Pregnancy" .

American Family Physician .

90 (3): 160– 165.

PMID 25077721 .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 September 2022 .

^ "Mortality and Burden of Disease Estimates for WHO Member States in 2004" (xls) . Department of Measurement and Health Information, World Health Organization. February 2009.

Archived from the original on 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ Ohlsson A, Shah VS (June 2014). "Intrapartum antibiotics for known maternal Group B streptococcal colonization".

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2016 (6): CD007467.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD007467.pub4 .

PMID 24915629 .

S2CID 205189572 .

^ "Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)" . World Health Organization. May 2013.

Archived from the original on 25 November 2014 . Retrieved 30 August 2013 .

^ a b van Handel M, Swaab H, de Vries LS, Jongmans MJ (July 2007).

"Long-term cognitive and behavioral consequences of neonatal encephalopathy following perinatal asphyxia: a review" .

European Journal of Pediatrics .

166 (7): 645– 54.

doi : 10.1007/s00431-007-0437-8 .

PMC 1914268 .

PMID 17426984 .

^ Marret, Stéphane; Vanhulle, Catherine; Laquerriere, Annie (1 January 2013), Dulac, Olivier; Lassonde, Maryse; Sarnat, Harvey B. (eds.), "Chapter 16 - Pathophysiology of cerebral palsy" , Handbook of Clinical Neurology , Pediatric Neurology Part I, 111 , Elsevier: 169– 176, doi : 10.1016/B978-0-444-52891-9.00016-6 , ISBN 9780444528919 , PMID 23622161 , retrieved 28 July 2022 ^ Warwick R, Williams PL, eds. (1973).

Gray's Anatomy (35th British ed.). London: Longman. p. 1046.

ISBN 978-0443010118 .

^ Stearns PN, ed. (1993).

Encyclopedia of Social History . Garland Reference Library of Social Sciences. Vol. V. 780. London: Taylor & Francis. p. 144.

ISBN 978-0-8153-0342-8 .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2016.

^ a b c Tait HN, Cidro J (2018).

Indigenous experiences of pregnancy and birth . Demeter Press.

ISBN 978-1772581355 .

OCLC 1012401274 .

^ a b "The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative" .

Johns Hopkins Medicine .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2022 . Retrieved 9 January 2022 .

^ "The CDC Guide to Breastfeeding Interventions" (PDF) .

CDC .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 January 2022 . Retrieved 9 January 2022 .

^ "About AMCB" .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2014 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .

^ "Welcome to the College of Midwives of British Columbia" .

College of Midwives of British Columbia website .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2013 . Retrieved 30 August 2013 .

^ Province of British Columbia (21 August 2013) [Revised Statues of British Columbia 1996].

"Health Professions Act" .

Statues and Regulations of British Columbia internet version . Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: Queens Printer.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2013 . Retrieved 30 August 2013 .

^ "Our role" .

Nursing & Midwifery Council website . London, England. 31 August 2011 [Created 2010-02-24].

Archived from the original on 5 September 2013 . Retrieved 30 August 2013 .

^ "The Nursing and Midwifery Order 2001" . London, England: Her Majesty's Stationery Office , The National Archives , Ministry of Justice , Her Majesty's Government . 2002.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2013.

^ Burton N (2015).

Natal signs: cultural representations of pregnancy, birth and parenting . Demeter Press.

ISBN 978-1926452326 .

OCLC 949328683 .

^ "Share of births attended by skilled health staff" .

Our World in Data .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 5 March 2020 .

^ a b Rosenthal E (30 June 2013).

"American Way of Birth, Costliest in the World" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2017.

^ Hsia RY, Akosa Antwi Y, Weber E (January 2014).

"Analysis of variation in charges and prices paid for vaginal and caesarean section births: a cross-sectional study" .

BMJ Open .

4 (1): e004017.

doi : 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-004017 .

PMC 3902513 .

PMID 24435892 .

^ Rivelli, Elizabeth (10 October 2022).

"How Much Does It Cost To Have A Baby? 2023 Averages" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2023 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

^ National Collaborating Centre for Women's and Children's Health (2007).

Intrapartum Care: Care of Healthy Women and Their Babies During Childbirth . NICE Clinical Guidelines, No. 55. London: RCOG.

ISBN 9781904752363 .

PMID 21250397 .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Recommendations: Intrapartum care for healthy women and babies" .

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence . 3 December 2014.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2020 . Retrieved 6 December 2020 .

^ Bennhold K, Louis CS (3 December 2014).

"British Regulator Urges Home Births Over Hospitals for Uncomplicated Pregnancies - NYTimes.com" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2017.

^ Murray, Christopher JL; Lopez, Alan D; Vos, Theo; et al. (GBD 2013 Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators) (January 2015).

"Global, regional, and national age-sex specific all-cause and cause-specific mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013" .

Lancet .

385 (9963): 117– 71.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61682-2 .

PMC 4340604 .

PMID 25530442 .

^ a b "Maternal health" . United Nations Population Fund.

Archived from the original on 29 November 2020 . Retrieved 29 January 2017 .

^ a b c Loudon I (July 2000).

"Maternal mortality in the past and its relevance to developing countries today" .

The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition .

72 (1 Suppl): 241S – 246S .

doi : 10.1093/ajcn/72.1.241S .

PMID 10871589 .

^ "Maternal health" .

United Nations Population Fund .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2020 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ Van Lerberghe W, De Brouwere V (2001).

"Of Blind Alleys and Things That Have Worked: History's Lessons on Reducing Maternal Mortality" . In De Brouwere V, Van Lerberghe W (eds.).

Safe Motherhood Strategies: A Review of the Evidence . Studies in Health Services Organisation and Policy. Vol. 17. Antwerp: ITG Press. pp.

7– 33.

ISBN 978-90-76070-19-3 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

Where nothing effective is done to avert maternal death, "natural" mortality is probably of the order of magnitude of 1,500/100,000.

^ Propublica, Nina Martin; Montagne, Renee (12 May 2017).

"U.S. Has The Worst Rate Of Maternal Deaths In The Developed World" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 24 April 2018 . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ Howard, Jacqueline (23 February 2022).

"US sees continued rise in maternal deaths – and ongoing inequities, CDC report shows" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2023 . Retrieved 13 February 2023 .

^ "Sharp rise in deaths among pregnant women and new mothers" .

PBS Newshour .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2023 . Retrieved 13 February 2023 .

^ a b Castillo, Michelle (7 May 2013).

"U.S. has highest first-day infant mortality out of industrialized world, group reports" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ Levi J, Kohn D, Johnson K (June 2011).

"Healthy Women, Healthy Babies: How health reform can improve the health of women and babies in America" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: Trust for America's Health .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2012 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ a b c Inge B (2006).

Growing up in a culture of respect child rearing in highland Peru . University of Texas Press.

OCLC 748863692 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d e Barbara R (2011).

Developing destinies: a Mayan midwife and town . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-531990-3 .

OCLC 779676136 .

[ page needed ] ^ Vernon DM , ed. (2005).

Having a Great Birth in Australia: Twenty Stories of Triumph, Power, Love and Delight from the Women and Men who Brought New Life Into the World . Canberra, Australia: Australian College of Midwives . p. 56.

ISBN 978-0-9751674-3-4 .

^ "Labor and delivery, postpartum care" .

Mayo Clinic .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2022 . Retrieved 29 June 2022 .

^ a b Dziadosz M, Basch RS, Young BK (March 2016). "Human amniotic fluid: a source of stem cells for possible therapeutic use".

American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology .

214 (3): 321– 27.

doi : 10.1016/j.ajog.2015.12.061 .

PMID 26767797 .

^ Cassidy T (2006).

Birth . New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. pp.

54–55 .

ISBN 978-0-87113-938-2 .

^ a b Thompson CJ (2005). "Consumer Risk Perceptions in a Community of Reflexive Doubt".

Journal of Consumer Research .

32 (2): 235– 48.

doi : 10.1086/432233 .

^ a b Dye NS (Autumn 1980). "History of Childbirth in America".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

6 (1). The University of Chicago Press: 97– 108.

doi : 10.1086/493779 .

JSTOR 3173968 .

PMID 21213655 .

S2CID 144068193 .

^ MacKenzie, I. Z.; Cooke, Inez B; Annan, B. (2003).

"Indications for caesarean section in a consultant obstetric unit over three decades" .

Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

23 (3): 233– 238.

doi : 10.1080/0144361031000098316 .

PMID 12850849 .

S2CID 25452611 .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2023 .

^ Kozhimannil, K. B.; Graves, A. J.; Ecklund, A. M.; Shah, N.; Aggarwal, R.; Snowden, J. M. (2018). "Cesarean Delivery Rates and Costs of Childbirth in a State Medicaid Program After Implementation of a Blended Payment Policy".

Medical Care .

56 (8): 658– 664.

doi : 10.1097/MLR.0000000000000937 .

PMID 29912840 .

S2CID 49305610 .

^ Watanabe, Kaori (1 December 2023).

"Current status of the position on labor progress prediction for contemporary pregnant women using Friedman curves: An updated review" .

Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research .

50 (3): 313– 321.

doi : 10.1111/jog.15842 .

ISSN 1341-8076 .

PMID 38037733 .

^ Zhang J, Troendle JF, Yancey MK (October 2002).

"Reassessing the labor curve in nulliparous women" .

American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology .

187 (4): 824– 28.

doi : 10.1067/mob.2002.127142 .

PMID 12388957 .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2016.

^ "Abnormal Labour" .

Medscape .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2019 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 .

^ Leavitt, Judith W. (1988).

Brought to Bed: Childbearing in America, 1750–1950 . University of Oxford. pp.

90– 91.

ISBN 978-0-19-505690-7 .

^ Ataman, A. D.; Vatanoğlu-Lutz, E. E.; Yıldırım, G. (2013).

"Medicine in stamps-Ignaz Semmelweis and Puerperal Fever" .

Journal of the Turkish German Gynecological Association .

14 (1): 35– 39.

doi : 10.5152/jtgga.2013.08 .

PMC 3881728 .

PMID 24592068 .

External links [ edit ] Childbirth at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Spontaneous Vaginal Delivery , Video by Merck Manual Professional Edition Maternal Morbidity/Mortality in the Media Archived 27 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine Social Devices for Impelling Women to Bear and Rear Children (1916) by Leta Stetter Hollingworth Classification D ICD - 11 : JB2 ICD - 10 : O80-O84 v t e Women's health Reproductive health Reproductive tract External female genitalia (vulva) Clitoris Clitoral hood Labia minora Labia majora Vagina Cervix Uterus Fallopian tube Ovary Reproductive system disease Maternal health Pregnancy Unintended pregnancy Gravidity and parity Obstetrics Antenatal care Adolescent pregnancy Complications of pregnancy Hyperemesis gravidarum Ectopic pregnancy Miscarriage Obstetrical bleeding Gestational diabetes Hypertension Preeclampsia Eclampsia Childbirth Midwifery Preterm birth Multiple births Oxytocin Obstructed labor Cesarian section Retained placenta Obstetrical fistulae Vesicovaginal fistula Rectovaginal fistula Episiotomy Husband stitch Postpartum care Postpartum confinement Maternal deaths Perinatal mortality Stillbirths Abortion Mother-to-child transmission Sterilization Compulsory sterilization Breastfeeding and mental health Reproductive life plan Infertility Childlessness Assisted reproductive technology In vitro fertilization Parenting Adoption Fostering Contraception and family planning Intrauterine devices Oral contraceptives Condoms Male contraceptive Contraceptive prevalence Contraceptive security Planned Parenthood Fertility awareness Menstruation Culture and menstruation Feminine hygiene Menarche Menstrual cycle Menstrual aids Cloth menstrual pad Menstrual cup Tampon Sanitary pad Dysmenorrhea Menorrhagia Amenorrhoea Menopause Hormone replacement therapy Sexual health Sexually transmitted infections Safe sex HIV Human papilloma virus HPV vaccine Pelvic inflammatory disease Female genital mutilation Clitoridectomy Infibulation Breast binding Breast health Breast ironing Child marriage Dyspareunia Forced marriage Gynaecological disorders Vaginitis Leblouh Polygamy Sexual intercourse Orgasm Puberty Sex differences Sex education Non-reproductive health Violence against women Abuse during childbirth Domestic violence Pregnancy Intimate partner violence Misogyny Sexual harassment Sexual assault Rape Femicide Gender discrimination Non-communicable diseases Cancer Lung cancer Breast cancer Uterine cancer Endometrial cancer Cervical cancer Papanicolaou test Ovarian cancer Cardiovascular disease Dementia Alzheimer's disease Bone health Osteoporosis Hip fracture Anaemia Mental health Anxiety Depression Major depressive disorder Urinary tract Urethra Urinary tract infection Urinary incontinence Sociocultural factors Poverty Disadvantaged Gender equality Healthcare inequality Gender disparities in health Social determinants of health Reproductive justice Women's empowerment Politics, research and advocacy United Nations The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women Declaration on the elimination of violence against women International Day of the Girl Child Commission on the Status of Women UN Women United States Office of Research on Women's Health Women's Health Initiative International Center for Research on Women Nurses' Health Study Black Women's Health Study Cartwright Inquiry Society for Women's Health Research Women's health by country China Ethiopia India Family planning Russia Birth control in the United States Category Commons WikiProject v t e Development of the human body Before birth Development Zygote Embryo Fetus Gestational age Birth and after Birth Child development Stages Early Puberty Adult development Ageing Senescence Death Phases Early years Infant Toddler Early childhood Childhood Child Youth Preadolescence Adolescence Emerging adulthood Adulthood Young adult Middle adult Elder adult Dying Social and legal Minor Age of majority v t e Sexual and reproductive health Rights Reproductive Justice Compulsory sterilization Contraceptive security Abortion-rights movements Genital integrity Circumcision controversy Intersex human rights Education Sex education Genetic counseling Pre-conception counseling Planning Childfreeness / childlessness Birth spacing Parenting adoption foster care Sperm theft Contraception Hormonal contraception Male contraception Safe sex Condom Intrauterine device Sterilization Assisted reproduction In vitro fertilization ICSI Gamete Cryopreservation Egg Sperm Sperm bank fertility fraud Health Men's Women's vulvovaginal Research self-report sexual risk behaviors Pregnancy Maternal health Obstetrics Unintended pregnancy childbirth Abortion Options counseling Pregnancy from rape Pregnant patients' rights Prenatal care Teenage pregnancy Precocious puberty and pregnancy Identity Gender identity Sexual orientation Intersex Transgender Genital modification Medicine Andrology Genitourinary medicine Gynaecology Obstetrics and gynaecology Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Sexual medicine Transgender health care Disorders Disorders of sex development Infertility Reproductive system disease Sexual dysfunction Sexually transmitted infections clinic Gender dysphoria By country China India Iran Ireland Pakistan Philippines Singapore United Kingdom teen United States teen pregnancy birth control History Birth control movement in the United States History of condoms Social hygiene movement Timeline of reproductive rights legislation Policy One-child policy Two-child policy Three-child policy Financial baby bonus bachelor tax child benefit tax on childlessness Abortion law v t e Pregnancy and childbirth Planning Birth control Natural family planning Male contraceptive Pre-conception counseling Conception Assisted reproductive technology artificial insemination fertility fraud fertility medication in vitro fertilisation partner-assisted reproduction Fertility awareness Unintended pregnancy Testing 3D ultrasound Obstetric ultrasonography Pregnancy test home testing Prenatal testing Medical imaging Types Cervical Cryptic Ectopic Abdominal Heterotopic Molar Ovarian Postterm Unintended Interstitial Rudimentary horn Childbirth Preparation Bradley method Lamaze Roles Mother Newborn Preterm birth Postterm pregnancy Doula Birth attendant Men's roles Midwife Auxiliary nurse midwife Obstetrician Perinatal nurse Traditional birth attendant Delivery Pelvimetry / Bishop score cervical dilation cervical effacement position Bloody show Uterine contraction Vaginal delivery Presentation breech cephalic shoulder Rupture of membranes Caesarean Childbirth positions Home birth Labor induction Multiple birth Natural childbirth Silent birth Unassisted childbirth Water birth Placental expulsion Prenatal Anatomy Amniotic fluid Amniotic sac Endometrium Placenta Development Embryo Fetus Fundal height Gestational age Maternal physiological changes Postpartum physiological changes Care Brain health and pollution Nutrition environmental toxicants in pregnancy prenatal Prenatal depression Immunization Concomitant conditions Anemia Hypertension Hypercoagulability Substance use Smoking Alcohol Cannabis Opioids Endocrine diseases Diabetes Thyroid disease Liver diseases Acute fatty liver Intrahepatic cholestasis Infections HIV COVID-19 Hepatitis C Malaria Skin diseases Lupus Pruritic folliculitis Dermatoses Others Drugs Vaginal flora Bleeding Motor vehicle emissions Pre-existing disease Sleep Procedures Amniocentesis Cardiotocography Chorionic villus sampling Nonstress test Abortion Postpartum Maternal Lochia Postpartum care Postpartum depression Postpartum confinement Sex after pregnancy Psychiatric disorders of childbirth Postpartum physiological changes Roles Doula Health visitor Lactation consultant Monthly nurse Confinement nanny Infant Adaptation to extrauterine life Apgar score Child care Congenital disorders Obstetric history Gravidity and parity Related Parental brain v t e Pathology of pregnancy , childbirth , and the puerperium Pregnancy Pregnancy with abortive outcome Abortion Ectopic pregnancy Abdominal Cervical Heterotopic Interstitial Ovarian Rudimentary horn Embryo loss Fetal resorption Molar pregnancy Miscarriage Stillbirth Edema , proteinuria , and hypertensive disorders Gestational hypertension Pre-eclampsia HELLP syndrome Eclampsia Other, predominantly related to pregnancy Digestive system Acute fatty liver of pregnancy Gestational diabetes Hepatitis E Hyperemesis gravidarum Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy Integumentary system / dermatoses of pregnancy Gestational pemphigoid Impetigo herpetiformis Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy Linea nigra Prurigo gestationis Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancy Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP) Stretch marks Nervous system Chorea gravidarum Blood Gestational thrombocytopenia Pregnancy-induced hypercoagulability Maternal care related to the fetus and amniotic cavity amniotic fluid Oligohydramnios Polyhydramnios Braxton Hicks contractions chorion / amnion Chorioamnionitis Chorionic hematoma Constriction ring syndrome Monoamniotic twins Prelabor rupture of membranes Obstetrical bleeding Antepartum placenta Circumvallate placenta Monochorionic twins Placenta accreta Placenta praevia Placental abruption Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome Labor Amniotic fluid embolism Cephalopelvic disproportion Obstructed labour Shoulder dystocia Fetal distress Locked twins Nuchal cord Obstetrical bleeding Postpartum Pain management during childbirth placenta Placenta accreta Preterm birth Postmature birth Umbilical cord prolapse Uterine inversion Uterine rupture Vasa praevia Uterine atony Puerperal Breastfeeding difficulties Low milk supply Cracked nipples Breast engorgement Childbirth-related post-traumatic stress disorder Pubic symphysis diastasis Postpartum bleeding Peripartum cardiomyopathy Postpartum depression Postpartum infections Postpartum psychosis Postpartum thyroiditis Puerperal mastitis Other Concomitant conditions Diabetes mellitus Systemic lupus erythematosus Thyroid disorders Maternal death Sexual activity during pregnancy Category v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud Authority control databases National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel 2 Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐bcsw2
Cached time: 20250818001103
Cache expiry: 85741
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.150 seconds
Real time usage: 3.575 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19350/1000000
Revision size: 175861/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 749693/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20228/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 52/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 893806/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.954/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9241412/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3014.089      1 -total
 58.12% 1751.736      1 Template:Reflist
 25.16%  758.494    101 Template:Cite_journal
 14.14%  426.227     73 Template:Cite_web
  7.85%  236.605     18 Template:Navbox
  5.98%  180.303     19 Template:Fix
  5.20%  156.673     22 Template:Cite_book
  4.94%  148.956     14 Template:Citation_needed
  4.10%  123.688      1 Template:Infobox_medical_condition_(new)
  4.08%  123.106      2 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:83449:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818001103 and revision id 1306440163. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Childbirth&oldid=1306440163 " Categories : Childbirth Midwifery Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Pages containing links to subscription-only content Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2023 Use British English from April 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Pages using div col with small parameter All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2021 Pages using Sister project links with default search Wikipedia medicine articles ready to translate This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 19:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Childbirth 104 languages Add topic

