Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Research areas 3 Products, projects, and technology 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc. (MERL) Company type Subsidiary Headquarters Cambridge , Massachusetts , United States Key people Richard Waters (President & CEO) [ 1 ] Number of employees Over 50 Parent Mitsubishi Electric US Website www .merl .com Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories ( MERL ) is a subsidiary of Mitsubishi Electric US Holdings, Inc.

, which is the principal subsidiary of Mitsubishi Electric in the United States. MERL acts as North American arm of Mitsubishi's Corporate R&D organization and is located in Cambridge, Massachusetts , United States.

MERL engages in application-motivated basic research and advanced development in areas crucial to Mitsubishi Electric. The facility employs more than 50 PhDs who conduct research and development across a wide range of fields, including digital signal processing, digital audio and video processing, wired and wireless digital communications, spoken language interfaces, computer vision, mechatronics and fundamental algorithms. Since its founding in 1991, MERL has been awarded over 700 patents.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories was founded in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1991 by the Mitsubishi Electric CR&D organization. In the late 1990s, MERL merged with two other laboratories that were part of Mitsubishi Electric. This consolidated all of Mitsubishi Electric’s North American research into one organization, creating the MERL that exists today.
Richard C. Waters, was a founding member of MERL and has been president since 1999.

[ 1 ] László Bélády was the head of MERL from 1991 to 1998, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] James D. Foley ,  who co-authored many of the most widely used university textbooks on computer graphics, was the president from 1998 to 1999.

Research areas [ edit ] MERL conducts application motivated basic research and advanced development in •	Electronics & Communications: Wireless and optical communications , advanced signal processing , optical and semiconductor devices, and electro-magnetics, RF& Power • Multimedia : Efficient acquisition, representation, processing, security, and interaction of multimedia.

• Data Analytics : Predictive analytics , decision analytics, modeling, simulation , and optimization .

• Spatial Analysis : Processing data from across space and time to extract meaning and build representations of objects and events in the world.

• Mechatronics : Advanced control.

An Algorithms group supports all five sectors, developing fundamental algorithms .

Products, projects, and technology [ edit ] MERL generates new technology and intellectual property, and has been involved in numerous products and projects, including: Generalized Belief Propagation Human–computer interaction via the Multi-touch DiamondTouch surface Saffron Type System Multiview Video Coding Ultra-wideband network technology using Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing Seam carving References [ edit ] ^ a b Richard C. Waters profile.

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories web site. Retrieved 21 March 2013.

^ Ranked List of Organizations with 200 or More Patents from 1/1/1992 to 12/31/2011. Electrical classes.

U.S. Patent and Trade Office, Retrieved 21 March 2013.

^ Ranked List of Organizations with 200 or More Patents from 1/1/1992 to 12/31/2011.Telecommunications classes.

U.S. Patent and Trade Office. Retrieved 21 March 2013.

^ Lee, John (1995.

International Biographical Dictionary of Computer Pioneers.

Taylor & Francis. p. 76.

ISBN 1884964478 . Retrieved October 28, 2012.

^ [Belady, Laszlo (2002).

"Oral history interview with Laszlo A. Belady." Charles Babbage Institute. Retrieved October 28, 2012.

External links [ edit ] Companies portal Official website Mitsubishi Electric US Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mitsubishi Electric .

v t e Mitsubishi Electric Mitsubishi Divisions and subsidiaries Current Green Cycle Systems Corporation Iconics Mitsubishi Electric China Mitsubishi Electric Europe Mitsubishi Electric United States Climaveneta Defunct Apricot Computers 1 Diatone 1 Joint ventures and shareholdings Current Mitsubishi Hitachi Home Elevator Powerex (50%) Renesas Electronics (25.05%) Shanghai Mitsubishi Elevator Shihlin Electric (20%) TMEIC Defunct NEC-Mitsubishi Electric Visual Systems 2 Products, services and standards Current Mitsubishi AAM-4 Camellia CC-Link DiamondTouch Diamond Vision DS2000 KASUMI MelsecNet MISTY1 Privacy Enhanced Computer Display Saffron Type System Seam carving SERVIS-2 Superbird-C2 Type 3 Chū-SAM Past Diamondtron Electrohome MELCOM MOLDIS Molectron Pedion Trium People Mitsuru Matsui Places Mitsubishi Electric Halle Solae Tokyo Building Other Atacama Submillimeter Telescope Experiment Mitsubishi Electric Championship at Hualalai Mitsubishi Electric Cup Mitsubishi Electric Classic Mitsubishi Electric Diamond Dolphins Mitsubishi Electric Koalas Mitsubishi Foundation 1 Now integrated into other Mitsubishi Electric divisions or business groupings 2 Sold Category Commons Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mitsubishi_Electric_Research_Laboratories&oldid=1243070177 " Categories : Mitsubishi Electric Research organizations in the United States Companies based in Cambridge, Massachusetts Design companies established in 1991 Electronics companies established in 1991 1991 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden category: Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 30 August 2024, at 09:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories Add languages Add topic

