Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Operation 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Galileo thermometer 25 languages العربية বাংলা Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thermometer containing several glass vessels of varying density A Celsius Galilean thermometer in two degree gradations. A risen orange orb denotes 24 °C.

A Galileo thermometer (or Galilean thermometer ) is a thermometer made of a sealed glass cylinder containing a clear liquid and several glass vessels of varying density . The individual floats rise or fall in relation to their respective density and the density of the surrounding liquid as the temperature changes. It is named after Galileo Galilei because he discovered the principle on which this thermometer is based—that the density of a liquid changes in relation to its temperature.

History [ edit ] Although named after the 16th–17th-century physicist Galileo, the thermometer was not invented by him. (Galileo did invent a thermometer called Galileo's air thermometer, more accurately called a thermoscope , in or before 1603.) [ 1 ] The instrument now known as a Galileo thermometer was invented by a group of academics and technicians known as the Accademia del Cimento of Florence, [ 2 ] who included Galileo's pupil, Torricelli and Torricelli's pupil Viviani .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Details of the thermometer were published in the Saggi di naturali esperienze fatte nell'Academia del Cimento sotto la protezione del Serenissimo Principe Leopoldo di Toscana e descritte dal segretario di essa Accademia (1666), the academy's main publication. The English translation of this work (1684) describes the device ('The Fifth Thermometer') as 'slow and lazy', a description that is reflected in an alternative Italian name for the invention, the termometro lento (slow thermometer).

[ 5 ] The outer vessel was filled with 'rectified spirits of wine' (a concentrated solution of ethanol in water); the weights of the glass bubbles were adjusted by grinding a small amount of glass from the sealed end; and a small air space was left at the top of the main vessel to allow 'for the Liquor to rarefie' (i.e. expand).

The device now called the Galileo thermometer was revived in the modern era by the Natural History Museum, London , which started selling a version in the 1990s.

[ 6 ] Operation [ edit ] In the Galileo thermometer, the small glass bulbs are partly filled with different-colored liquids. The composition of these liquids is mainly water; some contain a tiny percent of alcohol, but that is not important for the functioning of the thermometer; they merely function as fixed weights, with their colors denoting given temperatures. Once the hand-blown bulbs have been sealed, their effective densities are adjusted using the metal tags hanging from beneath them. Any expansion due to the temperature change of the colored liquid and air gap inside the bulbs does not affect the operation of the thermometer, as these materials are sealed inside a glass bulb of approximately fixed size. The clear liquid in which the bulbs are submerged is not water, but some organic compounds (such as ethanol or kerosene) the density of which varies with temperature. The fixed size of the outer tube ensures that the outer clear liquid will be in gas-liquid equilibrium. Even so, the equilibrium density of liquids like ethanol [ 7 ] decreases with an increase in temperature and this causes the bulbs to rise or sink accordingly.

[ 2 ] As the temperature rises the bulbs will sink one by one according to their individual density as the clear holding fluid's density gradually changes around them. Eventually all the bulbs may be at the base of the tube depending on the temperature of the surroundings and therefore that of the clear holding fluid. As the temperature falls the reverse happens with the bulbs, until they can all be at the top.

The metal tags on each bulb are stamped with a temperature. If a bulb is in the centre of the column, that gives a close approximation of the environment temperature outside the tube. If there are some at the top and some at the base but none in between the average of the lowest bulb at the top and the highest at the base provides that figure.

Gallery [ edit ] Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 See also [ edit ] Cartesian diver – Classic science experiment demonstrating the Archimedes' principle and the ideal gas law Frog thermometer – Type of clinical thermometer References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Galileo thermometer .

^ Aleksandr Khristoforovich Khrgian, Meteorology: a historical survey, Volume 1 , Israel Program for Scientific Translations, 1970, p. 25 ^ a b Loyson, Peter (2012). "Galilean Thermometer Not So Galilean".

Journal of Chemical Education .

89 (9): 1095– 1096.

Bibcode : 2012JChEd..89.1095L .

doi : 10.1021/ed200793g .

^ Fretwell, Mattie Bell (February 1937). "The Development if the Thermometer".

Mathematics Teacher .

30 (2): 80– 83.

doi : 10.5951/MT.30.2.0080 .

JSTOR 27952013 .

^ A. Frova & M. Marenzana, Thus spoke Galileo , p.348, accessed on Google Books 2012-06-14, itself based on R. Caverni, Storia del metodo sperimentale in Italia , Vol. 2, Florence, 1895 ^ José Montesinos, Carlos Solís Santos [eds], Largo campo di filosofare: Eurosymposium Galileo 2001 , Fundación Canaria Orotava, 2001 ^ Daily Mirror , 28 January 1994, p. 28 ^ "Ethanol - Density and Specific Weight vs. Temperature and Pressure" .

v t e Earth-based meteorological equipment and instrumentation Anemometer Atmometer Barograph Barometer Ceiling balloon Ceiling projector Ceilometer Dark adaptor goggles Dewcell Disdrometer Dropsonde Field mill Heat flux sensor Hygrometer Ice accretion indicator Lidar Lightning detector Nephelometer Nephoscope Pan evaporation Pyranometer Pyrheliometer Present weather sensor Radiosonde Rain gauge Snow gauge Snowboard Snow pillow SODAR Solarimeter Sounding rocket Stevenson screen Sunshine recorder Tethersonde Thermo-hygrograph Thermometer Tide gauge Transmissometer Weather balloon Weather buoy Weather radar Weather vane Whole sky camera Wind profiler Windsock v t e Galileo Galilei Scientific career Observational astronomy Galileo affair Galileo's escapement Galilean invariance Galilean moons Galilean transformation Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment Phases of Venus Celatone Thermoscope Works De motu antiquiora (1589–1592) Sidereus Nuncius (1610) Letters on Sunspots (1613) Letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) " Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina " (1615) " Discourse on the Tides " (1616) Discourse on Comets (1619) The Assayer (1623) Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632) Two New Sciences (1638) Family Vincenzo Galilei (father) Michelagnolo Galilei (brother) Vincenzo Gamba (son) Maria Celeste (daughter) Marina Gamba (mistress) Related " And yet it moves " Villa Il Gioiello Galileo's paradox Galileo's ship Sector Museo Galileo Galileo's telescopes Galileo's objective lens Tribune of Galileo Galileo thermometer Galileo project spacecraft Galileo Galilei Airport Galileo National Telescope Astronomers Monument In popular culture Life of Galileo (1943 play) Lamp At Midnight (1947 play) Galileo (1968 film) Galileo (1975 film) Starry Messenger (1996 book) Galileo's Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and Love (1999 book) Galileo Galilei (2002 opera) Galileo's Dream (2009 novel) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Galileo_thermometer&oldid=1290667389 " Categories : Thermometers Science education materials Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 07:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Galileo thermometer 25 languages Add topic

