Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work in mathematics 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Theodorus of Cyrene 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th century BC Greek mathematician This article is about Theodorus the mathematician from Cyrene. For the atheist also from Cyrene, see Theodorus the Atheist .

Theodorus of Cyrene ( Ancient Greek : Θεόδωρος ὁ Κυρηναῖος , romanized : Theódōros ho Kyrēnaîos ; fl.

c.

450 BC) was an ancient Greek mathematician. The only first-hand accounts of him that survive are in three of Plato 's dialogues: the Theaetetus , the Sophist , and the Statesman . In the first dialogue, he posits a mathematical construction now known as the Spiral of Theodorus .

Life [ edit ] Little is known as Theodorus' biography beyond what can be inferred from Plato's dialogues. He was born in the northern African colony of Cyrene , and apparently taught both there and in Athens .

[ 1 ] He complains of old age in the Theaetetus , the dramatic date of 399 BC of which suggests his period of flourishing to have occurred in the mid-5th century. The text also associates him with the sophist Protagoras , with whom he claims to have studied before turning to geometry.

[ 2 ] A dubious tradition repeated among ancient biographers like Diogenes Laërtius [ 3 ] held that Plato later studied with him in Cyrene , Libya.

[ 1 ] This eminent mathematician Theodorus was, along with Alcibiades and many other of Socrates' companions (many of whom would be associated with the Thirty Tyrants ), accused of distributing the mysteries at a symposium, according to Plutarch , who himself was priest of the temple at Delphi .

Work in mathematics [ edit ] Theodorus' work is known through a sole theorem, which is delivered in the literary context of the Theaetetus and has been argued alternately to be historically accurate or fictional.

[ 1 ] In the text, his student Theaetetus attributes to him the theorem that the square roots of the non-square numbers up to 17 are irrational: Theodorus here was drawing some figures for us in illustration of roots, showing that squares containing three square feet and five square feet are not commensurable in length with the unit of the foot, and so, selecting each one in its turn up to the square containing seventeen square feet and at that he stopped.

[ 4 ] The square containing two square units is not mentioned, perhaps because the incommensurability of its side with the unit was already known.) Theodorus's method of proof is not known. It is not even known whether, in the quoted passage, "up to" (μέχρι) means that seventeen is included. If seventeen is excluded, then Theodorus's proof may have relied merely on considering whether numbers are even or odd.  Indeed, Hardy and Wright [ 5 ] and Knorr [ 6 ] suggest proofs that rely ultimately on the following theorem:  If x 2 = n y 2 {\displaystyle x^{2}=ny^{2}} is soluble in integers , and n {\displaystyle n} is odd, then n {\displaystyle n} must be congruent to 1 modulo 8 (since x {\displaystyle x} and y {\displaystyle y} can be assumed odd, so their squares are congruent to 1 modulo 8.

That one cannot prove the irrationality the square root of 17 by considerations restricted to the arithmetic of the even and the odd has been shown in one system of the arithmetic of the even and the odd in [ 7 ] and, [ 8 ] but it is an open problem in a stronger natural axiom system for the arithmetic of the even and the odd [ 9 ] A possibility suggested earlier by Zeuthen [ 10 ] is that Theodorus applied the so-called Euclidean algorithm , formulated in Proposition X.2 of the Elements as a test for incommensurability. In modern terms, the theorem is that a real number with an infinite continued fraction expansion is irrational. Irrational square roots have periodic expansions . The period of the square root of 19 has length 6, which is greater than the period of the square root of any smaller number. The period of √17 has length one (so does √18; but the irrationality of √18 follows from that of √2).

The so-called Spiral of Theodorus is composed of contiguous right triangles with hypotenuse lengths equal √2, √3, √4, …, √17; additional triangles cause the diagram to overlap.

Philip J. Davis interpolated the vertices of the spiral to get a continuous curve. He discusses the history of attempts to determine Theodorus' method in his book Spirals: From Theodorus to Chaos , and makes brief references to the matter in his fictional Thomas Gray series.

Spiral of Theodorus That Theaetetus established a more general theory of irrationals, whereby square roots of non-square numbers are irrational, is suggested in the eponymous Platonic dialogue as well as commentary on, and scholia to, the Elements .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Chronology of ancient Greek mathematicians List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Quadratic irrational Wilbur Knorr References [ edit ] ^ a b c Nails, Debra (2002).

The People of Plato: A Prosopography of Plato and Other Socratics . Indianapolis: Hackett. pp.

281 -2.

ISBN 9780872205642 .

^ cf. Plato, Theaetetus , 189a ^ Diogenes Laërtius 3.6 ^ Plato .

Cratylus, Theaetetus, Sophist, Statesman . p. 174d . Retrieved August 5, 2010 .

^ Hardy, G. H.

; Wright, E. M.

(1979).

An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers . Oxford. pp.

42–44 .

ISBN 0-19-853171-0 .

^ Knorr, Wilbur (1975).

The Evolution of the Euclidean Elements . D. Reidel.

ISBN 90-277-0509-7 .

^ Pambuccian, Victor (2016), "The arithmetic of the even and the odd", Review of Symbolic Logic , 9 (2): 359– 369, doi : 10.1017/S1755020315000386 , S2CID 13359877 .

^ Menn, Stephen; Pambuccian, Victor (2016), "Addenda et corrigenda to "The arithmetic of the even and the odd" ", Review of Symbolic Logic , 9 (3): 638– 640, doi : 10.1017/S1755020316000204 , S2CID 11021387 .

^ Schacht, Celia (2018), "Another arithmetic of the even and the odd", Review of Symbolic Logic , 11 (3): 604– 608, doi : 10.1017/S1755020318000047 , S2CID 53020050 .

^ Heath, Thomas (1981).

A History of Greek Mathematics . Vol. 1. Dover. p. 206.

ISBN 0-486-24073-8 .

^ Heath 1981 , p. 209.

Further reading [ edit ] Choike, James R. (1980). "Theodorus' Irrationality Proofs".

The Two-Year College Mathematics Journal .

Gow, James (1884).

A Short History of Greek Mathematics . University press. p.

85 .

v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theodorus_of_Cyrene&oldid=1289084218 " Categories : Ancient Greek geometers Cyrenean Greeks 5th-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 6 May 2025, at 11:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theodorus of Cyrene 25 languages Add topic

