Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Henry George School 3 analysis 4 The Freeman 5 Intercollegiate Society of Individualists 6 Later years 7 In popular culture 8 Works 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Frank Chodorov 9 languages العربية Español Italiano مصرى Português Русский Shqip Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American libertarian thinker (1887–1966) Frank Chodorov Born Fishel Chodorowsky February 15, 1887 Lower West Side, Manhattan , New York City, United States Died December 28, 1966 (1966-12-28) (aged 79) United States Alma mater Columbia University (BA) Occupation Writer This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Frank Chodorov (February 15, 1887 – December 28, 1966) was an American intellectual, author, and member of the Old Right , a group of classically liberal thinkers who were non-interventionist in foreign policy and opposed to both the American entry into World War II and the New Deal . He was called by Ralph Raico "the last of the Old Right greats".

[ 1 ] Chodorov is best known for writing The Income Tax: Root of All Evil (1954), a book inspired by Georgist single-tax notions which has influenced many later libertarian thinkers, including Murray Rothbard .

Early life [ edit ] Born Fishel Chodorowsky on the Lower West Side of New York City on February 15, 1887, he was the eleventh child of Russian Jewish immigrants. He graduated from Columbia University in 1907, [ 2 ] then worked at a number of jobs around the country. Working in Chicago (1912–17), he read Henry George 's Progress and Poverty .

[ 3 ] Chodorov wrote that he "read the book several times, and each time I felt myself slipping into a cause." [ 4 ] According to Chodorov: George is the apostle of individualism ; he teaches the ethical basis of private property ; he stresses the function of capital in an advancing civilization; he emphasizes the greater productivity of voluntary cooperation in a free market economy, the moral degeneration of a people subjected to state direction and socialistic conformity. His is the philosophy of free enterprise , free trade , free men.

[ 5 ] Henry George School [ edit ] In 1937, Chodorov became director of the Henry George School of Social Science in New York.

[ 6 ] There, he established (with Will Lissner) and edited a school paper, The Freeman . It published articles by Albert Jay Nock (founder of an earlier journal also called The Freeman ), as well as such leading figures of the day as John Dewey , George Bernard Shaw , Bertrand Russell , Lincoln Steffens and Thorsten Veblen . Chodorov used the magazine to express his antiwar views: Every day we must repeat to ourselves as a liturgy, the truth that war is caused by the conditions that bring about poverty; that no war is justified; that no war benefits the people; that war is an instrument whereby the haves increase their hold on the have-nots; that war destroys liberty.

With the coming of World War II , such views were no longer tolerated: Chodorov was ousted from the school in 1942. He wrote that "it seemed to me then that the only thing for me to do was to blow my brains out, which I might have done if I had not had Albert Jay Nock by my side." [ 7 ] Nock had weathered similar "war fever" during World War I when as editor of the antiwar journal The Nation , he had seen that magazine banned from the US mails by the Woodrow Wilson administration.

[ 8 ] analysis [ edit ] Chodorov published articles in a variety of magazines, including H.L. Mencken 's American Mercury , the Saturday Evening Post and Scribner's . In 1944, he launched a four-page monthly broadsheet called analysis , described as "an individualistic publication—the only one of its kind in America." Murray Rothbard called it "one of the best, though undoubtedly the most neglected, of the 'little magazines' that has ever been published in the United States." [ 9 ] Along with Nock's works, Chodorov was influenced by Franz Oppenheimer 's The State : [ 10 ] "between the state and the individual there is always a tug-of-war," wrote Chodorov, "whatever power one acquires must be to the detriment of the other." [ 11 ] The Freeman [ edit ] In 1954, Chodorov again became editor of The Freeman , in its new incarnation, revived under the auspices of Foundation for Economic Education (FEE). He contributed several articles over the years to its Essays in Liberty series, beginning with Volume 1 in 1952. He engaged with William F. Buckley and Willi Schlamm on the question of whether individualists should support interventionism to aid people resisting communist aggression. Chodorov continued to advocate nonintervention, but as the Cold War continued, he lost influence: the American conservative movement came to be a bastion of interventionist foreign policy in combating Socialism.

Intercollegiate Society of Individualists [ edit ] In 1953, Chodorov founded the Intercollegiate Society of Individualists (ISI), with Buckley as president, becoming the first national conservative student organization, reaching 50,000 members by the end of the century. In later years, ISI became extremely influential as a clearinghouse of conservative publications and as a locus of the conservative intellectual movement in America. It later evolved into the Intercollegiate Studies Institute.

Chodorov was a major influence on many of those who would go on to lead the libertarian and conservative movements, including Buckley, M. Stanton Evans , Murray Rothbard , Edmund A. Opitz, and James J. Martin . Rothbard wrote: I shall never forget the profound thrill—a thrill of intellectual liberation—that ran through me when I first encountered the name of Frank Chodorov, months before we were to meet in person. As a young graduate student in economics, I had always believed in the free market, and had become increasingly libertarian over the years, but this sentiment was as nothing to the headline that burst forth in the title of a pamphlet that I chanced upon at the university bookstore: Taxation is Robbery , by Frank Chodorov. There it was; simple perhaps, but how many of us, let alone how many professors of the economics of taxation, have ever given utterance to this shattering and demolishing truth?

[ 9 ] Later years [ edit ] Chodorov was a secular Jew and gained a greater appreciation for religious thought in later years.

[ 12 ] He was a fan of westerns .

[ 13 ] In popular culture [ edit ] In the North American Confederacy alternate history series by L. Neil Smith , in which the United States becomes a libertarian state after a successful Whiskey Rebellion and the overthrowing and execution of George Washington by firing squad for treason in 1794, Frank Chodorov was chosen by the Continental Congress to be H. L. Mencken 's successor after his death in a duel in 1933. He served as the 20th President of the North American Confederacy from 1933 to 1940. He was succeeded by Rose Wilder Lane , who served as the 21st president from 1940 to 1952.

Works [ edit ] The Economics of Society, Government and State (1946) One is a Crowd: Reflections of an Individualist (1952) The Income Tax: Root of All Evil (1954) The Rise & Fall of Society: An Essay on the Economic Forces That Underline Social Institutions (1959) Flight to Russia (1959) Out of Step: The Autobiography of an Individualist (1962) Fugitive Essays (1980) See also [ edit ] Albert Jay Nock , a key influence for Chodorov, and to whom The Income Tax: Root of All Evil is dedicated References [ edit ] ^ Raico, Ralph (March 29, 2011) Neither the Wars Nor the Leaders Were Great , Mises Institute ^ Catalogue of the Officers and Students of Columbia College . D. Van Nostrand. 1907.

^ Chodorov, Frank (1980). Charles H. Hamilton (ed.).

Fugitive Essays: Selected Writings of Frank Chodorov . Indianapolis: Liberty Press. p.

13 .

ISBN 978-0913966723 .

^ Chodorov, Frank (1962).

Out of Step: The Autobiography of an Individualist . New York: Devin-Adair. p. 50.

^ Chodorov, Frank (1941). "Education for a Free Society".

Scribner's Commentator .

9 (February). Scribner's: 36– 37.

^ Henry George School of Social Science ^ Chodorov, Frank (1980). Charles H. Hamilton (ed.).

Fugitive Essays: Selected Writings of Frank Chodorov . Indianapolis: Liberty Press. p.

18 .

ISBN 978-0-913966-72-3 .

^ Rothbard, Murray N.

(2007).

The Betrayal of the American Right (PDF) . Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1933550138 . Retrieved July 25, 2010 .

^ a b Rothbard, Murray N. (1967).

"Frank Chodorov, R.I.P" (PDF) .

Left & Right: A Journal of Libertarian Thought .

3 (1). Murray N. Rothbard: 3– 8.

^ The State ^ Chodorov, Frank (1949). "The Cardinal Crime".

Analysis .

1949 (March). Frank Chodorov: 2.

^ Frank Chodorov, How a Jew Came to God [1] ^ Chodorov, Frank, I Watch Westerns Archived September 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Mises Institute Steelman, Aaron (2008).

"Chodorov, Frank (1887–1966)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

62– 63.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n41 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Frank Chodorov at Wikiquote Works related to Frank Chodorov at Wikisource v t e Anarcho-capitalism Origins Aristotelianism Austrian school of economics Marginalism School of Salamanca Subjective theory of value Objectivism Classical liberalism French liberal school Homestead principle Labor theory of property Physiocracy Individualist anarchism Concepts Anti-statism Civil rights Corporate governance Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Deregulation Economic liberalism Evictionism Free market Free-market roads Free trade Freedom of contract Individualism Jurisdictional arbitrage Laissez-faire Land tenure Market anarchism Natural law Non-aggression principle Polycentric law Private defense ( Army ( Company / list ), Intelligence , Investigator , Police , Security ) Private property Privatization Propertarianism Property rights Right to property Self-ownership Spontaneous order Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntaryism People Bruce L. Benson Walter Block Bryan Caplan Gerard Casey Anthony de Jasay David D. Friedman Hans-Hermann Hoppe Michael Huemer Stephan Kinsella Nick Land Michael Malice Javier Milei Robert P. Murphy Wendy McElroy Lew Rockwell Murray Rothbard Joseph Salerno Jeffrey Tucker Tom Woods Works The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty (1973) The Machinery of Freedom (1973) Defending the Undefendable (1976) The Ethics of Liberty (1982) To Serve and Protect (1998) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) The Myth of the Rational Voter (2007) The Voluntary City (2002) The Problem of Political Authority (2012) Issues Abortion Anarchism Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Inheritance Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Minarchism Objectivism Political parties Politics Theories of law Related topics Accelerationism Agorism Paleo-libertarianism Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Left-libertarianism Ultraliberalism Category v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Netherlands Greece Poland Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2r9m2
Cached time: 20250817135036
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.512 seconds
Real time usage: 0.661 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3750/1000000
Revision size: 12615/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 151007/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4725/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 65735/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.275/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9173697/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  501.212      1 -total
 24.54%  122.974      1 Template:Reflist
 22.11%  110.829      1 Template:Libertarianism_US
 21.76%  109.047      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.45%   92.497      1 Template:Infobox_person
 16.69%   83.645      5 Template:Cite_book
 12.60%   63.128      1 Template:Short_description
 10.62%   53.208      4 Template:Navbox
  7.23%   36.215      1 Template:Anarcho-capitalism
  6.85%   34.339     37 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2649355:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817135036 and revision id 1302510887. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frank_Chodorov&oldid=1302510887 " Categories : 1887 births 1966 deaths 20th-century American Jews 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers American foreign policy writers American libertarians American male non-fiction writers American people of Russian-Jewish descent American political writers American secular Jews American anti-communists American tax resisters Columbia College (New York) alumni Former atheists and agnostics Georgists Jewish anti-communists Jewish American non-fiction writers Libertarian theorists People from Tribeca Tax resistance Writers from Manhattan Old Right (United States) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2015 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 21:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frank Chodorov 9 languages Add topic

