Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Function 2 Ministers 3 Presidents and ministers 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Executive (government) 97 languages Alemannisch العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch overseeing administration of the state This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Executive" government – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of the Politics series on Executive government Head of state Monarch President President of the council of state Dictator Governor-general Government Head of government Chancellor Chief executive Chief minister First minister Minister-president Premier Prime minister President of the Council of Ministers President of the government Cabinet Government formation Cabinet collective responsibility Ministry Secretary Ministry Minister ( State Crown ) Secretary Other Commissary Commissioner Military junta Governor Mayor Presidency Systems Monarchy ( Constitutional ) Republic ( Parliamentary ) Directorial Parliamentary ( Westminster ) Semi-parliamentary ( simul simul ) Semi-presidential ( cohabitational ) Presidential Lists National governments Heads of state and government Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e The executive is the part of the government that executes or enforces the law. It can be organised as a branch of government , as liberal democracies do or as an organ of the unified state apparatus , as is the case in communist states .

Function [ edit ] The scope of executive power varies greatly depending on the political context in which it emerges, and it can change over time in a given country. In democratic countries, the executive often exercises broad influence over national politics, though limitations are often applied to the executive.

[ 1 ] In political systems based on the separation of powers , government authority is distributed between several branches to prevent power from being concentrated in the hands of a single person or group. To achieve this, each branch is subject to checks by the other branches; in general, the role of the legislature is to pass laws, which are then enforced by the executive, and interpreted by the judiciary . The executive can also be the source of certain types of law or law-derived rules, such as a decree or executive order .

In those that use fusion of powers , typically parliamentary systems , such as the United Kingdom , the executive forms the government, and its members generally belong to the political party that controls the legislature. Since the executive requires the support and approval of the legislature, the two bodies are "fused" together, rather than being independent. The principle of parliamentary sovereignty means powers possessed by the executive are solely dependent on those granted by the legislature, which can also subject its actions to judicial review. However, the executive often has wide-ranging powers stemming from the control of the government bureaucracy , especially in the areas of overall economic or foreign policy .

Ministers [ edit ] Vanhanen II Cabinet in a session of Finnish Parliament in 2007 In parliamentary systems, the executive is responsible to the elected legislature, which must maintain the confidence of the legislature or one part of it, if bicameral. In certain circumstances (varying by state), the legislature can express its lack of confidence in the executive, which causes either a change in the governing party or group of parties or a general election. Parliamentary systems have a head of government (who leads the executive, often called ministers ) normally distinct from the head of state (who continues through governmental and electoral changes). In the Westminster type of parliamentary system , the principle of separation of powers is not as entrenched as in some others. Members of the executive ( ministers ), are also members of the legislature, and hence play an important part in both the writing and enforcing of law. In presidential systems , the directly elected head of government appoints the ministers. The ministers can be directly elected by the voters.

[ 2 ] In this context, the executive consists of a leader or leader of an office or multiple offices.  Specifically, the top leadership roles of the executive branch may include: head of state – often the monarch , the president or the supreme leader, the chief representative and living symbol of national unity.

head of government – often the prime minister , overseeing the administration of all affairs of state.

defence minister – overseeing the armed forces , determining military policy, and managing external safety.

interior minister – overseeing the police forces , enforcing the law, and managing internal control.

foreign minister – overseeing the diplomatic service , determining foreign policy and managing foreign relations .

finance minister – overseeing the treasury, determining fiscal policy and managing national budget .

justice minister – overseeing criminal prosecutions, corrections, enforcement of court orders.

Presidents and ministers [ edit ] In a presidential system , the leader of the executive is both the head of state and government.

[ 3 ] In some cases, such as South Korea , there is a Prime Minister who assists the President, but who is not the head of government but is the second in the chain.

In a parliamentary system , a cabinet minister responsible to the legislature is the head of government, while the head of state is usually a largely ceremonial monarch or president.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Constitution Diarchy Legal reform Rule according to higher law References [ edit ] ^ Martinez, Jenny S. (2006).

"Inherent Executive Power: A Comparative Perspective" .

The Yale Law Journal .

115 (9): 2480– 2511.

doi : 10.2307/20455703 .

ISSN 0044-0094 .

JSTOR 20455703 .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-30 . Retrieved 2022-12-30 .

^ Buchs, Aurélia; Soguel, Nils (2022-04-01).

"Fiscal performance and the re-election of finance ministers–evidence from the Swiss cantons" .

Public Choice .

191 (1): 31– 49.

doi : 10.1007/s11127-021-00949-z .

ISSN 1573-7101 .

S2CID 246371550 .

^ "The Executive Branch" .

The White House .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ "Executive Branch of Government in Canada" .

Parliament of Canada . Archived from the original on 2 May 2017 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

v t e Civil service Concepts Bureaucracy Bureaucrat Drift Inertia Civil service commission Diplomat Entrance examination Government agency Merit system / Spoils system Parkinson's law Public administration Theory Public policy Public sector Public service Regulatory agency Technocracy By country/territory Australia Bangladesh Brazil Canada China Hong Kong France Germany Greece India Ireland Italy Japan Malaysia New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Russia Singapore Sri Lanka United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States European Union Categories National civil service commissions Government occupations Civil service by country See also: Civil service reform in developing countries v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Separation of powers Typical branches Executive Legislature Judiciary Additional branches Fourth Estate Civil service commission Auditory Electoral Prosecutory By country Australia Hong Kong Singapore United Kingdom United States See also Dual mandate Fusion of powers Judicial independence Judicial review Parliamentary sovereignty Separation of duties Unified power Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Korea Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Executive_(government)&oldid=1300561429 " Categories : Constitutional law Separation of powers Public law Executive branches of government Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from November 2019 All articles needing rewrite Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 02:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Executive (government) 97 languages Add topic

