Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Position within the political spectrum 3 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 3.1 Völkisch nationalism 3.2 Racial theories and antisemitism 3.2.1 Use of the American racist model 3.3 Response to World War I and Italian Fascism 4 Ideology and programme Toggle Ideology and programme subsection 4.1 Nationalism and racialism 4.1.1 Irredentism and expansionism 4.1.2 Racial theories 4.2 Social class 4.3 Sex and gender 4.3.1 Opposition to homosexuality 4.4 Religion 4.5 Economics 4.5.1 Anti-communism 4.5.2 Views of capitalism 4.6 Totalitarianism 5 Classification: Reactionary or Revolutionary Toggle Classification: Reactionary or Revolutionary subsection 5.1 Contemporary events and views 6 Post-war Nazism 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Notes 8.2 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Nazism 121 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kurdî Ladin Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Picard Piemontèis Polski Português Română Rumantsch Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German fascist ideology "National Socialism" and "Nazi" redirect here. For the party for whom the ideology is named, see Nazi Party . For other uses, see National Socialism (disambiguation) and Nazi (disambiguation) .

For Nazism after WWII, see Neo-Nazism .

"Hitlerism" redirects here. For the political positions held by Hitler personally, see Political views of Adolf Hitler .

This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably .  When this tag was added, its readable prose size was 17,000 words.

Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page .

( October 2024 ) Part of a series on Nazism Organizations Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Literature The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899) The Protocols of the Elders of Zion (1903) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " 25-point Program " (1920) The International Jew (1920s) Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes (1922) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Hitlers Zweites Buch (1928) Michael (1929) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) Gelöbnis treuester Gefolgschaft (1933) I Fight (1942) Religion Ariosophy Thule Society Aspects Catholic Church persecution Germany Poland Christmas Esotericism German Evangelical Church Deutsche Christen German Faith Movement Germanic paganism Heathenry Gottgläubig Kirchenkampf Occultism Positive Christianity Religion under Nazism Hitler's views Symbolism Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Germany portal Politics portal v t e Nazism ( / ˈ n ɑː t s i ɪ z əm , ˈ n æ t -/ ⓘ NA(H)T -see-iz-əm ), formally named National Socialism ( NS ; German : Nationalsozialismus , German: [natsi̯oˈnaːlzotsi̯aˌlɪsmʊs] ⓘ ), is the far-right totalitarian ideology and practices associated with Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party (NSDAP) in Germany.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] During Hitler's rise to power , it was frequently called Hitler Fascism and Hitlerism . The term " neo-Nazism " is applied to other far-right groups with similar ideology, which formed after World War II.

Nazism is a form of fascism , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] with disdain for liberal democracy and the parliamentary system . Its beliefs include support for dictatorship , [ 3 ] fervent antisemitism , anti-communism , anti-Slavism , [ 8 ] anti-Romani sentiment , scientific racism , white supremacy , Nordicism , social Darwinism , homophobia , ableism , and eugenics . The ultranationalism of the Nazis originated in pan-Germanism and the ethno-nationalist Völkisch movement, which had been prominent within German ultranationalism since the late 19th century. Nazism was influenced by the Freikorps paramilitary groups that emerged after Germany's defeat in World War I , from which came the party's "cult of violence".

[ 9 ] It subscribed to pseudo-scientific theories of a racial hierarchy , [ 10 ] identifying ethnic Germans as part of what the Nazis regarded as a Nordic Aryan master race .

[ 11 ] Nazism sought to overcome social divisions and create a homogeneous German society based on racial purity . The Nazis aimed to unite all Germans living in historically German territory, gain lands for expansion under the doctrine of Lebensraum , and exclude those deemed either Community Aliens or "inferior" races ( Untermenschen ).

The term "National Socialism" arose from attempts to create a nationalist redefinition of socialism , as an alternative to Marxist international socialism and free-market capitalism . Nazism rejected Marxist concepts of class conflict and universal equality , opposed cosmopolitan internationalism , and sought to convince the social classes in German society to subordinate their interests to the " common good ". The Nazi Party's precursor, the pan-German nationalist and antisemitic German Workers' Party , was founded in 1919. In the 1920s, the party was renamed the National Socialist German Workers' Party to appeal to left-wing workers, [ 12 ] a renaming that Hitler initially opposed.

[ 13 ] The National Socialist Program was adopted in 1920 and called for a united Greater Germany that would deny citizenship to Jews , while supporting land reform and the nationalisation of some industries. In Mein Kampf ("My Struggle"), Hitler outlined the antisemitism and anti-communism at the heart of his philosophy, and his disdain for representative democracy , over which he proposed the Führerprinzip ( leader principle ).

[ 14 ] Hitler's objectives involved eastward expansion of German territories, colonization of Eastern Europe, and promotion of an alliance with Britain and Italy , against the Soviet Union .

The Nazi Party won the greatest share of the vote in both Reichstag elections of 1932, making it the largest party in the legislature, albeit short of a majority. Because other parties were unable or unwilling to form a coalition government, Hitler was appointed Chancellor in January 1933 by President Paul von Hindenburg , with the support of conservative nationalists who believed they could control Hitler. With the use of emergency presidential decrees and a change in the Weimar Constitution which allowed the Cabinet to rule by direct decree, the Nazis established a one-party state and began the Gleichschaltung (process of Nazification). The Sturmabteilung (SA) and the Schutzstaffel (SS) functioned as the paramilitary organisations of the party. Hitler purged the party's more radical factions in the 1934 Night of the Long Knives . After Hindenburg's death in August 1934, Hitler became head of both state and government, as Führer und Reichskanzler . Hitler was now the dictator of Nazi Germany , under which Jews, political opponents and other "undesirable" elements were marginalised, imprisoned or murdered . During World War II, millions – including two-thirds of the Jewish population of Europe – were exterminated in a genocide known as the Holocaust . Following Germany's defeat and discovery of the full extent of the Holocaust, Nazi ideology became universally disgraced. It is widely regarded as evil , with only a few fringe racist groups, usually referred to as neo-Nazis, describing themselves as followers of National Socialism. Use of Nazi symbols is outlawed in many European countries, including Germany and Austria.

Etymology Nazi Party badge emblem The full name of the Nazi Party was Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei ( German for 'National Socialist German Workers' Party') and they officially used the acronym NSDAP. The renaming of the German Workers' Party (DAP) to the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP) was partially driven by a desire to draw upon both left-wing and right-wing ideals, with "Socialist" and "Workers'" appealing to the left, and "National" and "German" appealing to the right.

[ 15 ] The term "nazi" had been in use, before the rise of the NSDAP, as a colloquial and derogatory word for a backwards farmer or peasant . It characterised an awkward and clumsy person, a yokel . In this sense, the word Nazi was a hypocorism of the German male name Igna(t)z (itself a variation of the name Ignatius )—Igna(t)z being a common name at the time in Bavaria , the area from which the NSDAP emerged.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In the 1920s, political opponents of the NSDAP in the German labour movement seized on this. Using the earlier abbreviated term Sozi for Sozialist ( German for 'Socialist') as an example, [ 17 ] they shortened the NSDAP's name, Nationalsozialistische , to the dismissive "Nazi", in order to associate them with the derogatory use of this term.

[ 18 ] [ 17 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] The first use of the term "Nazi" by the National Socialists themselves occurred in 1926 in a publication by Joseph Goebbels called Der Nazi-Sozi ["The Nazi-Sozi"]. In Goebbels' pamphlet, the word "Nazi" only appears when linked with the word "Sozi" as an abbreviation of "National Socialism".

[ 23 ] After the NSDAP's rise to power in the 1930s, the use of the term "Nazi" by itself or in terms such as " Nazi Germany ", " Nazi regime ", and so on was popularised by German exiles outside the country, but not in Germany. From them, the term spread into other languages and it was eventually brought back into Germany after World War II.

[ 19 ] The NSDAP briefly adopted the designation "Nazi" in an attempt to reappropriate the term: an example of this is the series of articles published by Leopold von Mildenstein on the Völkischer Beobachter under the title Ein Nazi fährt nach Palästina in 1934; [ 24 ] but it soon gave up this effort and generally avoided using the term while it was in power.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] In each case, the authors typically referred to themselves as "National Socialists" and their movement as "National Socialism", but never as "Nazis". A compendium of Hitler's conversations from 1941 through 1944 entitled Hitler's Table Talk does not contain the word "Nazi" either.

[ 25 ] In speeches by Hermann Göring , he never uses the term "Nazi".

[ 26 ] Hitler Youth leader Melita Maschmann wrote a book about her experience entitled Account Rendered .

[ 27 ] She did not refer to herself as a "Nazi", even though she was writing well after World War II. In 1933, 581 members of the National Socialist Party answered interview questions put to them by Professor Theodore Abel from Columbia University . They similarly did not refer to themselves as "Nazis".

[ 28 ] Position within the political spectrum Left to right: Adolf Hitler , Hermann Göring , Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels , and Rudolf Hess Nazis alongside members of the far-right reactionary and monarchist German National People's Party (DNVP) during the brief NSDAP–DNVP alliance in the Harzburg Front from 1931 to 1932 The majority of scholars identify Nazism in both theory and practice as a form of far-right politics .

[ 1 ] Far-right themes in Nazism include the argument that superior people have a right to dominate other people and purge society of supposed inferior elements.

[ 29 ] Adolf Hitler and other proponents denied that Nazism was either left-wing or right-wing: instead, they officially portrayed Nazism as a syncretic movement.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In Mein Kampf , Hitler directly attacked both left-wing and right-wing politics in Germany, saying: Today our left-wing politicians in particular are constantly insisting that their craven-hearted and obsequious foreign policy necessarily results from the disarmament of Germany, whereas the truth is that this is the policy of traitors ... But the politicians of the Right deserve exactly the same reproach. It was through their miserable cowardice that those ruffians of Jews who came into power in 1918 were able to rob the nation of its arms.

[ 32 ] In a speech given in Munich on 12 April 1922, Hitler stated: There are only two possibilities in Germany; do not imagine that the people will forever go with the middle party, the party of compromises; one day it will turn to those who have most consistently foretold the coming ruin and have sought to dissociate themselves from it. And that party is either the Left: and then God help us! for it will lead us to complete destruction—to Bolshevism, or else it is a party of the Right which at the last, when the people is in utter despair, when it has lost all its spirit and has no longer any faith in anything, is determined for its part ruthlessly to seize the reins of power—that is the beginning of resistance of which I spoke a few minutes ago.

[ 33 ] Hitler at times redefined socialism. When George Sylvester Viereck interviewed Hitler in October 1923 for the American Monthly and asked him why he referred to his party as 'socialists' he replied: Socialism is the science of dealing with the common weal. Communism is not Socialism. Marxism is not Socialism. The Marxians have stolen the term and confused its meaning. I shall take Socialism away from the Socialists.
Socialism is an ancient Aryan, Germanic institution. Our German ancestors held certain lands in common. They cultivated the idea of the common weal. Marxism has no right to disguise itself as socialism. Socialism, unlike Marxism, does not repudiate private property. Unlike Marxism, it involves no negation of personality, and unlike Marxism, it is patriotic.

[ 34 ] In 1929, Hitler gave a speech to a group of Nazi leaders and simplified 'socialism' to mean, "Socialism! That is an unfortunate word altogether... What does socialism really mean? If people have something to eat and their pleasures, then they have their socialism." [ 35 ] When asked in an interview on 27 January 1934 whether he supported the "bourgeois right-wing", Hitler claimed that Nazism was not exclusively for any class and he indicated that it favoured neither the left nor the right, but preserved "pure" elements from both "camps" by stating: "From the camp of bourgeois tradition, it takes national resolve, and from the materialism of the Marxist dogma, living, creative Socialism." [ 36 ] Historians regard the equation of Nazism as "Hitlerism" as too simplistic since the term was used prior to the rise of Hitler and the Nazis. In addition, the different ideologies incorporated into Nazism were already well established in certain parts of German society long before World War I .

[ 37 ] The Nazis were strongly influenced by the post–World War I far-right in Germany, which held common beliefs such as anti-Marxism, anti-liberalism and antisemitism, along with nationalism , contempt for the Treaty of Versailles and condemnation of the Weimar Republic for signing the armistice in November 1918 which later led it to sign the Treaty of Versailles.

[ 38 ] A major inspiration for the Nazis were the far-right nationalist Freikorps , paramilitary organisations that engaged in political violence after World War I.

[ 38 ] Initially, the post–World War I German far-right was dominated by monarchists , but the younger generation, which was associated with völkisch nationalism, was more radical and it did not express any emphasis on the restoration of the German monarchy.

[ 39 ] This younger generation desired to dismantle the Weimar Republic and create a new radical and strong state based upon a martial ruling ethic that could revive the "Spirit of 1914" which was associated with German national unity ( Volksgemeinschaft ).

[ 39 ] The Nazis, the far-right monarchists, the reactionary German National People's Party (DNVP) and others, such as monarchist officers in the German Army and several prominent industrialists, formed an alliance in opposition to the Weimar Republic on 11 October 1931 in Bad Harzburg , officially known as the "National Front", but commonly referred to as the Harzburg Front .

[ 40 ] The Nazis stated that the alliance was purely tactical and they continued to have differences with the DNVP. After the elections of July 1932, the alliance broke down when the DNVP lost many of its seats in the Reichstag . The Nazis denounced them as "an insignificant heap of reactionaries".

[ 41 ] The DNVP responded by denouncing the Nazis for their "socialism", their street violence and the "economic experiments" that would take place if the Nazis ever rose to power.

[ 42 ] However, amidst an inconclusive political situation in which conservative politicians Franz von Papen and Kurt von Schleicher were unable to form stable governments without the Nazis, Papen proposed to President Hindenburg to appoint Hitler as Chancellor at the head of a government formed primarily of conservatives, with only three Nazi ministers.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Hindenburg did so, and contrary to the expectations of Papen and the DNVP, Hitler was soon able to establish a Nazi one-party dictatorship.

[ 45 ] Kaiser Wilhelm II , who was pressured to abdicate the throne and flee into exile amidst an attempted communist revolution in Germany, initially supported the Nazi Party. His four sons, including Prince Eitel Friedrich and Prince Oskar , became members of the Nazi Party in hopes that in exchange for their support, the Nazis would permit the restoration of the monarchy.

[ 46 ] Hitler dismissed the possibility of a restored monarchy, calling it "idiotic." [ 47 ] Wilhelm grew to distrust Hitler and was appalled at the Kristallnacht of 9–10 November 1938, stating, "For the first time, I am ashamed to be a German." [ 48 ] The former German emperor also denounced the Nazis as a "bunch of shirted gangsters" and "a mob ... led by a thousand liars or fanatics." [ 49 ] There were factions within the Nazi Party, both conservative and radical.

[ 50 ] The conservative Nazi Hermann Göring urged Hitler to conciliate with capitalists and reactionaries .

[ 50 ] Other prominent conservative Nazis included Heinrich Himmler and Reinhard Heydrich .

[ 51 ] Meanwhile, the radical Nazi Joseph Goebbels opposed capitalism, viewing it as having Jews at its core and he stressed the need for the party to emphasise both a proletarian and a national character. Those views were shared by Otto Strasser , who later left the Nazi Party and formed the Black Front in the belief that Hitler had allegedly betrayed the party's socialist goals by endorsing capitalism.

[ 50 ] When the Nazi Party emerged from obscurity to become a major political force after 1929, the conservative faction rapidly gained more influence, as wealthy donors took an interest in the Nazis as a potential bulwark against communism.

[ 52 ] The Nazi Party had previously been financed almost entirely from membership dues, but after 1929 its leadership began actively seeking donations from German industrialists, and Hitler began holding dozens of fundraising meetings with business leaders.

[ 53 ] In the midst of the Great Depression, facing the possibility of economic ruin on the one hand and a Communist or Social Democrat government on the other hand, German business increasingly turned to Nazism as offering a way out of the situation, by promising a state-driven economy that would support, rather than attack, existing business interests.

[ 54 ] By January 1933, the Nazi Party had secured the support of important sectors of German industry, mainly among the steel and coal producers, the insurance business, and the chemical industry.

[ 55 ] Large segments of the Nazi Party, particularly among the members of the Sturmabteilung (SA), were committed to the party's official socialist, revolutionary and anti-capitalist positions and expected both a social and an economic revolution when the party gained power in 1933.

[ 56 ] In the period immediately before the Nazi seizure of power, there were even Social Democrats and Communists who switched sides and became known as " Beefsteak Nazis ": brown on the outside and red inside.

[ 57 ] The leader of the SA, Ernst Röhm , pushed for a "second revolution" (the "first revolution" being the Nazis' seizure of power) that would enact socialist policies. Furthermore, Röhm desired that the SA absorb the much smaller German Army into its ranks under his leadership.

[ 56 ] Once the Nazis achieved power, Röhm's SA was directed by Hitler to violently suppress the parties of the left, but they also began attacks against individuals deemed to be associated with conservative reaction.

[ 58 ] Hitler saw Röhm's independent actions as violating and possibly threatening his leadership, as well as jeopardising the regime by alienating the conservative President Paul von Hindenburg and the conservative-oriented German Army.

[ 59 ] This resulted in Hitler purging Röhm and other radical members of the SA in 1934, in what came to be known as the Night of the Long Knives .

[ 59 ] Before he joined the Bavarian Army to fight in World War I, Hitler had lived a bohemian lifestyle as a petty street watercolour artist in Vienna and Munich and he maintained elements of this lifestyle later on, going to bed very late and rising in the afternoon, even after he became Chancellor and then Führer.

[ 60 ] After the war, his battalion was absorbed by the Bavarian Soviet Republic from 1918 to 1919, where he was elected Deputy Battalion Representative. According to historian Thomas Weber , Hitler attended the funeral of communist Kurt Eisner (a German Jew), wearing a black mourning armband on one arm and a red communist armband on the other, [ 61 ] which he took as evidence that Hitler's political beliefs had not yet solidified.

[ 61 ] In Mein Kampf , Hitler never mentioned any service with the Bavarian Soviet Republic and he stated that he became an antisemite in 1913 during his years in Vienna. This statement has been disputed by the contention that he was not an antisemite at that time, [ 62 ] even though it is well established that he read many antisemitic tracts and journals during that time and admired Karl Lueger , the antisemitic mayor of Vienna.

[ 63 ] Hitler altered his political views in response to the signing of the Treaty of Versailles in June 1919 and it was then that he became an antisemitic, German nationalist.

[ 62 ] Hitler expressed opposition to capitalism, regarding it as having Jewish origins and accusing capitalism of holding nations ransom to the interests of a parasitic cosmopolitan rentier class.

[ 64 ] He also expressed opposition to communism and egalitarian forms of socialism, arguing that inequality and hierarchy are beneficial to the nation.

[ 65 ] He believed that communism was invented by the Jews to weaken nations by promoting class struggle.

[ 66 ] After his rise to power, Hitler took a pragmatic position on economics, accepting private property and allowing capitalist private enterprises to exist so long as they adhered to the goals of the Nazi state, but not tolerating enterprises that he saw as being opposed to the national interest.

[ 50 ] German business leaders disliked Nazi ideology but came to support Hitler, because they saw the Nazis as a useful ally to promote their interests.

[ 67 ] Business groups made significant financial contributions to the Nazi Party both before and after the Nazi seizure of power, in the hope that a Nazi dictatorship would eliminate the organised labour movement and the left-wing parties.

[ 68 ] Hitler actively sought to gain the support of business leaders by arguing that private enterprise is incompatible with democracy.

[ 69 ] Although he opposed communist ideology, Hitler publicly praised the Soviet Union 's leader Joseph Stalin and Stalinism on numerous occasions.

[ 70 ] Hitler commended Stalin for seeking to purify the Communist Party of the Soviet Union of Jewish influences, noting Stalin's purging of Jewish communists such as Leon Trotsky , Grigory Zinoviev , Lev Kamenev and Karl Radek .

[ 71 ] While Hitler had always intended to bring Germany into conflict with the Soviet Union so he could gain Lebensraum ("living space"), he supported a temporary strategic alliance between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union to form a common anti-liberal front so they could defeat liberal democracies, particularly France .

[ 70 ] Hitler admired the British Empire and its colonial system as living proof of Germanic superiority over "inferior" races and saw the United Kingdom as Germany's natural ally.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] He wrote in Mein Kampf : "For a long time to come there will be only two Powers in Europe with which it may be possible for Germany to conclude an alliance. These Powers are Great Britain and Italy." [ 73 ] Origins See also: Early timeline of Nazism The historical roots of Nazism are to be found in various elements of European political culture which were in circulation in the intellectual capitals of the continent, what Joachim Fest called the "scrapheap of ideas" prevalent at the time.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] In Hitler and the Collapse of the Weimar Republic , historian Martin Broszat points out that [A]lmost all essential elements of ... Nazi ideology were to be found in the radical positions of ideological protest movements [in pre-1914 Germany]. These were: a virulent anti-Semitism, a blood-and-soil ideology, the notion of a master race, [and] the idea of territorial acquisition and settlement in the East. These ideas were embedded in a popular nationalism which was vigorously anti-modernist, anti-humanist and pseudo-religious.

[ 75 ] Brought together, the result was an anti-intellectual and politically semi-illiterate ideology lacking cohesion, a product of mass culture which allowed its followers emotional attachment and offered a simplified and easily digestible world-view based on a political mythology for the masses.

[ 75 ] Völkisch nationalism Main article: Völkisch nationalism See also: German Question , German nationalism , Pan-Germanism , Unification of Germany , and Völkisch movement Johann Gottlieb Fichte , considered one of the fathers of German nationalism Adolf Hitler himself along with other members of the National Socialist German Workers' Party (German: Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei , NSDAP) in the Weimar Republic (1918–1933) were greatly influenced by several 19th- and early 20th-century thinkers and proponents of philosophical, onto-epistemic, and theoretical perspectives on ecological anthropology , scientific racism , holistic science , and organicism regarding the constitution of complex systems and theorization of organic-racial societies.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] In particular, one of the most significant ideological influences on the Nazis was the 19th-century German nationalist philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte , whose works had served as an inspiration to Hitler and other Nazi Party members, and whose ideas were implemented among the philosophical and ideological foundations of Nazi-oriented Völkisch nationalism .

[ 77 ] Fichte's works served as an inspiration to Hitler and other Nazi Party members, including Dietrich Eckart and Arnold Fanck .

[ 77 ] [ 80 ] In Speeches to the German Nation (1808), written amid the First French Empire 's occupation of Berlin during the Napoleonic Wars , Fichte called for a German national revolution against the French Imperial Army occupiers, making passionate public speeches, arming his students for battle against the French and stressing the need for action by the German nation so it could free itself.

[ 81 ] Fichte's German nationalism was populist and opposed to traditional elites, spoke of the need for a "People's War" ( Volkskrieg ) and put forth concepts similar to those which the Nazis adopted.

[ 81 ] Fichte promoted German exceptionalism and stressed the need for the German nation to purify itself (including purging the German language of French words, a policy that the Nazis undertook upon their rise to power).

[ 81 ] Another important figure in pre-Nazi völkisch thinking was Wilhelm Heinrich Riehl , whose work— Land und Leute ( Land and People , written between 1857 and 1863)—collectively tied the organic German Volk to its native landscape and nature, a pairing which stood in stark opposition to the mechanical and materialistic civilisation which was then developing as a result of industrialisation .

[ 82 ] Geographers Friedrich Ratzel and Karl Haushofer borrowed from Riehl's work as did Nazi ideologues Alfred Rosenberg and Paul Schultze-Naumburg , both of whom employed some of Riehl's philosophy in arguing that "each nation-state was an organism that required a particular living space in order to survive".

[ 83 ] Riehl's influence is overtly discernible in the Blut und Boden ( Blood and Soil ) philosophy introduced by Oswald Spengler , which the Nazi agriculturalist Walther Darré and other prominent Nazis adopted.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Völkisch nationalism denounced soulless materialism , individualism and secularised urban industrial society, while advocating a "superior" society based on ethnic German "folk" culture and German "blood".

[ 86 ] It denounced foreigners and foreign ideas and declared that Jews, Freemasons and others were "traitors to the nation" and unworthy of inclusion.

[ 87 ] Völkisch nationalism saw the world in terms of natural law and romanticism and it viewed societies as organic, extolling the virtues of rural life, condemning the neglect of tradition and the decay of morals, denounced the destruction of the natural environment and condemned "cosmopolitan" cultures such as Jews and Romani.

[ 88 ] The first party that attempted to combine nationalism and socialism was the (Austria-Hungary) German Workers' Party , which predominantly aimed to solve the conflict between the Austrian Germans and the Czechs in the multi-ethnic Austrian Empire , then part of Austria-Hungary .

[ 89 ] In 1896 the German politician Friedrich Naumann formed the National-Social Association which aimed to combine German nationalism and a non-Marxist form of socialism together; the attempt turned out to be futile and the idea of linking nationalism with socialism quickly became equated with antisemites, extreme German nationalists and the völkisch movement in general.

[ 37 ] Georg Ritter von Schönerer , a major exponent of Pan-Germanism in Austria During the era of the German Empire , völkisch nationalism was overshadowed by both Prussian patriotism and the federalist tradition of its various component states.

[ 90 ] The events of World War I, including the end of the Prussian monarchy in Germany, resulted in a surge of revolutionary völkisch nationalism.

[ 91 ] The Nazis supported such revolutionary völkisch nationalist policies [ 90 ] and they claimed that their ideology was influenced by the leadership and policies of German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck , who was instrumental in founding the German Empire.

[ 92 ] The Nazis declared that they were dedicated to continuing the process of creating a unified German nation state that Bismarck had begun and desired to achieve.

[ 93 ] While Hitler was supportive of Bismarck's creation of the German Empire, he was critical of Bismarck's moderate domestic policies.

[ 94 ] On the issue of Bismarck's support of a Kleindeutschland ("Lesser Germany", excluding Austria) versus the Pan-German Großdeutschland ("Greater Germany") which the Nazis advocated, Hitler stated that Bismarck's attainment of Kleindeutschland was the "highest achievement" Bismarck could have achieved "within the limits possible at that time".

[ 95 ] In Mein Kampf , Hitler presented himself as a "second Bismarck".

[ 96 ] During his youth in Austria, Hitler was politically influenced by Austrian Pan-Germanist proponent Georg Ritter von Schönerer , who advocated radical German nationalism , antisemitism, anti-Catholicism , anti-Slavic sentiment and anti-Habsburg views.

[ 97 ] From von Schönerer and his followers, Hitler adopted for the Nazi movement the Heil greeting, the Führer title and the model of absolute party leadership.

[ 97 ] Hitler was also impressed by the populist antisemitism and the anti-liberal bourgeois agitation of Karl Lueger , who as the mayor of Vienna during Hitler's time in the city used a rabble-rousing style of oratory that appealed to the wider masses.

[ 98 ] Unlike von Schönerer, Lueger was not a German nationalist and instead was a pro-Catholic Habsburg supporter and only used German nationalist notions occasionally for his own agenda.

[ 98 ] Although Hitler praised both Lueger and Schönerer, he criticised the former for not applying a racial doctrine against the Jews and Slavs.

[ 99 ] Racial theories and antisemitism Main article: Nazi racial theories Part of a series on Antisemitism Part of Jewish history and discrimination History Timeline Reference Definitions IHRA definition Jerusalem Declaration Three Ds By country Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Canada China Chile Costa Rica Europe France Dreyfus affair 21st-century Germany Greece Hungary Italy Japan New Zealand Norway Pakistan Palestine Romania Russia Russian Empire Soviet Union Stalinist Saudi Arabia textbook controversy South Africa Spain Matar judíos Sweden Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Conservative Party Labour Party United States History Venezuela Manifestations Academic Arab Economic Gaza War ('08–'09) Gaza war ('23–'25) Holocaust denial Medieval Nazism Neo-Nazi Strasserism New Olympic Racial Religious Christian Islamic Nation of Islam Secondary COVID-19 Zionist Tropes Andinia Plan Blood libel Cohen Plan Cultural Bolshevism Cultural Marxism Deicide Franklin Prophecy Host desecration International Jewish conspiracy Jewish lobby Jewish war conspiracy theory Judensau Judeo-Bolshevism Żydokomuna Judeo-Masonism Kosher tax QAnon Rootless cosmopolitan Doctors' plot Slánský trial Self-hating Jew Stab-in-the-back myth White genocide ZOG conspiracy Persecution Rhineland massacres Black Death persecutions Boycotts Expulsions Jewish quarter Ghettos in Europe Mellah The Holocaust Jewish hat Jewish quota Judensau Martyrdom in Judaism Nuremberg Laws Pale of Settlement Pogroms Russian Empire Russian Civil War Refuseniks Segregation Spanish Inquisition synagogue attacks Yellow badge Internet /pol/ 8chan The Daily Stormer Disclose.tv Europa: The Last Battle Groypers Jew Watch Metapedia The Occidental Observer Social media Red Ice Renegade StoneToss Stormfront Triple parentheses TruNews The Unz Review Veterans Today Opposition Anti-Defamation League Campaign Against Antisemitism Community Security Trust Simon Wiesenthal Center Southern Poverty Law Center Stephen Roth Institute Swedish Committee Against Antisemitism U.S. National Strategy to Counter Antisemitism Category v t e Arthur de Gobineau , one of the key inventors of the theory of the " Aryan race " The concept of the Aryan race , which the Nazis promoted, stems from racial theories asserting that Europeans are the descendants of Indo-Iranian settlers, people of ancient India and ancient Persia .

[ 100 ] Proponents of this theory based their assertion on the fact that words in European languages and words in Indo-Iranian languages have similar pronunciations and meanings.

[ 100 ] Johann Gottfried Herder argued that the Germanic peoples held close racial connections to the ancient Indians and the ancient Persians, who he claimed were advanced peoples that possessed a great capacity for wisdom, nobility, restraint and science.

[ 100 ] Contemporaries of Herder used the concept of the Aryan race to draw a distinction between what they deemed to be "high and noble" Aryan culture versus that of "parasitic" Semitic culture.

[ 100 ] Notions of white supremacy and Aryan racial superiority were combined in the 19th century, with white supremacists maintaining the belief that certain groups of white people were members of an Aryan "master race" that is superior to other races and particularly superior to the Semitic race, which they associated with "cultural sterility".

[ 100 ] Arthur de Gobineau , a French racial theorist and aristocrat, blamed the fall of the ancien régime in France on racial degeneracy caused by racial intermixing , which he argued had destroyed the purity of the Aryan race, a term which he only reserved for Germanic people.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Gobineau's theories, which attracted a strong following in Germany, [ 101 ] emphasised the existence of an irreconcilable polarity between Aryan ( Germanic ) and Jewish cultures .

[ 100 ] Houston Stewart Chamberlain , whose book The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century would prove to be a seminal work in the history of German nationalism Aryan mysticism claimed that Christianity originated in Aryan religious traditions, and that Jews had usurped the legend from Aryans.

[ 100 ] Houston Stewart Chamberlain , an English-born German proponent of racial theory, supported notions of Germanic supremacy and antisemitism in Germany.

[ 101 ] Chamberlain's work, The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899), praised Germanic peoples for their creativity and idealism while asserting that the Germanic spirit was threatened by a "Jewish" spirit of selfishness and materialism .

[ 101 ] Chamberlain used his thesis to promote monarchical conservatism while denouncing democracy , liberalism and socialism .

[ 101 ] The book became popular, especially in Germany.

[ 101 ] Chamberlain stressed a nation's need to maintain its racial purity in order to prevent its degeneration and argued that racial intermingling with Jews should never be permitted.

[ 101 ] In 1923, Chamberlain met Hitler, whom he admired as a leader of the rebirth of the free spirit.

[ 103 ] Madison Grant 's work The Passing of the Great Race (1916) advocated Nordicism and proposed that a eugenics program should be implemented in order to preserve the purity of the Nordic race. After reading the book, Hitler called it "my Bible".

[ 104 ] In Germany, the belief that Jews were economically exploiting Germans became prominent due to the ascendancy of many wealthy Jews into prominent positions upon the unification of Germany in 1871.

[ 105 ] From 1871 to the early 20th century, German Jews were overrepresented in Germany's upper and middle classes while they were underrepresented in Germany's lower classes, particularly in the fields of agricultural and industrial labour.

[ 106 ] German Jewish financiers and bankers played a key role in fostering Germany's economic growth from 1871 to 1913 and they benefited enormously from this boom. In 1908, amongst the twenty-nine wealthiest German families with aggregate fortunes of up to 55 million marks at the time, five were Jewish and the Rothschilds were the second wealthiest German family.

[ 107 ] The predominance of Jews in Germany's banking, commerce and industry sectors during this time period was very high, even though Jews were estimated to account for only 1% of the population of Germany.

[ 105 ] The overrepresentation of Jews in these areas fuelled resentment among non-Jewish Germans during periods of economic crisis.

[ 106 ] The 1873 stock market crash and the ensuing depression resulted in a spate of attacks on alleged Jewish economic dominance in Germany and antisemitism increased.

[ 106 ] During this time period, in the 1870s, German völkisch nationalism began to adopt antisemitic and racist themes and it was also adopted by a number of radical right political movements.

[ 108 ] Radical antisemitism was promoted by prominent advocates of völkisch nationalism, including Eugen Diederichs , Paul de Lagarde and Julius Langbehn .

[ 88 ] De Lagarde called the Jews a " bacillus , the carriers of decay ... who pollute every national culture ... and destroy all faiths with their materialistic liberalism" and he called for the extermination of the Jews.

[ 109 ] Langbehn called for a war of annihilation against the Jews, and his genocidal policies were later published by the Nazis and given to soldiers on the front during World War II .

[ 109 ] One antisemitic ideologue of the period, Friedrich Lange , even used the term "National Socialism" to describe his own anti-capitalist take on the völkisch nationalist template.

[ 110 ] Johann Gottlieb Fichte accused Jews in Germany of having been and inevitably of continuing to be a "state within a state" that threatened German national unity.

[ 81 ] Fichte promoted two options in order to address this, his first one being the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine so the Jews could be impelled to leave Europe.

[ 111 ] His second option was violence against Jews and he said that the goal of the violence would be "to cut off all their heads in one night, and set new ones on their shoulders, which should not contain a single Jewish idea".

[ 111 ] The Protocols of the Elders of Zion (1912) is an antisemitic forgery created by the secret service of the Russian Empire , the Okhrana . Many antisemites believed it was real and thus it became widely popular after World War I.

[ 112 ] The Protocols claimed that there was a secret international Jewish conspiracy to take over the world.

[ 113 ] Hitler had been introduced to The Protocols by Alfred Rosenberg and from 1920 onwards he focused his attacks by claiming that Judaism and Marxism were directly connected, that Jews and Bolsheviks were one and the same and that Marxism was a Jewish ideology-this became known as " Jewish Bolshevism ".

[ 114 ] Hitler believed that The Protocols were authentic.

[ 115 ] During his life in Vienna between 1907 and 1913, Hitler became fervently anti-Slavic .

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] Prior to the Nazi ascension to power, Hitler often blamed moral degradation on Rassenschande ("racial defilement"), a way to assure his followers of his continuing antisemitism, which had been toned down for popular consumption.

[ 120 ] Prior to the induction of the Nuremberg Race Laws in 1935 by the Nazis, many German nationalists such as Roland Freisler strongly supported laws to ban Rassenschande between Aryans and Jews as racial treason.

[ 120 ] Even before the laws were officially passed, the Nazis banned sexual relations and marriages between party members and Jews.

[ 121 ] Party members found guilty of Rassenschande were severely punished; some party members were even sentenced to death.

[ 122 ] The Nazis claimed that Bismarck was unable to complete German national unification because Jews had infiltrated the German parliament and they claimed that their abolition of parliament had ended this obstacle to unification.

[ 92 ] Using the stab-in-the-back myth , the Nazis accused Jews—and other populations who it considered non-German—of possessing extra-national loyalties, thereby exacerbating German antisemitism about the Judenfrage (the Jewish Question), the far-right political canard which was popular when the ethnic völkisch movement and its politics of Romantic nationalism for establishing a Großdeutschland was strong.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Nazism's racial policy positions may have developed from the views of important biologists of the 19th century, including French biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck , through Ernst Haeckel 's idealist version of Lamarckism and the father of genetics , German botanist Gregor Mendel .

[ 125 ] Haeckel's works were later condemned by the Nazis as inappropriate for "National-Socialist formation and education in the Third Reich". This may have been because of his " monist " atheistic , materialist philosophy, which the Nazis disliked, along with his friendliness to Jews, opposition to militarism and support altruism, with one Nazi official calling for them to be banned.

[ 126 ] Unlike Darwinian theory, Lamarckian theory officially ranked races in a hierarchy of evolution from apes while Darwinian theory did not grade races in a hierarchy of higher or lower evolution from apes, but simply stated that all humans as a whole had progressed in their evolution from apes.

[ 125 ] Many Lamarckians viewed "lower" races as having been exposed to debilitating conditions for too long for any significant "improvement" of their condition to take place in the near future.

[ 127 ] Haeckel used Lamarckian theory to describe the existence of interracial struggle and put races on a hierarchy of evolution, ranging from wholly human to subhuman .

[ 125 ] Mendelian inheritance , or Mendelism, was supported by the Nazis, as well as by mainstream eugenicists of the time. The Mendelian theory of inheritance declared that genetic traits and attributes were passed from one generation to another.

[ 128 ] Eugenicists used Mendelian inheritance theory to demonstrate the transfer of biological illness and impairments from parents to children, including mental disability, whereas others also used Mendelian theory to demonstrate the inheritance of social traits, with racialists claiming a racial nature behind certain general traits such as inventiveness or criminal behaviour.

[ 129 ] Use of the American racist model Hitler and other Nazi legal theorists were inspired by America's institutional racism and saw it as the model to follow. In particular, they saw it as a model for the expansion of territory and the elimination of indigenous inhabitants therefrom, for laws denying full citizenship for African Americans , which they wanted to implement also against Jews, and for racist immigration laws banning "inferior" races. In Mein Kampf , Hitler extolled America as the only contemporary example of a country with racist ("völkisch") citizenship statutes in the 1920s, and Nazi lawyers made use of the American models in crafting laws for Nazi Germany.

[ 130 ] U.S. citizenship laws and anti-miscegenation laws directly inspired the two principal Nuremberg Laws —the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law.

[ 130 ] Response to World War I and Italian Fascism During World War I, German sociologist Johann Plenge spoke of the rise of a "National Socialism" in Germany within what he termed the " ideas of 1914 " that were a declaration of war against the "ideas of 1789" (the French Revolution ).

[ 131 ] According to Plenge, the "ideas of 1789" which included the rights of man, democracy, individualism and liberalism were being rejected in favour of "the ideas of 1914" which included the "German values" of duty, discipline, law and order.

[ 131 ] Plenge believed that ethnic solidarity ( Volksgemeinschaft ) would replace class division and that "racial comrades" would unite to create a socialist society in the struggle of "proletarian" Germany against "capitalist" Britain.

[ 131 ] He believed that the "Spirit of 1914" manifested itself in the concept of the "People's League of National Socialism".

[ 132 ] This National Socialism was a form of state socialism that rejected the "idea of boundless freedom" and promoted an economy that would serve the whole of Germany under the leadership of the state.

[ 132 ] This National Socialism was opposed to capitalism due to the components that were against "the national interest" of Germany, but insisted that National Socialism would strive for greater efficiency in the economy.

[ 132 ] Plenge advocated an authoritarian, rational ruling elite to develop National Socialism through a hierarchical technocratic state, [ 133 ] and his ideas were part of the basis of Nazism.

[ 131 ] Oswald Spengler , a philosopher of history Oswald Spengler , a German cultural philosopher, was a major influence on Nazism, although after 1933 he became alienated from Nazism and was later condemned by the Nazis for criticising Adolf Hitler.

[ 134 ] Spengler's conception of national socialism and a number of his political views were shared by the Nazis and the Conservative Revolutionary movement .

[ 135 ] Spengler's views were also popular amongst Italian Fascists , including Benito Mussolini .

[ 136 ] Spengler's book The Decline of the West (1918), written during the final months of World War I, addressed the supposed decadence of modern European civilisation, which he claimed was caused by atomising and irreligious individualisation and cosmopolitanism .

[ 134 ] Spengler's major thesis was that a law of historical development of cultures existed involving a cycle of birth, maturity, ageing and death when it reaches its final form of civilisation.

[ 134 ] Upon reaching the point of civilisation, a culture will lose its creative capacity and succumb to decadence until the emergence of " barbarians " creates a new epoch.

[ 134 ] Spengler considered the Western world as having succumbed to decadence of intellect, money, cosmopolitan urban life, irreligious life, atomised individualisation and believed that it was at the end of its biological and "spiritual" fertility.

[ 134 ] He believed that the "young" German nation as an imperial power would inherit the legacy of Ancient Rome , lead a restoration of value in " blood " and instinct, while the ideals of rationalism would be revealed as absurd.

[ 134 ] Spengler's notions of "Prussian socialism" as described in his book Preussentum und Sozialismus ("Prussiandom and Socialism", 1919), influenced Nazism and the Conservative Revolutionary movement .

[ 135 ] Spengler wrote: "The meaning of socialism is that life is controlled not by the opposition between rich and poor, but by the rank that achievement and talent bestow. That is our freedom, freedom from the economic despotism of the individual".

[ 135 ] Spengler adopted the anti-English ideas addressed by Plenge and Sombart during World War I that condemned English liberalism and English parliamentarianism while advocating a national socialism that was free from Marxism and that would connect the individual to the state through corporatist organisation.

[ 134 ] Spengler claimed that socialistic Prussian characteristics existed across Germany, including creativity, discipline, concern for the greater good, productivity and self-sacrifice.

[ 137 ] He prescribed war as a necessity by saying: "War is the eternal form of higher human existence and states exist for war: they are the expression of the will to war".

[ 138 ] The Marinebrigade Ehrhardt during the Kapp Putsch in Berlin, 1920 [ 139 ] (The Marinebrigade Erhardt used the swastika as its symbol, as seen on their helmets and on the truck, which inspired the Nazi Party to adopt it as the movement's symbol.) Spengler's definition of socialism did not advocate a change to property relations.

[ 135 ] He denounced Marxism for seeking to train the proletariat to "expropriate the expropriator", the capitalist and then to let them live a life of leisure on this expropriation.

[ 140 ] He claimed that "Marxism is the capitalism of the working class" and not true socialism.

[ 140 ] According to Spengler, true socialism would be in the form of corporatism, stating that "local corporate bodies organised according to the importance of each occupation to the people as a whole; higher representation in stages up to a supreme council of the state; mandates revocable at any time; no organised parties, no professional politicians, no periodic elections".

[ 141 ] The book Das Dritte Reich (1923), translated as "The Third Reich", by Arthur Moeller van den Bruck Wilhelm Stapel , an antisemitic German intellectual, used Spengler's thesis on the cultural confrontation between Jews as whom Spengler described as a Magian people versus Europeans as a Faustian people.

[ 142 ] Stapel described Jews as a landless nomadic people in pursuit of an international culture whereby they can integrate into Western civilisation.

[ 142 ] As such, Stapel claims that Jews have been attracted to "international" versions of socialism, pacifism or capitalism because as a landless people the Jews have transgressed various national cultural boundaries.

[ 142 ] For all of Spengler's influence on the movement, he was opposed to its antisemitism. He wrote in his personal papers "[H]ow much envy of the capability of other people in view of one's lack of it lies hidden in anti-Semitism!" as well as "[W]hen one would rather destroy business and scholarship than see Jews in them, one is an ideologue, i.e., a danger for the nation. Idiotic." [ 143 ] Arthur Moeller van den Bruck was initially the dominant figure of the Conservative Revolutionaries influenced Nazism.

[ 144 ] He rejected reactionary conservatism while proposing a new state that he coined the "Third Reich", which would unite all classes under authoritarian rule.

[ 145 ] Van den Bruck advocated a combination of the nationalism of the right and the socialism of the left.

[ 146 ] Fascism was a major influence on Nazism. The seizure of power by Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini in the March on Rome in 1922 drew admiration by Hitler, who less than a month later had begun to model himself and the Nazi Party upon Mussolini and the Fascists.

[ 147 ] Hitler presented the Nazis as a form of German fascism.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] In November 1923, the Nazis attempted a "March on Berlin" modelled after the March on Rome, which resulted in the failed Beer Hall Putsch in Munich .

[ 150 ] Hitler spoke of Nazism being indebted to the success of Fascism's rise to power in Italy.

[ 151 ] In a private conversation in 1941, Hitler said that "the brown shirt would probably not have existed without the black shirt", the "brown shirt" referring to the Nazi militia and the "black shirt" referring to the Fascist militia .

[ 151 ] He also said in regards to the 1920s: "If Mussolini had been outdistanced by Marxism, I don't know whether we could have succeeded in holding out. At that period National Socialism was a very fragile growth".

[ 151 ] Other Nazis—especially those at the time associated with the party's more radical wing such as Gregor Strasser , Joseph Goebbels and Heinrich Himmler—rejected Italian Fascism , accusing it of being too conservative or capitalist.

[ 152 ] Alfred Rosenberg condemned Italian Fascism for being racially confused and having influences from philosemitism .

[ 153 ] Strasser criticised the policy of Führerprinzip as being created by Mussolini and considered its presence in Nazism as a foreign imported idea.

[ 154 ] Throughout the relationship between Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, a number of lower-ranking Nazis scornfully viewed fascism as a conservative movement that lacked a full revolutionary potential.

[ 154 ] Ideology and programme In his book The Hitler State ( Der Staat Hitlers ), historian Martin Broszat writes: ...National Socialism was not primarily an ideological and programmatic, but a charismatic movement , whose ideology was incorporated in the Führer, Hitler, and which would have lost all its power to integrate without him. ... [T]he abstract, utopian and vague National Socialistic ideology only achieved what reality and certainty it had through the medium of Hitler.

Thus, any explication of the ideology of Nazism must be descriptive, as it was not generated primarily from first principles, but was the result of numerous factors, including Hitler's strongly held personal views, some parts of the 25-point plan , the general goals of the völkische and nationalist movements, and the conflicts between Nazi Party functionaries who battled "to win [Hitler] over to their respective interpretations of [National Socialism]." Once the Party had been purged of divergent influences such as Strasserism , Hitler was accepted by the Party's leadership as the "supreme authority to rule on ideological matters".

[ 155 ] Nazi ideology was based on a bio-geo-political " Weltanschauung " (worldview), advocating territorial expansionism to cultivate what it viewed as a "purified and homogeneous Aryan population ." Nazi regime's policies were shaped by the integration of biopolitics and geopolitics within the Hitlerian worldview, amalgamating spatial theory, practice, and imagination with biopolitics. In Hitlerism, the concepts of space and race were not separate but existed in tension, forming a distinct bio-geo-political framework at the core of the Nazi project. This ideology viewed German territorial conquests and extermination of those ethnic groups it dehumanised as " untermensch " as part of a biopolitical process to establish an ideal German community.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] Nationalism and racialism Further information: Nazi racial theories and Racial policy of Nazi Germany Nazism emphasised German nationalism, including both irredentism and expansionism . Nazism held racial theories based upon a belief in the existence of an Aryan master race that was superior to all other races. The Nazis emphasised the existence of racial conflict between the Aryan race and others—particularly Jews, whom the Nazis viewed as a mixed race that had infiltrated multiple societies and was responsible for exploitation and repression of the Aryan race. The Nazis also categorised Slavs as Untermensch (sub-human).

[ 158 ] Wolfgang Bialas argues that the Nazis' sense of morality could be described as a form of procedural virtue ethics , as it demanded unconditional obedience to absolute virtues with the attitude of social engineering and replaced common sense intuitions with an ideological catalogue of virtues and commands. The ideal Nazi new man was to be race-conscious and an ideologically dedicated warrior who would commit actions for the sake of the German race while at the same time convinced he was doing the right thing and acting morally. The Nazis believed an individual could only develop their capabilities and individual characteristics within the framework of the individual's racial membership; the race one belonged to determined whether or not one was worthy of moral care. The Christian concept of self-denial was to be replaced with the idea of self-assertion towards those deemed inferior. Natural selection and the struggle for existence were declared by the Nazis to be the most divine laws; peoples and individuals deemed inferior were said to be incapable of surviving without those deemed superior, yet by doing so they imposed a burden on the superior. Natural selection was deemed to favour the strong over the weak and the Nazis deemed that protecting those declared inferior was preventing nature from taking its course; those incapable of asserting themselves were viewed as doomed to annihilation, with the right to life being granted only to those who could survive on their own.

[ 159 ] Irredentism and expansionism Further information: Lebensraum Beginning of Lebensraum , the Nazi German expulsion of Poles from central Poland , 1939 At the core of the Nazi ideology was the bio-geo-political project to acquire Lebensraum ("living space") through territorial conquests.

[ 160 ] The German Nazi Party supported German irredentist claims to Austria, Alsace-Lorraine , the region of Sudetenland , and the territory known since 1919 as the Polish Corridor . A major policy of the German Nazi Party was Lebensraum for the German nation based on claims that Germany after World War I was facing an overpopulation crisis and that expansion was needed to end the country's overpopulation within existing confined territory, and provide resources necessary to its people's well-being.

[ 161 ] Since the 1920s, the Nazi Party publicly promoted the expansion of Germany into territories held by the Soviet Union.

[ 162 ] In Mein Kampf , Hitler stated that Lebensraum would be acquired in Eastern Europe, especially Russia.

[ 163 ] In his early years as the Nazi leader, Hitler had claimed that he would be willing to accept friendly relations with Russia on the tactical condition that Russia agree to return to the borders established by the German–Russian peace agreement of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk signed by Grigori Sokolnikov of the Russian Soviet Republic in 1918 which gave large territories held by Russia to German control in exchange for peace.

[ 162 ] In 1921, Hitler had commended the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk as opening the possibility for restoration of relations between Germany and Russia by saying: The first trial of the Nazis in Europe , which took place in Kaunas in 1935. The accused claimed that the Klaipėda Region should be part of Germany, not Lithuania , and spread propaganda, prepared for an armed uprising.

[ 164 ] Through the peace with Russia the sustenance of Germany as well as the provision of work were to have been secured by the acquisition of land and soil, by access to raw materials, and by friendly relations between the two lands.

— Adolf Hitler [ 162 ] From 1921 to 1922, Hitler evoked rhetoric of both the achievement of Lebensraum involving the acceptance of a territorially reduced Russia as well as supporting Russian nationalists in overthrowing the Bolsheviks and establishing a new White Russian government.

[ 162 ] Hitler's attitudes changed by the end of 1922, in which he then supported an alliance of Germany with Britain to destroy Russia.

[ 162 ] Hitler later declared how far he intended to expand Germany into Russia: Asia, what a disquieting reservoir of men! The safety of Europe will not be assured until we have driven Asia back behind the Urals. No organized Russian state must be allowed to exist west of that line.

— Adolf Hitler [ 165 ] Hitler's doctrine of Lebensraum "For the future of the German nation the 1914 frontiers are of no significance. They did not serve to protect us in the past, nor do they offer any guarantee for our defence in the future. With these frontiers the German people cannot maintain themselves as a compact unit, nor can they be assured of their maintenance. ... Against all this we, National Socialists, must stick firmly to the aim that we have set for our foreign policy; namely, that the German people must be assured the territorial area which is necessary for it to exist on this earth. ... The right to territory may become a duty when a great nation seems destined to go under unless its territory be extended. And that is particularly true when the nation in question is not some little group of negro people but the Germanic mother of all the life which has given cultural shape to the modern world." — Adolf Hitler , — (" Mein Kampf ", Volume 2, Chapter 14: "Germany's policy in Eastern Europe") [ 166 ] Policy for Lebensraum planned mass expansion of Germany's borders to eastwards of the Ural Mountains .

[ 165 ] [ 167 ] Hitler planned for the "surplus" Russian population living west of the Urals to be deported to the east of the Urals.

[ 168 ] Historian Adam Tooze explains that Hitler believed that lebensraum was vital to securing American-style consumer affluence for the German people. In this light, Tooze argues that the view that the regime faced a " guns or butter " contrast is mistaken. While it is true that resources were diverted from civilian consumption to military production, Tooze explains that at a strategic level "guns were ultimately viewed as a means to obtaining more butter".

[ 169 ] While the Nazi pre-occupation with agrarian living and food production are often seen as a sign of their backwardness, Tooze explains this was in fact a major driving issue in European society for at least the last two centuries. The issue of how European societies should respond to the new global economy in food was one of the major issues facing Europe in the early 20th century. Agrarian life in Europe (except perhaps with the exception of Britain) was incredibly common—in the early 1930s, over 9 million Germans (almost a third of the work force) were still working in agriculture and many people not working in agriculture still had small allotments or otherwise grew their own food. Tooze estimates that just over half the German population in the 1930s was living in towns and villages with populations under 20,000 people. Many people in cities still had memories of rural-urban migration—Tooze thus explains that the Nazis obsessions with agrarianism were not an atavistic gloss on a modern industrial nation but a consequence of the fact that Nazism (as both an ideology and as a movement) was the product of a society still in economic transition.

[ 170 ] Topographical map of Europe: the Nazi Party declared support for Drang nach Osten (expansion of Germany east to the Ural Mountains), that is shown on the upper right side of the map as a brown diagonal line.

The Nazis obsession with food production was a consequence of the First World War. While Europe was able to avert famine with international imports, blockades brought the issue of food security back into European politics, the Allied blockade of Germany in and after World War I did not cause an outright famine but chronic malnutrition did kill an estimated 600,000 people in Germany and Austria. The economic crises of the interwar period meant that most Germans had memories of acute hunger. Thus Tooze concludes that the Nazis obsession with acquiring land was not a case of "turning back the clock" but more a refusal to accept that the result of the distribution of land, resources and population, which had resulted from the imperialist wars of the 18th and 19th centuries, should be accepted as final. While the victors of the First World War had either suitable agricultural land to population ratios or large empires (or both), allowing them to declare the issue of living space closed, the Nazis, knowing Germany lacked either of these, refused to accept that Germany's place in the world was to be a medium-sized workshop dependent upon imported food.

[ 171 ] According to Goebbels, the conquest of Lebensraum was intended as an initial step [ 172 ] towards the final goal of Nazi ideology, which was the establishment of complete German global hegemony.

[ 173 ] Rudolf Hess relayed to Walter Hewel Hitler's belief that world peace could only be acquired "when one power, the racially best one , has attained uncontested supremacy". When this control would be achieved, this power could then set up for itself a world police and assure itself "the necessary living space. [...] The lower races will have to restrict themselves accordingly".

[ 173 ] Racial theories In its racial categorisation , Nazism viewed what it called the Aryan race as the master race of the world—a race that was superior to all other races.

[ 174 ] It viewed Aryans as being in racial conflict with a mixed race people, the Jews, whom the Nazis identified as a dangerous enemy of the Aryans. It also viewed a number of other peoples as dangerous to the well-being of the Aryan race. In order to preserve the perceived racial purity of the Aryan race, a set of race laws was introduced in 1935 which came to be known as the Nuremberg Laws. At first these laws only prevented sexual relations and marriages between Germans and Jews, but they were later extended to the " Gypsies , Negroes , and their bastard offspring", who were described by the Nazis as people of "alien blood".

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] Such relations between Aryans (cf.

Aryan certificate ) and non-Aryans were now punishable under the race laws as Rassenschande or "race defilement".

[ 175 ] After the war began, the race defilement law was extended to include all foreigners (non-Germans).

[ 177 ] At the bottom of the racial scale of non-Aryans were Jews, Romanis, Slavs [ 178 ] and blacks.

[ 179 ] To maintain the "purity and strength" of the Aryan race, the Nazis eventually sought to exterminate Jews, Romani, Slavs and the physically and mentally disabled .

[ 178 ] [ 180 ] Other groups deemed " degenerate " and " asocial " who were not targeted for extermination, but were subjected to exclusionary treatment by the Nazi state, included homosexuals , blacks , Jehovah's Witnesses and political opponents.

[ 180 ] One of Hitler's ambitions at the start of the war was to exterminate, expel or enslave most or all Slavs from Central and Eastern Europe in order to acquire living space for German settlers.

[ 181 ] A "poster information" from the exhibition " Miracle of Life " in Berlin in 1935 A Nazi-era school textbook for German students entitled Heredity and Racial Biology for Students written by Jakob Graf described to students the Nazi conception of the Aryan race in a section titled "The Aryan: The Creative Force in Human History".

[ 174 ] Graf claimed that the original Aryans developed from Nordic peoples who invaded Ancient India and launched the initial development of Aryan culture there that later spread to ancient Persia and he claimed that the Aryan presence in Persia was what was responsible for its development into an empire.

[ 174 ] He claimed that ancient Greek culture was developed by Nordic peoples due to paintings of the time which showed Greeks who were tall, light-skinned, light-eyed, blond-haired people.

[ 174 ] He said that the Roman Empire was developed by the Italics who were related to the Celts who were also a Nordic people.

[ 174 ] He believed that the vanishing of the Nordic component of the populations in Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome led to their downfall.

[ 174 ] The Renaissance was claimed to have developed in the Western Roman Empire because of the Migration Period that brought new Nordic blood to the Empire's lands, such as the presence of Nordic blood in the Lombards (referred to as Longobards in the book); that remnants of the Visigoths were responsible for the creation of the Spanish Empire ; and that the heritage of the Franks , Goths and Germanic peoples in France was what was responsible for its rise as a major power.

[ 174 ] He claimed that the rise of the Russian Empire was due to its leadership by people of Norman descent.

[ 174 ] He described the rise of Anglo-Saxon societies in North America , South Africa and Australia as being the result of the Nordic heritage of Anglo-Saxons .

[ 174 ] He concluded these points by saying: "Everywhere Nordic creative power has built mighty empires with high-minded ideas, and to this very day Aryan languages and cultural values are spread over a large part of the world, though the creative Nordic blood has long since vanished in many places".

[ 174 ] A wagon piled high with corpses outside the crematorium in Buchenwald concentration camp In Nazi Germany, the idea of creating a master race resulted in efforts to "purify" the Deutsche Volk through eugenics and its culmination was the compulsory sterilisation or the involuntary euthanasia of physically or mentally disabled people. After World War II, the euthanasia programme was named Action T4 .

[ 182 ] The ideological justification for euthanasia was Hitler's view of Sparta (11th century – 195 BC) as the original völkisch state and he praised Sparta's dispassionate destruction of congenitally deformed infants in order to maintain racial purity.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Some non-Aryans enlisted in Nazi organisations like the Hitler Youth and the Wehrmacht , including Germans of African descent [ 185 ] and Jewish descent.

[ 186 ] The Nazis began to implement "racial hygiene" policies as soon as they came to power. The July 1933 " Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring " prescribed compulsory sterilisation for people with a range of conditions which were thought to be hereditary, such as schizophrenia , epilepsy , Huntington's chorea and " imbecility ". Sterilization was also mandated for chronic alcoholism and other forms of social deviance .

[ 187 ] An estimated 360,000 people were sterilised under this law between 1933 and 1939. Although some Nazis suggested that the programme should be extended to people with physical disabilities, such ideas had to be expressed carefully, given the fact that some Nazis had physical disabilities, one example being one of the most powerful figures of the regime, Joseph Goebbels, who had a deformed right leg.

[ 188 ] One of many Polish children murdered in Auschwitz by the Nazis. The Generalplan Ost envisaged the deportation, extermination, Germanization and enslavement of all or most Poles , Czechs , Ukrainians , Belarusians and Russians .

Nazi racial theorist Hans F. K. Günther argued that European peoples were divided into five races: Nordic , Mediterranean , Dinaric , Alpine and East Baltic .

[ 11 ] Günther applied a Nordicist conception in order to justify his belief that Nordics were the highest in the racial hierarchy.

[ 11 ] In his book Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes (1922) ("Racial Science of the German People"), Günther recognised Germans as being composed of all five races, but emphasised the strong Nordic heritage among them.

[ 189 ] Hitler read Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes , which influenced his racial policy.

[ 190 ] Gunther believed that Slavs belonged to an "Eastern race" and he warned against Germans mixing with them.

[ 191 ] The Nazis described Jews as being a racially mixed group of primarily Near Eastern and Oriental racial types.

[ 192 ] Because such racial groups were concentrated outside Europe, the Nazis claimed that Jews were "racially alien" to all European peoples and that they did not have deep racial roots in Europe.

[ 192 ] Günther emphasised Jews' Near Eastern racial heritage.

[ 193 ] Günther identified the mass conversion of the Khazars to Judaism in the 8th century as creating the two major branches of the Jewish people: those of primarily Near Eastern racial heritage became the Ashkenazi Jews (that he called Eastern Jews) while those of primarily Oriental racial heritage became the Sephardi Jews (that he called Southern Jews).

[ 194 ] Günther claimed that the Near Eastern type was composed of commercially spirited and artful traders, and that the type held strong psychological manipulation skills which aided them in trade.

[ 193 ] He claimed that the Near Eastern race had been "bred not so much for the conquest and exploitation of nature as it had been for the conquest and exploitation of people".

[ 193 ] Günther believed that European peoples had a racially motivated aversion to peoples of Near Eastern racial origin and their traits, and as evidence of this he showed multiple examples of depictions of satanic figures with Near Eastern physiognomies in European art.

[ 195 ] Cover of the racist booklet " Der Untermensch " published by SS in 1942. 4 million copies of the brochure were printed by Nazi Germany and distributed across occupied territories. The pamphlet depicted the Slavic and Jewish inhabitants of Eastern Europe as primitive people.

[ 196 ] Hitler's conception of the Aryan Herrenvolk ("Aryan master race") excluded the vast majority of Slavs from Central and Eastern Europe (i.e.

Poles , Russians , Ukrainians , Belarusians , etc.). They were regarded as a race of men not inclined to a higher form of civilisation , which was under an instinctive force that reverted them back to nature. The Nazis also regarded the Slavs as having dangerous Jewish and Asiatic, meaning Mongol , influences.

[ 197 ] Because of this, the Nazis declared Slavs to be Untermenschen ("subhumans").

[ 198 ] Nazi anthropologists attempted to scientifically prove the historical admixture of the Slavs who lived further East and leading Nazi racial theorist Hans Günther regarded the Slavs as being primarily Nordic centuries ago but he believed that they had mixed with non-Nordic types over time.

[ 199 ] Exceptions were made for a small percentage of Slavs who the Nazis saw as descended from German settlers and therefore fit to be Germanised and considered part of the Aryan master race.

[ 200 ] Hitler described Slavs as "a mass of born slaves who feel the need for a master".

[ 201 ] Himmler classified Slavs as "bestial untermenschen " and Jews as the "decisive leader of the Untermenschen ".

[ 202 ] These ideas were fervently advocated through Nazi propaganda , which had a massive impact on the indoctrination of the German population. " Der Untermenschen ", a racist brochure published by the SS in 1942, has been regarded as one of the most infamous pieces of Nazi anti-Slavic propaganda .

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] The Nazi notion of Slavs as inferior served as a legitimisation of their desire to create Lebensraum for Germans and other Germanic people in eastern Europe, where millions of Germans and other Germanic settlers would be moved into once those territories were conquered, while the original Slavic inhabitants were to be annihilated, removed or enslaved.

[ 205 ] Nazi Germany's policy changed towards Slavs in response to military manpower shortages, forcing it to allow Slavs to serve in its armed forces within the occupied territories in spite of the fact that they were considered "subhuman".

[ 206 ] Hitler declared that racial conflict against Jews was necessary in order to save Germany from suffering under them and he dismissed concerns that the conflict with them was inhumane and unjust: We may be inhumane, but if we rescue Germany we have achieved the greatest deed in the world. We may work injustice, but if we rescue Germany then we have removed the greatest injustice in the world. We may be immoral, but if our people is rescued we have opened the way for morality.

[ 207 ] Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels frequently employed antisemitic rhetoric to underline this view: "The Jew is the enemy and the destroyer of the purity of blood, the conscious destroyer of our race." [ 208 ] Social class Nazi politics was based on competition and struggle as its organising principle, and the Nazis believed that "human life consisted of eternal struggle and competition and derived its meaning from struggle and competition." [ 209 ] The Nazis saw this eternal struggle in military terms, and advocated a society organised like an army in order to achieve success. They promoted the idea of a national-racial "people's community" ( Volksgemeinschaft ) in order to accomplish "the efficient prosecution of the struggle against other peoples and states." [ 210 ] Like an army, the Volksgemeinschaft was meant to consist of a hierarchy of ranks or classes of people, some commanding and others obeying, all working together for a common goal.

[ 210 ] This concept was rooted in the writings of 19th century völkisch authors who glorified medieval German society, viewing it as a "community rooted in the land and bound together by custom and tradition," in which there was neither class conflict nor selfish individualism.

[ 211 ] The Nazis concept of the volksgemeinschaft appealed to many, as it was seen as it seemed at once to affirm a commitment to a new type of society for the modern age yet also offer protection from the tensions and insecurities of modernisation. It would balance individual achievement with group solidarity and cooperation with competition. Stripped of its ideological overtones, the Nazi vision of modernisation without internal conflict and a political community that offered both security and opportunity was so potent a vision of the future that many Germans were willing to overlook its racist and anti-Semitic essence.

[ 212 ] Nazism rejected the Marxist concept of class conflict , and it praised both German capitalists and German workers as essential to the Volksgemeinschaft . In the Volksgemeinschaft , social classes would continue to exist, but there would be no class conflict between them.

[ 213 ] Hitler said that "the capitalists have worked their way to the top through their capacity, and as the basis of this selection, which again only proves their higher race, they have a right to lead." [ 214 ] German business leaders co-operated with the Nazis during their rise to power and received substantial benefits from the Nazi state after it was established, including high profits and state-sanctioned monopolies and cartels.

[ 215 ] Large celebrations and symbolism were used extensively to encourage those engaged in physical labour on behalf of Germany, with leading National Socialists often praising the "honour of labour", which fostered a sense of community ( Gemeinschaft ) for the German people and promoted solidarity towards the Nazi cause.

[ 216 ] To win workers away from Marxism, Nazi propaganda sometimes presented its expansionist foreign policy goals as a "class struggle between nations." [ 214 ] Bonfires were made of school children's differently coloured caps as symbolic of the unity of different social classes.

[ 217 ] In 1922, Hitler disparaged other nationalist and racialist political parties as disconnected from the mass populace, especially lower and working-class young people: The racialists were not capable of drawing the practical conclusions from correct theoretical judgements, especially in the Jewish Question. In this way, the German racialist movement developed a similar pattern to that of the 1880s and 1890s. As in those days, its leadership gradually fell into the hands of highly honourable, but fantastically naïve men of learning, professors, district counsellors, schoolmasters, and lawyers—in short a bourgeois, idealistic, and refined class. It lacked the warm breath of the nation's youthful vigour.

[ 218 ] Nevertheless, the Nazi Party's voter base consisted mainly of farmers and the middle class, including groups such as Weimar government officials, school teachers, doctors, clerks, self-employed businessmen, salesmen, retired officers, engineers, and students.

[ 219 ] Their demands included lower taxes, higher prices for food, restrictions on department stores and consumer co-operatives, and reductions in social services and wages.

[ 220 ] The need to maintain the support of these groups made it difficult for the Nazis to appeal to the working class, since the working class often had opposite demands.

[ 220 ] From 1928 onward, the Nazi Party's growth into a large national political movement was dependent on middle class support, and on the public perception that it "promised to side with the middle classes and to confront the economic and political power of the working class." [ 221 ] The financial collapse of the white collar middle-class of the 1920s figures much in their strong support of Nazism.

[ 222 ] Although the Nazis continued to make appeals to "the German worker", historian Timothy Mason concludes that "Hitler had nothing but slogans to offer the working class." [ 223 ] Historians Conan Fischer and Detlef Mühlberger argue that while the Nazis were primarily rooted in the lower middle class, they were able to appeal to all classes in society and that while workers were generally underrepresented, they were still a substantial source of support for the Nazis.

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] H.L. Ansbacher argues that the working-class soldiers had the most faith in Hitler out of any occupational group in Germany.

[ 226 ] The Nazis also established a norm that every worker should be semi-skilled, which was not simply rhetorical; the number of men leaving school to enter the work force as unskilled labourers fell from 200,000 in 1934 to 30,000 in 1939. For many working-class families, the 1930s and 1940s were a time of social mobility; not in the sense of moving into the middle class but rather moving within the blue-collar skill hierarchy.

[ 227 ] Overall, the experience of workers varied considerably under Nazism. Workers' wages did not increase much during Nazi rule, as the government feared wage-price inflation and thus wage growth was limited. Prices for food and clothing rose, though costs for heating, rent and light decreased. Skilled workers were in shortage from 1936 onward, meaning that workers who engaged in vocational training could look forward to considerably higher wages. Benefits provided by the Labour Front were generally positively received, even if workers did not always buy in to propaganda about the volksgemeinschaft . Workers welcomed opportunities for employment after the harsh years of the Great Depression, creating a common belief that the Nazis had removed the insecurity of unemployment. Workers who remained discontented risked the Gestapo 's informants. Ultimately, the Nazis faced a conflict between their rearmament program, which by necessity would require material sacrifices from workers (longer hours and a lower standard of living), versus a need to maintain the confidence of the working class in the regime. Hitler was sympathetic to the view that stressed taking further measures for rearmament, but he did not fully implement the measures required for it in order to avoid alienating the working class.

[ 228 ] While the Nazis had substantial support amongst the middle-class, they often attacked traditional middle-class values and Hitler personally held great contempt for them. This was because the traditional image of the middle class was one that was obsessed with personal status, material attainment and quiet, comfortable living, which was in opposition to the Nazism's ideal of a New Man. The Nazis' New Man was envisioned as a heroic figure who rejected a materialistic and private life for a public life and a pervasive sense of duty, willing to sacrifice everything for the nation. Despite the Nazis' contempt for these values, they were still able to secure millions of middle-class votes. Hermann Beck argues that while some members of the middle-class dismissed this as mere rhetoric, many others in some ways agreed with the Nazis—the defeat of 1918 and the failures of the Weimar period caused many middle-class Germans to question their own identity, thinking their traditional values to be anachronisms and agreeing with the Nazis that these values were no longer viable. While this rhetoric would become less frequent after 1933 due to the increased emphasis on the volksgemeinschaft , it and its ideas would never truly disappear until the overthrow of the regime. The Nazis instead emphasised that the middle-class must become staatsbürger , a publicly active and involved citizen, rather than a selfish, materialistic spießbürger , who was only interested in private life.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] Sex and gender Further information: Women in Nazi Germany and Transgender people in Nazi Germany Obligations of Polish workers in Germany, warning them of the death penalty for any sexual relations between Germans and Poles Nazi ideology advocated excluding women from political involvement and confining them to the spheres of " Kinder, Küche, Kirche " (Children, Kitchen, Church).

[ 231 ] Many women enthusiastically supported the regime, but formed their own internal hierarchies.

[ 232 ] Hitler's own opinion on the matter of women in Nazi Germany was that while other eras of German history had experienced the development and liberation of the female mind, the National Socialist goal was essentially singular in that it wished for them to produce a child.

[ 233 ] Based on this theme, Hitler once remarked about women that "with every child that she brings into the world, she fights her battle for the nation. The man stands up for the Volk , exactly as the woman stands up for the family".

[ 234 ] Proto-natalist programs in Nazi Germany offered favourable loans and grants to newlyweds and encouraged them to give birth to offspring by providing them with additional incentives.

[ 235 ] Contraception was discouraged for racially valuable women in Nazi Germany and abortion was forbidden by strict legal mandates, including prison sentences for women who sought them as well as prison sentences for doctors who performed them, whereas abortion for racially "undesirable" persons was encouraged.

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] While unmarried until the very end of the regime, Hitler often made excuses about his busy life hindering any chance for marriage.

[ 238 ] Among National Socialist ideologues, marriage was valued not for moral considerations but because it provided an optimal breeding environment.

Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler reportedly told a confidant that when he established the Lebensborn program, an organisation that would dramatically increase the birth rate of "Aryan" children through extramarital relations between women classified as racially pure and their male equals, he had only the purest male "conception assistants" in mind.

[ 239 ] Since the Nazis extended the Rassenschande ("race defilement") law to all foreigners at the beginning of the war, [ 177 ] pamphlets were issued to German women which ordered them to avoid sexual relations with foreign workers who were brought to Germany and the pamphlets also ordered German women to view these same foreign workers as a danger to their blood.

[ 240 ] Although the law was applicable to both genders, German women were punished more severely for having sexual relations with foreign forced labourers in Germany.

[ 241 ] The Nazis issued the Polish decrees on 8 March 1940 which contained regulations concerning the Polish forced labourers ( Zivilarbeiter ) who were brought to Germany during World War II. One of the regulations stated that any Pole "who has sexual relations with a German man or woman, or approaches them in any other improper manner, will be punished by death".

[ 242 ] After the decrees were enacted, Himmler stated: Fellow Germans who engage in sexual relations with male or female civil workers of the Polish nationality, commit other immoral acts or engage in love affairs shall be arrested immediately.

[ 243 ] The Nazis later issued similar regulations against the Eastern Workers ( Ost-Arbeiter ) , including the imposition of the death penalty if they engaged in sexual relations with German persons.

[ 244 ] Heydrich issued a decree on 20 February 1942 which declared that sexual intercourse between a German woman and a Russian worker or prisoner of war would result in the Russian man being punished with the death penalty.

[ 245 ] Another decree issued by Himmler on 7 December 1942 stated that any "unauthorised sexual intercourse" would result in the death penalty.

[ 246 ] Because the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour did not permit capital punishment for race defilement, special courts were convened in order to allow the death penalty to be imposed in some cases.

[ 247 ] German women accused of race defilement were marched through the streets with their head shaven and placards detailing their crimes were placed around their necks [ 248 ] and those convicted of race defilement were sent to concentration camps.

[ 240 ] When Himmler reportedly asked Hitler what the punishment should be for German girls and German women who were found guilty of race defilement with prisoners of war (POWs), he ordered that "every POW who has relations with a German girl or a German would be shot" and the German woman should be publicly humiliated by "having her hair shorn and being sent to a concentration camp".

[ 249 ] The League of German Girls was particularly regarded as instructing girls to avoid race defilement, which was treated with particular importance for young females.

[ 250 ] Transgender people had a variety of experiences depending on whether they were considered "Aryan" or capable of useful work.

[ 251 ] Several historians have noted that transgender people were targeted by the Nazis through legislation and were sent to concentration camps.

[ 252 ] [ 253 ] [ 254 ] [ 255 ] [ 256 ] Opposition to homosexuality Further information: Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Berlin memorial to homosexual victims of the Holocaust: Totgeschlagen – Totgeschwiegen (Struck Dead – Hushed Up) After the Night of the Long Knives, Hitler promoted Himmler and the SS, who then zealously suppressed homosexuality by saying: "We must exterminate these people root and branch ... the homosexual must be eliminated".

[ 257 ] In 1936, Himmler established the " Reichszentrale zur Bekämpfung der Homosexualität und Abtreibung " ("Reich Central Office for the Combating of Homosexuality and Abortion").

[ 258 ] Between 1937 and 1939, the Nazi regime arrested some 95,000 homosexual men.

[ 259 ] Nazi ideology still viewed German men who were gay as a part of the Aryan master race, but the Nazi regime attempted to force them into sexual and social conformity. Homosexuals were viewed as failing in their duty to procreate and reproduce for the Aryan nation. Gay men who would not conform were sent to concentration camps under the "Extermination Through Work" campaign.

[ 260 ] As concentration camp prisoners, homosexual men were forced to wear pink triangle badges.

[ 261 ] Religion Main article: Religion in Nazi Germany Further information: Catholic Church and Nazi Germany , German Christians (movement) , German Faith Movement , Kreuz und Adler , Positive Christianity , Religious aspects of Nazism , Anti-Masonry § Nazi Germany and occupied Europe , and Religious views of Adolf Hitler Members of the German Christians organisation celebrating Luther Day in Berlin in 1933. A speech is given by Bishop Hossenfelder.

Hitler in 1935 with Cesare Orsenigo , the Catholic Church 's nuncio to Germany The Nazi Party Programme of 1920 guaranteed freedom for all religious denominations which were not hostile to the State and it also endorsed Positive Christianity in order to combat "the Jewish-materialist spirit".

[ 262 ] Positive Christianity was a modified version of Christianity which emphasised racial purity and nationalism .

[ 263 ] The Nazis were aided by theologians such as Ernst Bergmann . In his work Die 25 Thesen der Deutschreligion ( Twenty-five Points of the German Religion ), Bergmann held the view that the Old Testament of the Bible was inaccurate along with portions of the New Testament , claimed that Jesus was not a Jew but was instead of Aryan origin and he also claimed that Adolf Hitler was the new messiah .

[ 263 ] Hitler denounced the Old Testament as " Satan 's Bible" and using components of the New Testament he attempted to prove that Jesus was both an Aryan and an antisemite by citing passages such as John 8:44 where he noted that Jesus is yelling at "the Jews", as well as saying to them "your father is the devil" and the Cleansing of the Temple , which describes Jesus' whipping of the "Children of the Devil".

[ 264 ] Hitler claimed that the New Testament included distortions by Paul the Apostle , who Hitler described as a "mass-murderer turned saint".

[ 264 ] In their propaganda, the Nazis used the writings of Martin Luther , the Protestant Reformer . They publicly displayed an original edition of Luther's On the Jews and their Lies during the annual Nuremberg rallies.

[ 265 ] [ 266 ] The Nazis were initially very hostile to Catholics because most Catholics supported the German Centre Party . Catholics opposed the Nazis' promotion of compulsory sterilisation of those whom they deemed inferior and the Catholic Church forbade its members to vote for the Nazis. In 1933, extensive Nazi violence occurred against Catholics due to their association with the Centre Party and their opposition to the Nazi regime's sterilisation laws.

[ 267 ] The Nazis demanded that Catholics declare their loyalty to the German state.

[ 268 ] In their propaganda, the Nazis used elements of Germany's Catholic history, in particular the German Catholic Teutonic Knights and their campaigns in Eastern Europe . The Nazis identified them as "sentinels" in the East against "Slavic chaos", though beyond that symbolism, the influence of the Teutonic Knights on Nazism was limited.

[ 269 ] Hitler also admitted that the Nazis' night rallies were inspired by the Catholic rituals which he had witnessed during his Catholic upbringing.

[ 270 ] The Nazis did seek official reconciliation with the Catholic Church and they endorsed the creation of the pro-Nazi Catholic Kreuz und Adler , an organisation which advocated a form of national Catholicism that would reconcile the Catholic Church's beliefs with Nazism.

[ 268 ] On 20 July 1933, a concordat ( Reichskonkordat ) was signed between Nazi Germany and the Catholic Church, which in exchange for acceptance of the Catholic Church in Germany required German Catholics to be loyal to the German state. The Catholic Church then ended its ban on members supporting the Nazi Party.

[ 268 ] During the Second World War and the fanaticization of National Socialism, priests and nuns increasingly came into the focus of the Gestapo and the SS. In the concentration camps, separate priestly blocks were formed, and any church resistance was strictly persecuted. The monastery sister Maria Restituta Kafka was sentenced to death by the People's Court and executed only for a harmless song critical of the regime.

[ 271 ] Polish priests came en masse to the Auschwitz concentration camp. Catholic resistance groups like those around Roman Karl Scholz were persecuted uncompromisingly.

[ 272 ] [ 273 ] While the Catholic resistance was often anti-war and passive, there are also examples of actively combating National Socialism. The group around the priest Heinrich Maier approached the American secret service and provided them with plans and location sketches of for V-2 rockets , Tiger tanks , Messerschmitt Bf 109 and Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet and their production sites so that they could successfully bomb the factories.

[ 274 ] [ 275 ] [ 276 ] [ 277 ] [ 278 ] After the war, their history was often forgotten, also because they acted against the express instructions of their church authorities.

[ 279 ] [ 280 ] [ 281 ] Historian Michael Burleigh claims that Nazism used Christianity for political purposes, but such use required that "fundamental tenets were stripped out, but the remaining diffuse religious emotionality had its uses".

[ 270 ] Burleigh claims that Nazism's conception of spirituality was "self-consciously pagan and primitive".

[ 270 ] Historian Roger Griffin rejects the claim that Nazism was primarily pagan, noting that although there were some influential neo-paganists in the Nazi Party, such as Heinrich Himmler and Alfred Rosenberg , they represented a minority and their views did not influence Nazi ideology beyond its use for symbolism. It is noted that Hitler denounced Germanic paganism in Mein Kampf and condemned Rosenberg's and Himmler's paganism as "nonsense".

[ 282 ] Economics Main article: Economy of Nazi Germany Further information: Economics of fascism Deutsches Volk–Deutsche Arbeit: German People, German Work (1934) – an example of reactionary modernism The Nazis came to power in the midst of Great Depression , when the unemployment rate at that point in time was close to 30%.

[ 283 ] Generally speaking, Nazi theorists and politicians blamed Germany's previous economic failures on political causes like the influence of Marxism on the workforce, the sinister and exploitative machinations of what they called international Jewry and the vindictiveness of the western political leaders' war reparation demands. Instead of traditional economic incentives, the Nazis offered solutions of a political nature, such as the elimination of organised trade unions , rearmament (in contravention of the Versailles Treaty) and biological politics.

[ 284 ] Various work programs designed to establish full employment for the German population were instituted once the Nazis seized full national power. Hitler encouraged nationally supported projects like the construction of the Autobahn highway system, the introduction of an affordable people's car ( Volkswagen ) and later the Nazis bolstered the economy through the business and employment generated by military rearmament.

[ 285 ] The Nazis benefited early in the regime's existence from the first post-Depression economic upswing, and this combined with their public works projects, job-procurement program and subsidised home repair program reduced unemployment by as much as 40 per cent in one year. This development tempered the unfavourable psychological climate caused by the earlier economic crisis and encouraged Germans to march in step with the regime.

[ 286 ] The economic policies of the Nazis were in many respects a continuation of the policies of the German National People's Party , a national-conservative party and the Nazis' coalition partner.

[ 287 ] While other Western capitalist countries strove for increased state ownership of industry during the same period, the Nazis transferred public ownership into the private sector and handed over some public services to private organizations, mostly affiliated with the Nazi Party. It was an intentional policy with multiple objectives rather than ideologically driven and was used as a tool to enhance support for the Nazi government and the party.

[ 288 ] According to historian Richard Overy , the Nazi war economy was a mixed economy that combined free markets with central planning and described the economy as being somewhere in between the command economy of the Soviet Union and the capitalist system of the United States.

[ 289 ] The Nazi government continued the economic policies introduced by the government of Kurt von Schleicher in 1932 to combat the effects of the Depression.

[ 290 ] Upon being appointed Chancellor in 1933, Hitler appointed Hjalmar Schacht , a former member of the German Democratic Party , as President of the Reichsbank in 1933 and Minister of Economics in 1934.

[ 283 ] Hitler promised measures to increase employment, protect the German currency, and promote recovery from the Great Depression. These included an agrarian settlement program, labour service, and a guarantee to maintain health care and pensions.

[ 291 ] However, these policies and programs, which included a large public works programs supported by deficit spending such as the construction of the Autobahn network to stimulate the economy and reduce unemployment, [ 292 ] were inherited and planned to be undertaken by the Weimar Republic during conservative Paul von Hindenburg 's presidency and which the Nazis appropriated as their own after coming to power.

[ 293 ] Above all, Hitler's priority was rearmament and the buildup of the German military in preparation for an eventual war to conquer Lebensraum in the East.

[ 294 ] The policies of Schacht created a scheme for deficit financing, in which capital projects were paid for with the issuance of promissory notes called Mefo bills , which could be traded by companies with each other.

[ 295 ] This was particularly useful in allowing Germany to rearm because the Mefo bills were not Reichsmarks and did not appear in the federal budget, so they helped conceal rearmament.

[ 296 ] At the beginning of his rule, Hitler said that "the future of Germany depends exclusively and only on the reconstruction of the Wehrmacht. All other tasks must cede precedence to the task of rearmament." [ 294 ] This policy was implemented immediately, with military expenditures quickly growing far larger than the civilian work-creation programs. As early as June 1933, military spending for the year was budgeted to be three times larger than the spending on all civilian work-creation measures in 1932 and 1933 combined.

[ 297 ] Nazi Germany increased its military spending faster than any other state in peacetime, with the share of military spending rising from 1 per cent to 10 per cent of national income in the first two years of the regime alone.

[ 298 ] Eventually, it reached as high as 75 per cent by 1944.

[ 299 ] In spite of their rhetoric condemning big business prior to their rise to power, the Nazis quickly entered into a partnership with German business from as early as February 1933. That month, after being appointed Chancellor but before gaining dictatorial powers, Hitler made a personal appeal to German business leaders to help fund the Nazi Party for the crucial months that were to follow. He argued that they should support him in establishing a dictatorship because "private enterprise cannot be maintained in the age of democracy" and because democracy would allegedly lead to communism.

[ 69 ] He promised to destroy the German left and the trade unions, without any mention of anti-Jewish policies or foreign conquests.

[ 300 ] In the following weeks, the Nazi Party received contributions from seventeen different business groups, with the largest coming from IG Farben and Deutsche Bank .

[ 300 ] Historian Adam Tooze writes that the leaders of German business were therefore "willing partners in the destruction of political pluralism in Germany".

[ 67 ] In exchange, owners and managers of German businesses were granted unprecedented powers to control their workforce, collective bargaining was abolished and wages were frozen at a relatively low level.

[ 301 ] Business profits also rose very rapidly, as did corporate investment.

[ 302 ] In addition, the Nazis privatised public properties and public services, only increasing economic state control through regulations.

[ 303 ] Hitler believed that private ownership was useful in that it encouraged creative competition and technical innovation, but insisted that it had to conform to national interests and be "productive" rather than "parasitical".

[ 304 ] Private property rights were conditional upon following the economic priorities set by the Nazi leadership, with high profits as a reward for firms who followed them and the threat of nationalisation being used against those who did not.

[ 305 ] Under Nazi economics, free competition and self-regulating markets diminished, but Hitler's social Darwinist beliefs made him retain business competition and private property as economic engines.

[ 306 ] [ 307 ] The Nazis were hostile to the idea of social welfare in principle, upholding instead the social Darwinist concept that the weak and feeble should perish.

[ 308 ] They condemned the welfare system of the Weimar Republic as well as private charity, accusing them of supporting people regarded as racially inferior and weak, who should have been weeded out in the process of natural selection.

[ 309 ] Nevertheless, faced with the mass unemployment and poverty of the Great Depression, the Nazis found it necessary to set up charitable institutions to help racially-pure Germans in order to maintain popular support, while arguing that this represented "racial self-help" and not indiscriminate charity or universal social welfare.

[ 310 ] Nazi programs such as the Winter Relief of the German People and the broader National Socialist People's Welfare (NSV) were organised as quasi-private institutions, officially relying on private donations from Germans to help others of their race, although in practice those who refused to donate could face severe consequences.

[ 311 ] Unlike the social welfare institutions of the Weimar Republic and the Christian charities, the NSV distributed assistance on explicitly racial grounds. It provided support only to those who were "racially sound, capable of and willing to work, politically reliable, and willing and able to reproduce". Non-Aryans were excluded, as well as the "work-shy", "asocials" and the "hereditarily ill".

[ 312 ] Successful efforts were made to get middle-class women involved in social work assisting large families, [ 217 ] and the Winter Relief campaigns acted as a ritual to generate public sympathy.

[ 313 ] Agrarian policies were also important to the Nazis since they corresponded not just to the economy but to their geopolitical conception of Lebensraum as well. For Hitler, the acquisition of land and soil was requisite in moulding the German economy.

[ 314 ] To tie farmers to their land, selling agricultural land was prohibited.

[ 315 ] Farm ownership remained private, but business monopoly rights were granted to marketing boards to control production and prices with a quota system.

[ 316 ] The Hereditary Farm Law of 1933 established a cartel structure under a government body known as the Reichsnährstand (RNST) which determined "everything from what seeds and fertilizers were used to how land was inherited".

[ 316 ] Hitler primarily viewed the German economy as an instrument of power and believed the economy was not about creating wealth and technical progress so as to improve the quality of life for a nation's citizenry, but rather that economic success was paramount for providing the means and material foundations necessary for military conquest.

[ 317 ] While economic progress generated by National Socialist programs had its role in appeasing the German people, the Nazis and Hitler in particular did not believe that economic solutions alone were sufficient to thrust Germany onto the stage as a world power. The Nazis thus sought to secure a general economic revival accompanied by massive military spending for rearmament, especially later through the implementation of the Four Year Plan , which consolidated their rule and firmly secured a command relationship between the German arms industry and the National Socialist government.

[ 318 ] Between 1933 and 1939, military expenditures were upwards of 82 billion Reichsmarks and represented 23 per cent of Germany's gross national product as the Nazis mobilised their people and economy for war.

[ 319 ] Anti-communism Anti-communist, antisemitic propaganda poster in Nazi Germany The Nazis claimed that communism was dangerous to the well-being of nations because of its intention to dissolve private property , its support of class conflict , its aggression against the middle class , its hostility towards small business and its atheism .

[ 320 ] Nazism rejected class conflict-based socialism and economic egalitarianism , favouring instead a stratified economy with social classes based on merit and talent, retaining private property and the creation of national solidarity that transcends class distinction.

[ 321 ] During the late 1930s and the 1940s, anti-communist regimes and groups that supported Nazism included the Falange in Francoist Spain , the Vichy regime and the 33rd Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Charlemagne (1st French) in France and the British Union of Fascists under Oswald Mosley .

[ 322 ] In Mein Kampf , Hitler stated his desire to "make war upon the Marxist principle that all men are equal".

[ 323 ] He believed that "the notion of equality was a sin against nature." [ 324 ] Nazism upheld the "natural inequality of men," including inequality between races and also within each race. The Nazi state aimed to advance those individuals with special talents or intelligence, so they could rule over the masses.

[ 65 ] Nazi ideology relied on elitism and the Führerprinzip (leadership principle), arguing that elite minorities should assume leadership roles over the majority, and that the elite minority should itself be organised according to a "hierarchy of talent", with a single leader—the Führer —at the top.

[ 325 ] The Führerprinzip held that each member of the hierarchy owed absolute obedience to those above him and should hold absolute power over those below him.

[ 66 ] During the 1920s, Hitler urged disparate Nazi factions to unite in opposition to Jewish Bolshevism .

[ 326 ] Hitler asserted that the "three vices" of "Jewish Marxism" were democracy, pacifism and internationalism .

[ 327 ] The Communist movement, the trade unions, the Social Democratic Party and the left-wing press were all considered to be Jewish-controlled and part of the "international Jewish conspiracy" to weaken the German nation by promoting internal disunity through class struggle.

[ 66 ] The Nazis also believed that the Jews had instigated the Bolshevik revolution in Russia and that Communists had stabbed Germany in the back and caused it to lose the First World War.

[ 328 ] They further argued that modern cultural trends of the 1920s (such as jazz music and cubist art ) represented " cultural Bolshevism " and were part of a political assault aimed at the spiritual degeneration of the German Volk .

[ 328 ] Joseph Goebbels published a pamphlet titled The Nazi-Sozi which gave brief points of how Nazism differed from Marxism.

[ 329 ] In 1930, Hitler said: "Our adopted term 'Socialist' has nothing to do with Marxist Socialism. Marxism is anti-property; true Socialism is not".

[ 330 ] The Communist Party of Germany (KPD) was the largest Communist Party in the world outside of the Soviet Union, until it was destroyed by the Nazis in 1933.

[ 331 ] In the 1920s and early 1930s, Communists and Nazis often fought each other directly in street violence , with the Nazi paramilitary organisations being opposed by the Communist Red Front and Anti-Fascist Action . After the beginning of the Great Depression, both Communists and Nazis saw their share of the vote increase. While the Nazis were willing to form alliances with other parties of the right, the Communists refused to form an alliance with the Social Democratic Party of Germany , the largest party of the left.

[ 332 ] After the Nazis came to power, they quickly banned the Communist Party under the allegation that it was preparing for revolution and that it had caused the Reichstag fire .

[ 333 ] Four thousand KPD officials were arrested in February 1933, and by the end of the year 130,000 communists had been sent to Nazi concentration camps .

[ 334 ] Views of capitalism See also: List of companies involved in the Holocaust The Nazis argued that free-market capitalism damages nations due to international finance and the worldwide economic dominance of disloyal big business, which they considered to be the product of Jewish influences.

[ 320 ] Nazi propaganda posters in working class districts emphasised anti-capitalism, such as one that said: "The maintenance of a rotten industrial system has nothing to do with nationalism. I can love Germany and hate capitalism".

[ 335 ] Both in public and in private Hitler opposed free-market capitalism because it "could not be trusted to put national interests first", arguing that it holds nations ransom in the interests of a parasitic cosmopolitan rentier class.

[ 336 ] He believed that international free trade would lead to global domination by the British Empire and the United States, which he believed were controlled by Jewish bankers in Wall Street and the City of London . In particular, Hitler saw the United States as a major future rival and feared that the globalization after World War I would allow North America to displace Europe as the world's most powerful continent. Hitler's anxiety over the economic rise of the United States was a major theme in his unpublished Zweites Buch . He even hoped for a time that Britain could be swayed into an alliance with Germany on the basis of a shared economic rivalry with the United States.

[ 337 ] Hitler desired an economy that would direct resources "in ways that matched the many national goals of the regime" such as the buildup of the military, building programs for cities and roads, and economic self-sufficiency.

[ 304 ] Hitler also distrusted free-market capitalism for being unreliable due to its egotism and preferred a state-directed economy that maintains private property and competition but subordinates them to the interests of the Volk and Nation.

[ 336 ] Hitler told a party leader in 1934: "The economic system of our day is the creation of the Jews".

[ 336 ] Hitler said to Benito Mussolini that capitalism had "run its course".

[ 336 ] Hitler also said that the business bourgeoisie "know nothing except their profit. 'Fatherland' is only a word for them." [ 338 ] Hitler was personally disgusted with the ruling bourgeois elites of Germany during the period of the Weimar Republic, whom he referred to as "cowardly shits".

[ 339 ] In Mein Kampf , Hitler effectively supported mercantilism in the belief that economic resources from their respective territories should be seized by force, as he believed that the policy of Lebensraum would provide Germany with such economically valuable territories.

[ 340 ] He argued that the United States and the United Kingdom only benefitted from free trade because they had already conquered substantial internal markets through British colonial conquests and American westward expansion .

[ 337 ] Hitler argued that the only means to maintain economic security was to have direct control over resources rather than being forced to rely on world trade.

[ 340 ] Hitler claimed that war to gain such resources was the only means to surpass the failing capitalist economic system.

[ 340 ] In practice, however, the Nazis merely opposed one type of capitalism , namely 19th-century free-market capitalism and the laissez-faire model, which they nonetheless applied to the social sphere in the form of social Darwinism .

[ 308 ] Some have described Nazi Germany as an example of corporatism , authoritarian capitalism , or totalitarian capitalism .

[ 288 ] [ 341 ] [ 342 ] [ 343 ] While claiming to strive for autarky in propaganda, the Nazis crushed existing movements towards self-sufficiency [ 344 ] and established extensive capital connections in efforts to ready for expansionist war and genocide [ 345 ] in alliance with traditional business and commerce elites.

[ 346 ] In spite of their anti-capitalist rhetoric in opposition to big business, the Nazis allied with German business as soon as they got in power by appealing to the fear of communism and promising to destroy the German left and trade unions, [ 347 ] eventually purging both more radical and reactionary elements from the party in 1934.

[ 59 ] Joseph Goebbels, who would later go on to become the Nazi Propaganda Minister, was strongly opposed to both capitalism and communism, viewing them as the "two great pillars of materialism" that were "part of the international Jewish conspiracy for world domination".

[ 348 ] Nevertheless, he wrote in his diary in 1925 that if he were forced to choose between them, "in the final analysis, it would be better for us to go down with Bolshevism than live in eternal slavery under capitalism".

[ 349 ] Goebbels also linked his antisemitism to his anti-capitalism, stating in a 1929 pamphlet that "we see, in the Hebrews, the incarnation of capitalism, the misuse of the nation's goods".

[ 208 ] Within the Nazi Party, the faction associated with anti-capitalist beliefs was the SA, a paramilitary wing led by Ernst Röhm . The SA had a complicated relationship with the rest of the party, giving both Röhm himself and local SA leaders significant autonomy.

[ 350 ] Different local leaders would even promote different political ideas in their units, including "nationalistic, socialistic, anti-Semitic, racist, völkisch, or conservative ideas." [ 351 ] There was tension between the SA and Hitler, especially from 1930 onward, as Hitler's "increasingly close association with big industrial interests and traditional rightist forces" caused many in the SA to distrust him.

[ 352 ] The SA regarded Hitler's seizure of power in 1933 as a "first revolution" against the left, and some voices within the ranks began arguing for a "second revolution" against the right.

[ 353 ] After engaging in violence against the left in 1933, Röhm's SA also began attacks against individuals deemed to be associated with conservative reaction.

[ 58 ] Hitler saw Röhm's independent actions as violating and possibly threatening his leadership, as well as jeopardising the regime by alienating the conservative President Paul von Hindenburg and the conservative-oriented German Army.

[ 59 ] This resulted in Hitler purging Röhm and other radical members of the SA in 1934, during the Night of the Long Knives.

[ 59 ] Totalitarianism See also: Totalitarianism Nazi Party rally in Nuremberg , 1936 Under Nazism, with its emphasis on the nation, individualism was denounced and instead importance was placed upon Germans belonging to the German Volk and "people's community" ( Volksgemeinschaft) .

[ 354 ] Hitler declared that "every activity and every need of every individual will be regulated by the collectivity represented by the party" and that "there are no longer any free realms in which the individual belongs to himself".

[ 355 ] One of the core objectives of the Nazi party was the establishment of a totalitarian state which indoctrinated the German population with ultra-nationalist ideas and violently enforced its ideological worldview upon the society.

[ 356 ] Heinrich Himmler justified the establishment of a repressive police state , in which the security forces could exercise power arbitrarily, by claiming that national security and order should take precedence over the needs of the individual.

[ 357 ] In his speech delivered at the inauguration of the Nazi Reich Chamber of Culture on 15 November 1933, Joseph Goebbels stated: "The revolution we have carried out is a total one. It has embraced all areas of public life and transformed them from below. It has completely changed and recast the relationship of people to each other, to the State, and to life itself. It was in fact the breakthrough of a fresh world-view , which had fought for power in opposition for fourteen years to provide the basis for the German people to develop a new relationship with the State. What has been happening since 30 January is only the visible expression of this revolutionary process." [ 358 ] According to the famous philosopher and political theorist, Hannah Arendt , the allure of Nazism as a totalitarian ideology (with its attendant mobilisation of the German population) resided within the construct of helping that society deal with the cognitive dissonance resultant from the tragic interruption of the First World War and the economic and material suffering consequent to the Depression and brought to order the revolutionary unrest occurring all around them. Instead of the plurality that existed in democratic or parliamentary states , Nazism as a totalitarian system promulgated "clear" solutions to the historical problems faced by Germany, levied support by de-legitimizing the former government of Weimar and provided a politico-biological pathway to a better future, one free from the uncertainty of the past. It was the atomised and disaffected masses that Hitler and the party elite pointed in a particular direction and using clever propaganda to make them into ideological adherents, exploited in bringing Nazism to life.

[ 359 ] While the ideologues of Nazism, much like those of Stalinism , abhorred democratic or parliamentary governance as practised in the United States or Britain, their differences are substantial. An epistemic crisis occurs when one tries to synthesize and contrast Nazism and Stalinism as two-sides of the same coin with their similarly tyrannical leaders, state-controlled economies and repressive police structures. Namely, while they share a common thematic political construction, they are entirely inimical to one another in their worldviews and when more carefully analysed against one another on a one-to-one level, an "irreconcilable asymmetry" results.

[ 360 ] Carl Schmitt , a Nazi legal theorist and member of Prussian State Council , characterized the " Führerprinzip " as the ideological foundation of Nazi Germany's "total state".

[ 361 ] [ 362 ] In his book " Staat, Bewegung, Volk " (1933), Schmitt wrote: "National Socialism does not think in abstractions and clichés. It is the enemy of all normative and functionalist ways of proceeding. It supports and cultivates every authentic substance of the people wherever it encounters it, in the countryside, in ethnic groups [ Stämme ] or classes. It has created the hereditary farm law; saved the peasantry; purged the Civil Service of alien [ fremdgeartet ] elements and thus re-stored it as a class. It has the courage to treat unequally what is unequal and enforce necessary differentiations." [ 363 ] Classification: Reactionary or Revolutionary Although Nazism is often seen as a reactionary movement, it did not seek a return of Germany to the pre-Weimar monarchy but instead looked much further back to a mythic halcyon Germany which never existed. It has also been seen—as it was by the German-American scholar Franz Leopold Neumann —as the result of a crisis of capitalism which manifested as a "totalitarian monopoly capitalism". In this view Nazism is a mass movement of the middle class which was in opposition to a mass movement of workers in socialism and its extreme form, Communism.

[ 364 ] Historian Karl Dietrich Bracher argues: Such an interpretation runs the risk of misjudging the revolutionary component of National Socialism, which cannot be dismissed as being simply reactionary. Rather, from the very outset, and particularly as it developed into the SS state, National Socialism aimed at a transformation of state and society.

[ 364 ] About Hitler's and the Nazi Party's political positions, Bracher further claims: [They] were of a revolutionary nature: destruction of existing political and social structures and their supporting elites; profound disdain for civic order, for human and moral values, for Hapsburg and Hohenzollern , for liberal and Marxist ideas. The middle class and middle-class values, bourgeois nationalism and capitalism, the professionals, the intelligentsia and the upper class were dealt the sharpest rebuff. These were the groups which had to be uprooted [...].

[ 365 ] See the condemnations of Nazism made by Kaiser Wilhelm II of the House of Hohenzollern and Otto von Hapsburg of the House of Hapsburg in the next section.

Similarly, historian Modris Eksteins argued: Contrary to many interpretations of Nazism, which tend to view it as a reactionary movement, as, in the words of Thomas Mann , an "explosion of antiquarianism", intent on turning Germany into a pastoral folk community of thatched cottages and happy peasants, the general thrust of the movement, despite archaisms, was futuristic. Nazism was a headlong plunge into the future, towards a "brave new world." Of course, it used to advantage residual conservative and utopian longings, paid respect to these romantic visions, and picked its ideological trappings from the German past. but its goals were, by its own lights, distinctly progressive. It was not a double-faced Janus whose aspects were equally attentive to the past and the future, nor was it a modern Proteus , the god of metamorphosis, who duplicates pre-existing forms. The intention of the movement was to create a new type of human being from whom would spring a new morality, a new social system, and eventually a new international order. That was, in fact, the intention of all the fascist movements. After a visit to Italy and a meeting with Mussolini, Oswald Mosley wrote that fascism "has produced not only a new system of government, but also a new type of man, who differs from politicians of the old world as men from another planet." Hitler talked in these terms endlessly. National Socialism was more than a political movement, he said; it was more than a faith; it was a desire to create mankind anew.

[ 366 ] British historian Ian Kershaw , in his history of Europe in the first half of the 20th century, To Hell and Back , says about Nazism, Italian Fascism and Bolshevism: They were different forms of a completely new, modern type of dictatorship—the complete antithesis to liberal democracy . They were all revolutionary, if by that term we understand a major political upheaval driven by the utopian aim of changing society fundamentally. They were not content simply to use repression as a means of control, but sought to mobilize behind an exclusive ideology to "educate" people into becoming committed believers, to claim them soul as well as body. Each of the regimes was, therefore, dynamic in ways that "conventional" authoritarianism was not.

[ 367 ] Despite such tactical breaks necessitated by pragmatic concerns, which were typical for Hitler during his rise to power and in the early years of his regime, those who see Hitler as a revolutionary argue that he never ceased being a revolutionary dedicated to the radical transformation of Germany, especially when it concerned racial matters. In his monograph, Hitler: Study of a Revolutionary?

, Martyn Housden concludes: [Hitler] compiled a most extensive set of revolutionary goals (calling for radical social and political change); he mobilized a revolutionary following so extensive and powerful that many of his aims were achieved; he established and ran a dictatorial revolutionary state; and he disseminated his ideas abroad through a revolutionary foreign policy and war. In short, he defined and controlled the National Socialist revolution in all its phases.

[ 368 ] There were aspects of Nazism which were undoubtedly reactionary, such as their attitude toward the role of women in society, which was completely traditionalist, [ 369 ] calling for the return of women to the home as wives, mothers and homemakers, although ironically this ideological policy was undermined in reality by the growing labour shortages and need for more workers caused by men leaving the workforce for military service. The number of working women actually increased from 4.24 million in 1933 to 4.52 million in 1936 and 5.2 million in 1938, [ 370 ] despite active discouragement and legal barriers put in place by the Nazi regime.

[ 371 ] Another reactionary aspect of Nazism was in their arts policy, which stemmed from Hitler's rejection of all forms of "degenerate" modern art , music and architecture .

[ 372 ] Historian Martin Broszat describes Nazism as having: ...a peculiar hybrid, half-reactionary, half-revolutionary relationship to established society, to the political system and tradition. ... [Its] ideology was almost like a backwards-looking Utopia. It derived from romantic pictures and clichés of the past, from warlike-heroic, patriarchal or absolutist ages, social and political systems, which, however, were translated into the popular and avant-garde, into the fighting slogans of totalitarian nationalism. The élitist notion of aristocratic nobility became the völkische 'nobility of blood' of the 'master race', the princely ' theory of divine right ' gave way to the popular national Führer; the obedient submission to the active national ' following '.

[ 373 ] Contemporary events and views After the failure of the Beer Hall Putsch in 1923, and his subsequent trial and imprisonment, Hitler decided that the way for the Nazi Party to achieve power was not through insurrection, but through legal and quasi-legal means. This did not sit well with the brown-shirted stormtroopers of the SA, especially those in Berlin, who chafed under the restrictions that Hitler placed on them, and their subordination to the party. This resulted in the Stennes Revolt of 1930–31, after which Hitler made himself the Supreme Commander of the SA and brought Ernst Röhm back to be their Chief of Staff and keep them in line. The quashing of the SA's revolutionary fervor convinced many businessmen and military leaders that the Nazis had put aside their insurrectionist past, and that Hitler could be a reliable partner.

[ 374 ] [ 375 ] After the Nazis' " Seizure of Power " in 1933, Röhm and the Brown Shirts were not content for the party to simply carry the reins of power. Instead, they pressed for a continuation of the "National Socialist revolution" to bring about sweeping social changes, which Hitler, primarily for tactical reasons, was not willing to do at that time. He was instead focused on rebuilding the military and reorienting the economy to provide the rearmament necessary for invasion of the countries to the east of Germany, especially Poland and Russia, to get the Lebensraum ("living space") he believed was necessary to the survival of the Aryan race. For this, he needed the co-operation of not only the military, but also the vital organs of capitalism, the banks and big businesses, which he would be unlikely to get if Germany's social and economic structure was being radically overhauled. Röhm's public proclamation that the SA would not allow the "German Revolution" to be halted or undermined caused Hitler to announce that "The revolution is not a permanent condition." The unwillingness of Röhm and the SA to cease their agitation for a "Second Revolution", and the unwarranted fear of a "Röhm putsch" to accomplish it, were factors behind Hitler's purging of the SA leadership in the Night of the Long Knives in the summer of 1934.

[ 376 ] [ 377 ] Kaiser Wilhelm II , the last German Emperor , was appalled at the Kristallnacht of 9–10 November 1938, stating "For the first time, I am ashamed to be a German": [ 378 ] There's a man alone, without family, without children, without God ... He builds legions, but he doesn't build a nation. A nation is created by families, a religion, traditions: it is made up out of the hearts of mothers, the wisdom of fathers, the joy and the exuberance of children ... For a few months I was inclined to believe in National Socialism. I thought of it as a necessary fever. And I was gratified to see that there were, associated with it for a time, some of the wisest and most outstanding Germans. But these, one by one, he has got rid of or even killed ... He has left nothing but a bunch of shirted gangsters! This man could bring home victories to our people each year, without bringing them either glory or danger. But of our Germany, which was a nation of poets and musicians, of artists and soldiers, he has made a nation of hysterics and hermits, engulfed in a mob and led by a thousand liars or fanatics.

— Wilhelm on Hitler, December 1938 [ 49 ] Otto von Hapsburg , the last Crown Prince of Austria-Hungary , denounced Nazism, stating: [ 379 ] I absolutely reject [Nazi] Fascism for Austria ... This un-Austrian movement promises everything to everyone, but really intends the most ruthless subjugation of the Austrian people ... The people of Austria will never tolerate that our beautiful fatherland should become an exploited colony, and that the Austrian should become a man of second category.

Following the German annexation of Austria, Otto was sentenced to death by the Nazi regime; Rudolf Hess ordered that Otto was to be executed immediately if caught.

[ 380 ] [ 381 ] [ 382 ] As ordered by Adolf Hitler , his personal property and that of the House of Habsburg were confiscated. It was not returned after the war.

[ 383 ] The so-called " Habsburg Law ", which had previously been repealed, was reintroduced by the Nazis.

[ 384 ] Post-war Nazism Main article: Neo-Nazism Following Nazi Germany's defeat in World War II and the end of the Holocaust , overt expressions of support for Nazi ideas were prohibited in Germany and other European countries. Nonetheless, movements which self-identify as National Socialist or which are described as adhering to Nazism continue to exist on the fringes of politics in many Western societies. Usually espousing a white supremacist ideology, many deliberately adopt the symbols of Nazi Germany.

[ 385 ] See also Art in Nazi Germany Consequences of Nazism Glossary of Nazi Germany List of books about Nazi Germany List of nicknames and pseudonyms of Nazis List of Nazi ideologues List of Nazi Party leaders and officials Nazi architecture Nazi occultism Nazi salute Nazism and cinema Nazism and the Wehrmacht References Notes ^ a b Fritzsche, Peter (1998).

Germans into Nazis . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-35092-2 .

Eatwell, Roger (1997).

Fascism, A History . Viking-Penguin. pp.

xvii– xxiv, 21, 26– 31, 114– 140, 352.

ISBN 978-0-14-025700-7 .

Griffin, Roger (2000). "Revolution from the Right: Fascism". In Parker, David (ed.).

Revolutions and the Revolutionary Tradition in the West 1560–1991 . London: Routledge. pp.

185– 201.

ISBN 978-0-415-17295-0 .

^ "The political parties in the Weimar Republic" (PDF) .

Bundestag .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 .

^ a b "Nazism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2022 .

Nazism attempted to reconcile conservative, nationalist ideology with a socially radical doctrine.

^ Spielvogel, Jackson J.

(2010) [1996] Hitler and Nazi Germany: A History New York: Routledge. p. 1 ISBN 978-0-13-192469-7 Quote: "Nazism was only one, although the most important, of a number of similar-looking fascist movements in Europe between World War I and World War II." ^ Orlow, Dietrick (2009) The Lure of Fascism in Western Europe: German Nazis, Dutch and French Fascists, 1933–1939 London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 6–9.

ISBN 978-0-230-60865-8 .

^ Eley, Geoff (2013) Nazism as Fascism: Violence, Ideology, and the Ground of Consent in Germany 1930–1945 . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-81263-4 ^ Kailitz, Steffen and Umland, Andreas (2017).

"Why Fascists Took Over the Reichstag but Have Not captured the Kremlin: A Comparison of Weimar Germany and Post-Soviet Russia" Archived 5 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

Nationalities Papers .

45 (2): 206–221.

^ Kiernan, Ben; Lower, Wendy; Naimark, Norman; Straus, Scott (2023). "15: The Nazis and the Slavs – Poles and Soviet Prisoners of War". In Kiernan, Ben; Lower, Wendy; Naimark, Norman; Straus, Scott (eds.).

The Cambridge World History of Genocide . Vol. 3: Genocide in the Contemporary Era, 1914– 2020. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. pp. 358, 359.

doi : 10.1017/9781108767118 .

ISBN 978-1-108-48707-8 .

^ Evans 2003 , p. 229.

^ Ramin Skibba (20 May 2019).

"The Disturbing Resilience of Scientific Racism" .

Smithsonian.com .

Archived from the original on 11 October 2022 . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

^ a b c Baum, Bruce David (2006).

The Rise and Fall of the Caucasian Race: A Political History of Racial Identity . New York/London: New York University Press. p.

156 .

ISBN 978-1-4294-1506-4 .

^ Mitcham, Samuel W.

(1996).

Why Hitler?: The Genesis of the Nazi Reich . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. p. 68.

ISBN 978-0-275-95485-7 ^ Konrad Heiden , "Les débuts du national-socialisme", Revue d'Allemagne, VII, No. 71 (Sept. 15, 1933), p. 821.

^ Kershaw 1999 , pp. 243–244, 248–249.

^ Childers 2001a , 26:00–31:04.

^ Gottlieb, Henrik ; Morgensen, Jens Erik, eds. (2007).

Dictionary Visions, Research and Practice: Selected Papers from the 12th International Symposium on Lexicography, Copenhagen 2004 (illustrated ed.). Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Pub. Co. p. 247.

ISBN 978-90-272-2334-0 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 22 October 2014 .

^ a b c Harper, Douglas.

"Nazi" .

etymonline.com . Online Etymology Dictionary.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 October 2014 .

^ Lepage, Jean-Denis (2009).

Hitler Youth, 1922–1945: An Illustrated History . McFarland. p.

9 .

ISBN 978-0-7864-3935-5 .

^ a b c Rabinbach, Anson ; Gilman, Sander , eds. (2013).

The Third Reich Sourcebook . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-520-95514-1 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 14 August 2015 .

^ a b Copping, Jasper (23 October 2011).

"Why Hitler hated being called a Nazi and what's really in humble pie – origins of words and phrases revealed" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2014 .

^ Seebold, Elmar , ed. (2002).

Kluge Etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache (in German) (24th ed.). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter .

ISBN 978-3-11-017473-1 .

^ Nazi.

In: Friedrich Kluge, Elmar Seebold : Etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache.

24. Auflage, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York 2002, ISBN 3-11-017473-1 ( Online Etymology Dictionary: Nazi Archived 6 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ Goebbels, Joseph (1927) "The Nazi-Sozi" Archived 2 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine , translated and annotated by Randall Bytwerk, Calvin College German Propaganda Archive ^ Meier, Axel (18 November 2014).

"Die Artikelserie "Ein Nazi fährt nach Palästina" " .

Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung (in German).

^ Bormann, Martin , compiler, et al., Hitler's Table Talk , republished 2016 ^ See Selected Speeches of Field Marshal Hermann Goring ^ Maschmann, Melita , Account Rendered: A Dossier On My Former Self , originally published in 1963, republished in 2016, Plunkett Lake Press ^ Theodore Fred Abel papers .

^ Oliver H. Woshinsky .

Explaining Politics: Culture, Institutions, and Political Behavior . Oxon; New York: Routledge, 2008, p. 156.

^ Hitler, Adolf in Domarus, Max and Patrick Romane, eds.

The Essential Hitler: Speeches and Commentary , Waulconda, Illinois: Bolchazi-Carducci Publishers, Inc., 2007, p. 170.

^ Koshar, Rudy.

Social Life, Local Politics, and Nazism: Marburg, 1880–1935 , University of North Carolina Press, 1986, p. 190.

^ Hitler, Adolf, Mein Kampf , Bottom of the Hill Publishing, 2010, p. 287.

^ Dawidowicz, Lucy .

A Holocaust Reader Behrman House, Inc, 1976, p. 31.

^ "1923 Interview with Adolf Hitler" .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2022 . Retrieved 14 July 2022 .

^ Turner, Henry A. (1985).

German Big Business and the Rise of Hitler .

Oxford University Press . p. 77.

^ Adolf Hitler, Max Domarus .

The Essential Hitler: Speeches and Commentary . pp. 171, 172–173.

^ a b Kershaw 1999 , p. 135.

^ a b Peukert, Detlev, The Weimar Republic . Macmillan, 1993.

ISBN 978-0-8090-1556-6 , pp. 73–74.

^ a b Peukert, Detlev , The Weimar Republic . 1st paperback ed. Macmillan, 1993.

ISBN 978-0-8090-1556-6 , p. 74.

^ Beck, Hermann The Fateful Alliance: German Conservatives and Nazis in 1933: The Machtergreifung in a New Light , Berghahn Books, 2008.

ISBN 978-1-84545-680-1 , p. 72.

^ Beck, Hermann The Fateful Alliance: German Conservatives and Nazis in 1933: The Machtergreifung in a New Light , 2008. pp. 72–75.

^ Beck, Hermann The Fateful Alliance: German Conservatives and Nazis in 1933: The Machtergreifung in a New Light , 2008, p. 84.

^ Bendersky 1985 , pp. 104–106.

^ Stephen J. Lee.

European Dictatorships, 1918–1945.

Routledge, 1987, p. 169.

^ Bendersky 1985 , pp. 106–107.

^ Miranda Carter. George, Nicholas and Wilhelm: Three Royal Cousins and the Road to World War I. Borzoi Book, 2009. 420 pp.

^ Beevor, Antony (2013).

The Second World War . New York: Back Bay Books. pp.

92– 93.

ISBN 978-0316023757 .

^ Balfour, Michael (1964).

The Kaiser and his Times . Houghton Mifflin. p. 409.

^ a b "The Kaiser on Hitler" (PDF) .

Ken . 15 December 1938.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 6 September 2023 .

^ a b c d Mann, Michael, Fascists , New York City: Cambridge University Press, 2004, p. 183.

^ Browder, George C., Foundations of the Nazi Police State: The Formation of Sipo and SD , Lexington: Kentucky University Press, 2004, p. 202.

^ Hallgarten, George (1973). "The Collusion of Capitalism". In Snell, John L. (ed.). "The Nazi Revolution: Hitler's Dictatorship and the German Nation". D. C. Heath and Company. p. 132 ^ Hallgarten, George (1973). "The Collusion of Capitalism". In Snell, John L. (ed.). "The Nazi Revolution: Hitler's Dictatorship and the German Nation". D. C. Heath and Company. p. 133 ^ Hallgarten, George (1973). "The Collusion of Capitalism". In Snell, John L. (ed.). "The Nazi Revolution: Hitler's Dictatorship and the German Nation". D. C. Heath and Company. pp. 137, 142 ^ Hallgarten, George (1973). "The Collusion of Capitalism". In Snell, John L. (ed.). "The Nazi Revolution: Hitler's Dictatorship and the German Nation". D. C. Heath and Company. p. 141 ^ a b Bendersky, Joseph W. (2007).

A Concise History of Nazi Germany . Plymouth, England: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc. p. 96.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5363-7 .

^ Heiden, Konrad (1938) Hitler: A Biography , London: Constable & Co. Ltd. p. 390 ^ a b Nyomarkay 1967 , pp. 123–124, 130.

^ a b c d e Nyomarkay 1967 , p. 133.

^ Glenn D. Walters.

Lifestyle Theory: Past, Present, and Future . Nova Publishers, 2006, p. 40.

^ a b Weber, Thomas, Hitler's First War: Adolf Hitler, the Men of the List Regiment, and the First World War , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011, p. 251.

^ a b Gaab, Jeffrey S., Munich: Hofbräuhaus & History: Beer, Culture, & Politics , 2nd ed. New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc, 2008, p. 61.

^ Kershaw 1999 , pp. 34–35, 50–52, 60–67.

^ Overy, R.J., The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia , W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2004. pp. 399–403.

^ a b Bendersky 1985 , p. 49.

^ a b c Bendersky 1985 , p. 50.

^ a b Tooze 2006 , p. 101.

^ Tooze 2006 , pp. 100–101.

^ a b Tooze 2006 , p. 99.

^ a b Furet, François, Passing of an Illusion: The Idea of Communism in the Twentieth Century , Chicago; London: University of Chicago Press, 1999.

ISBN 0-226-27340-7 , pp. 191–192.

^ Furet, François, Passing of an Illusion: The Idea of Communism in the Twentieth Century , 1999, p. 191.

^ Nicosia, Francis R. (2000).

The Third Reich and the Palestine Question . Transaction Publishers. p. 82.

ISBN 0-7658-0624-X .

^ a b Buchanan, Patrick J. (2008).

Churchill, Hitler, and 'The Unnecessary War': How Britain Lost Its Empire and the West Lost the World . Crown/Archetype. p. 325.

ISBN 978-0-307-40956-0 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 7 March 2019 .

^ Fest, Joachim C.

(1974) [1973].

Hitler . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0-297-76755-8 .

^ a b c Broszat 1987 , p. 38.

^ Harrington, Anne (2021).

"Chapter Six: Life Science, Nazi Wholeness, and the 'Machine' in Germany's Midst" .

Reenchanted Science: Holism in German Culture from Wilhelm II to Hitler .

Princeton, New Jersey : Princeton University Press . p. 175.

doi : 10.1515/9780691218083-009 .

ISBN 978-0-691-21808-3 .

JSTOR j.ctv14163kf.11 .

S2CID 162490363 .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2022 . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

When Hans Shemm in 1935 declared National Socialism to be "politically applied biology," things began to look up, not only for holism , but for the life sciences in general. After all, if the good National Socialist citizen was now seen as the man or woman who understood and revered what were called "Life's laws," then it seemed clear that the life scientists had a major role to play in defining a National Socialist educational program that would transmit the essence of these laws to every family in every village in the country. [...] So much seemed familiar: the calls among the National Socialists to return to authentic "German" values and "ways of knowing," to "overcome" the materialism and mechanism of the "West" and the "Jewish-international lie" of scientific objectivity; the use of traditional volkisch tropes that spoke of the German people ( Volk ) as a mystical, pseudobiological whole and the state as an "organism" in which the individual was subsumed in the whole ("You are nothing, your Volk is everything"); the condemnation of Jews as an alien force representing chaos, mechanism, and inauthenticity.

Hitler himself had even used the stock imagery of conservative holism in Mein Kampf when he spoke of the democratic state as "a dead mechanism which only lays claim to existence for its own sake" and contrasted this with his vision of statehood for Germany in which "there must be formed a living organism with the exclusive aim of serving a higher idea." ^ a b c Deichmann, Ute (2020).

"Science and political ideology: The example of Nazi Germany" .

Mètode Science Studies Journal .

10 (Science and Nazism. The unconfessed collaboration of scientists with National Socialism).

Universitat de València : 129– 137.

doi : 10.7203/metode.10.13657 .

hdl : 10550/89369 .

ISSN 2174-9221 .

S2CID 203335127 .

Archived from the original on 1 March 2022 . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

Although in their basic framework Nazi anti-Semitic and racist ideology and policies were not grounded in science, scientists not only supported them in various ways, but also took advantage of them, for example by using the new possibilities of unethical experimentation in humans that these ideologies provided. Scientists' complicity with Nazi ideology and politics does, however, not mean that all sciences in Nazi Germany were ideologically tainted. I argue, rather, that despite the fact that some areas of science continued at high levels, science in Nazi Germany was most negatively affected not by the imposition of Nazi ideology on the conduct of science but by the enactment of legal measures that ensured the expulsion of Jewish scientists . The anti-Semitism of young faculty and students was particularly virulent. Moreover, I show that scientists supported Nazi ideologies and policies not only through so-called reductionist science such as eugenics and race-hygiene , but also by promoting organicist and holistic ideologies of the racial state. [...] The ideology of leading Nazi party ideologues was strongly influenced by the Volkish movement which, in the wake of the writings of philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte and other nineteenth century authors, promoted the idea of Volk (people) as an organic unity. They did not base their virulent anti-Semitism and racism on anthropological concepts.

^ Anker, Peder (2021).

"The Politics of Holism, Ecology, and Human Rights" .

Imperial Ecology: Environmental Order in the British Empire, 1895–1945 .

Cambridge, Massachusetts and London : Harvard University Press . p. 157.

doi : 10.4159/9780674020221-008 .

ISBN 978-0-674-02022-1 .

S2CID 142173094 .

The paradoxical character of the politics of holism is the theme of this chapter, which focuses on the mutually shaping relationship between John William Bews , John Phillips , and the South African politician Jan Christian Smuts . Smuts was a promoter of international peace and understanding through the League of Nations, but also a defender of racial suppression and white supremacy in his own country. His politics, I will argue, were fully consistent with his holistic philosophy of science. Smuts was guided by the efforts of ecologists such as Bews and Phillips, who provided him with a day-to-day update of the latest advances in scientific knowledge of natural laws governing Homo sapiens . A substantial part of this chapter will thus return to their research on human ecology to explore the mutual field of inspiration linking them and Smuts. Two aspects of this human ecological research were particularly important: the human gradualism or ecological "succession" of human personalities researched by Bews, and the concept of an ecological biotic community explored by Phillips. Smuts transformed this research into a policy of racial gradualism that respected local ways of life in different (biotic) communities, a policy he tried to morally sanctify and promote as author of the famous 1945 Preamble of the United Nation Charter about human rights.

^ Scheid, Volker (2016).

"Chapter 3: Holism, Chinese Medicine, and Systems Ideologies: Rewriting the Past to Imagine the Future" . In Whitehead, A.; Woods, A.; Atkinson, S.; Macnaughton, J.; Richards, J. (eds.).

The Edinburgh Companion to the Critical Medical Humanities . Vol. 1.

Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press .

doi : 10.3366/edinburgh/9781474400046.003.0003 .

ISBN 978-1-4744-0004-6 .

S2CID 13333626 . Bookshelf ID:NBK379258.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 – via NCBI .

Common Roots: Holism Before and During the Interwar Years : This chapter cannot explore in detail the complex entanglements between these different notions of holism, or how they reflect Germany's troubled path towards modernity. My starting point, instead, is the interwar years . By then, holism had become an important resource for people across Europe, the US and beyond—but once again specifically in Germany—for dealing with what Max Weber , in 1918, had famously analysed as a widely felt disenchantment with the modern world . The very word 'holism' (as opposed to ideas or practices designated as such today), as well as related words like 'emergence' or 'organicism', date from this time. It was coined in 1926 by Jan Smuts to describe a perceived tendency of evolutionary processes towards the formation of wholes, granting these wholes a special onto-epistemic significance that parts lack. This was cultural holism now underpinned by evolutionary science and deployed by Smuts not only as a tool for grasping the coming into being of the world but also as an ideological justification for the development of Apartheid in South Africa . In Weimar Germany and then under Nazism , holistic science became a mainstream academic endeavour, once more intermingling cultural politics and serious scientific research. Holistic perspectives also became popular in the interwar years among academics and the wider public throughout the UK and US. In France, it was associated with vitalist philosophies and the emergence of neo-Hippocratic thinking in medicine, manifesting the unease many people felt about the shifts that biomedicine was undergoing at the time.

^ Ryback 2010 , pp. 129–130.

^ a b c d Ryback 2010 , p. 129.

^ George L. Mosse, The Crisis of German Ideology: Intellectual Origins of the Third Reich (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1964), pp. 19–23.

^ Thomas Lekan and Thomas Zeller, "Introduction: The Landscape of German Environmental History", in Germany's Nature: Cultural Landscapes and Environmental History , edited by Thomas Lekan and Thomas Zeller (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2005), p. 3.

^ The Nazi concept of Lebensraum has connections with this idea, with German farmers being rooted to their soil, needing more of it for the expansion of the German Volk—whereas the Jew is precisely the opposite, nomadic and urban by nature. See: Roderick Stackelberg, The Routledge Companion to Nazi Germany (New York: Routledge, 2007), p. 259.

^ Additional evidence of Riehl's legacy can be seen in the Riehl Prize, Die Volkskunde als Wissenschaft (Folklore as Science) which was awarded in 1935 by the Nazis. See: George L. Mosse, The Crisis of German Ideology: Intellectual Origins of the Third Reich (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1964), p. 23. Applicants for the Riehl prize had stipulations that included only being of Aryan blood, and no evidence of membership in any Marxist parties or any organisation that stood against National Socialism. See: Hermann Stroback, "Folklore and Fascism before and around 1933," in The Nazification of an Academic Discipline: Folklore in the Third Reich , edited by James R Dow and Hannjost Lixfeld (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994), pp. 62–63.

^ Cyprian Blamires.

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, Inc., 2006, p. 542.

^ Keith H. Pickus.

Constructing Modern Identities: Jewish University Students in Germany, 1815–1914 . Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1999, p. 86.

^ a b Jonathan Olsen.

Nature and Nationalism: Right-wing Ecology and the Politics of Identity in Contemporary Germany . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1999, p. 62.

^ Andrew Gladding Whiteside, Austrian National Socialism before 1918, (1962), pp. 1–3 ^ a b Nina Witoszek, Lars Trägårdh.

Culture and Crisis: The Case of Germany and Sweden . Berghahn Books, 2002. pp. 89–90.

^ Witoszek, Nina and Lars Trägårdh, Culture and Crisis: The Case of Germany and Sweden , Berghahn Books, 2002, p. 90.

^ a b Gerwarth 2007 , p. 150.

^ Gerwarth 2007 , p. 149.

^ Gerwarth 2007 , p. 54.

^ Gerwarth 2007 , pp. 54, 131.

^ Gerwarth 2007 , p. 131.

^ a b David Nicholls.

Adolf Hitler: A Biographical Companion . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000. pp. 236–237.

^ a b David Nicholls.

Adolf Hitler: A Biographical Companion . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000. pp. 159–160.

^ Brigitte Hamann (2010).

Hitler's Vienna: A Portrait of the Tyrant as a Young Man . Tauris Parke Paperbacks. p. 302.

ISBN 978-1-84885-277-8 .

^ a b c d e f g Blamires, Cyprian; Jackson, Paul.

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia: Volume 1 . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, Inc, 2006, p. 62.

^ a b c d e f g Stackelberg, Roderick; Winkle, Sally Anne.

The Nazi Germany Sourcebook: An Anthology of Texts , London: Routledge, 2002, p. 11.

^ A. J. Woodman.

The Cambridge Companion to Tacitus , 2009, p. 294: "The white race was defined as beautiful, honourable and destined to rule; within it the Aryans are ' cette illustre famille humaine, la plus noble '." Originally a linguistic term synonymous with Indo-European, ' Aryan ' became, not least because of the Essai, the designation of a race, which Gobineau specified was 'la race germanique' ^ Blamires, Cyprian and Paul Jackson, World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia: Volume 1 , 2006, p. 126.

^ Stefan Kühl (2002).

Nazi Connection: Eugenics, American Racism, and German National Socialism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-514978-4 .

^ a b William Brustein.

Roots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe Before the Holocaust . Cambridge University Press, 2003, p. 207.

^ a b c Brustein, 2003, p. 210.

^ William Brustein.

Roots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe Before the Holocaust . Cambridge University Press, 2003, pp. 207, 209.

^ Nina Witoszek, Lars Trägårdh.

Culture and Crisis: The Case of Germany and Sweden . Berghahn Books, 2002, p. 89.

^ a b Jack Fischel.

The Holocaust . Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1998, p. 5.

^ Philip Rees , Biographical Dictionary of the Extreme Right Since 1890 , Simon & Schuster, 1990, p. 220 ^ a b Ryback 2010 , p. 130.

^ Roderick Stackelberg, Sally Anne Winkle.

The Nazi Germany Sourcebook: An Anthology of Texts , 2002, p. 45.

^ Ian Kershaw .

Hitler, 1936–45: Nemesis . New York: W.W. Norton & Company Inc., 2001, p. 588.

^ David Welch.

Hitler: Profile of a Dictator . 2nd edition. New York: UCL Press, 2001. pp. 13–14.

^ David Welch.

Hitler: Profile of a Dictator , 2001, p. 16.

^ "Nazism" .

Britannica . Archived from the original on 28 February 2024.

^ Pinkus, Oscar (2005).

The War Aims and Strategies of Adolf Hitler . McFarland & Company, Inc. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-7864-2054-4 .

^ Davies, Norman (1997).

Europe: A History . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 850.

ISBN 0-19-820171-0 .

^ Housden, Martyn (2000). "2: Ideologue".

Hitler: Study of a Revolutionary?

. New York: Routledge. p. 32.

ISBN 0-415-16359-5 .

^ a b Claudia Koonz (2005).

The Nazi Conscience . Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-01842-6 .

^ Richard Weikart (2009).

Hitler's Ethic . Palgrave Macmillan. p.

142 .

ISBN 978-0-230-62398-9 .

^ Sarah Ann Gordon (1984).

Hitler, Germans, and the 'Jewish Question' . Princeton University Press. p.

265 .

ISBN 978-0-691-10162-0 .

^ "Florida Holocaust Museum: Antisemitism – Post World War 1" (history), flholocaustmuseum.org, 2003, webpage: Post-WWI Antisemitism Archived 3 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "THHP Short Essay: What Was the Final Solution?". Holocaust-History.org, July 2004, webpage: HoloHist-Final Archived 4 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine : notes that Hermann Göring used the term in his order of 31 July 1941 to Reinhard Heydrich , chief of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA).

^ a b c Peter J. Bowler .

Evolution: The History of an Idea . 2nd edition. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1989. pp. 304–305.

^ Robert J. Richards .

Myth 19 That Darwin and Haeckel were Complicit in Nazi Biology . The University of Chicago.

http://home.uchicago.edu/~rjr6/articles/Myth.pdf Archived 12 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Peter J. Bowler.

Evolution: The History of an Idea , 1989, p. 305.

^ Denis R. Alexander, Ronald L. Numbers.

Biology and Ideology from Descartes to Dawkins . Chicago, Illinois; London: University of Chicago Press, 2010, p. 209.

^ Henry Friedlander.

The Origins of Nazi Genocide: From Euthanasia to the Final Solution . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995, p. 5.

^ a b Whitman, James Q. (2017).

Hitler's American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law . Princeton University Press. pp.

37– 47.

^ a b c d Kitchen, Martin , A History of Modern Germany, 1800–2000 , Malden, MA; Oxford, England; Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Publishing, Inc., 2006, p. 205.

^ a b c Hüppauf, Bernd-Rüdiger War, Violence, and the Modern Condition , Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1997, p. 92.

^ Rohkrämer, Thomas, "A Single Communal Faith?: The German Right from Conservatism to National Socialism", Monographs in German History . Volume 20, Berghahn Books, 2007, p. 130 ^ a b c d e f g Blamires, Cyprian; Jackson, Paul.

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia: Volume 1 . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, Inc, 2006, p. 628.

^ a b c d Winkler, Heinrich August and Alexander Sager, Germany: The Long Road West , English ed. 2006, p. 414.

^ Blamires, Cyprian; Jackson, Paul.

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia: Volume 1 , 2006, p. 629.

^ Weitz, Eric D., Weimar Germany: Promise and Tragedy , Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2007. pp. 336–337.

^ Weitz, Eric D., Weimar Germany: Promise and Tragedy , Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2007, p. 336.

^ German Federal Archive image description ^ a b Hughes, H. Stuart, Oswald Spengler , New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1992, p. 108.

^ Hughes, H. Stuart, Oswald Spengler , New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers, 1992, p. 109.

^ a b c Kaplan, Mordecai M.

Judaism as a Civilization: Toward a Reconstruction of American-Jewish Life . p. 73.

^ Farrenkopf, John (2001).

Prophet of Decline: Spengler on World History and Politics . LSU Press. pp.

237– 238.

ISBN 9780807127278 .

^ Stern, Fritz Richard The politics of cultural despair: a study in the rise of the Germanic ideology University of California Press reprint edition (1974) p. 296 ^ Burleigh, Michael The Third Reich: a new history Pan MacMillan (2001) p. 75 ^ Redles, David Nazi End Times; The Third Reich as a Millennial Reich in Kinane, Karolyn & Ryan, Michael A. (eds) End of Days: Essays on the Apocalypse from Antiquity to Modernity McFarland and Co (2009) p. 176.

^ Kershaw 1999 , p. 182.

^ Fulda, Bernhard.

Press and Politics in the Weimar Republic . Oxford University Press, 2009, p. 65.

^ Carlsten, F. L.

The Rise of Fascism . 2nd ed. University of California Press, 1982, p. 80.

^ David Jablonsky.

The Nazi Party in Dissolution: Hitler and the Verbotzeit, 1923–1925 . London; Totowa, NJ: Frank Cass and Company Ltd., 1989. pp. 20–26, 30 ^ a b c Hugh R. Trevor-Roper (ed.), Gerhard L. Weinberg (ed.).

Hitler's Table Talk 1941–1944: Secret Conversations . Enigma Books, 2008. p. 10 ^ Stanley G. Payne.

A History of Fascism, 1914–1945 . Madison: Wisconsin University Press, 1995. pp. 463–464.

^ Stanley G. Payne.

A History of Fascism, 1914–1945 , 1995, p. 463.

^ a b Stanley G. Payne.

A History of Fascism, 1914–1945 , 1995, p. 464.

^ Broszat 1981 , p. 29.

^ Giaccaria, Paolo; Minca, Claudio, eds. (2016).

Hitler's Geographies: The Spatialities of the Third Reich . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. pp. 10, 11, 29.

ISBN 978-0-226-27442-3 .

^ Neumann, Boaz (2002).

"The National Socialist Politics of Life" .

New German Critique (85): 107– 130.

doi : 10.2307/3115178 .

ISSN 0094-033X .

JSTOR 3115178 .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2023 . Retrieved 9 December 2023 .

^ Steve Thorne.

The Language of War . London: Routledge, 2006, p. 38.

ISBN 978-0-415-35867-5 ^ Bialas, Wolfgang, and Lothar Fritze, eds.

Nazi Ideology and Ethics.

Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014, pp. 15–57 ISBN 978-1443854221 ^ Giaccaria, Paolo; Minca, Claudio, eds. (2016). "1: For a Tentative Spatial Theory of the Third Reich".

Hitler's Geographies: The Spatialities of the Third Reich . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. p. 37.

ISBN 978-0-226-27442-3 .

^ Stephen J. Lee.

Europe, 1890–1945 , p. 237.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c d e Peter D. Stachura.

The Shaping of the Nazi State , p. 31.

^ Joseph W. Bendersk, A History of Nazi Germany: 1919–1945, p. 177 ^ Gliožaitis, Algirdas.

"Neumanno-Sasso byla" [The Case of Neumann-Sass].

Mažosios Lietuvos enciklopedija (in Lithuanian).

Archived from the original on 12 February 2022 . Retrieved 12 February 2022 .

^ a b André Mineau.

Operation Barbarossa: Ideology and Ethics Against Human Dignity . Rodopi, 2004, p. 36 ^ Hitler, Adolf (1939). "XIV: Germany's policy in Eastern Europe".

Mein Kampf . Hurst & Blackett Ltd. pp. 498, 500.

^ Rolf-Dieter Müller , Gerd R. Ueberschär .

Hitler's War in the East, 1941–1945: A Critical Assessment . Berghahn Books, 2009, p. 89.

^ Bradl Lightbody.

The Second World War: Ambitions to Nemesis . London; New York: Routledge, 2004, p. 97.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Tooze 2008 , pp. 161–162.

^ Tooze 2008 , pp. 166–167.

^ Tooze 2008 , pp. 167–168.

^ Goebbels, Joseph (1970).

The Goebbels Diaries, 1942–1943 . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0-8371-3815-2 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 September 2020 – via Google Books.

^ a b Weinberg, Gerhard L. (1995) Germany, Hitler, and World War II: Essays in modern German and world history Cambridge University Press , p. 36 Archived 15 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e f g h i j George Lachmann Mosse. Nazi Culture: Intellectual, Cultural and Social Life in the Third Reich, p. 79.

^ a b S.H. Milton (2001). " "Gypsies" as social outsiders in Nazi Germany". In Robert Gellately; Nathan Stoltzfus (eds.).

Social Outsiders in Nazi Germany . Princeton University Press. pp. 216, 231.

ISBN 978-0-691-08684-2 .

^ Michael Burleigh (1991).

The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945 . Cambridge University Press. p.

49 .

ISBN 978-0-521-39802-2 .

^ a b Majer 2003 , p. 180.

^ a b Mineau, André (2004).

Operation Barbarossa: Ideology and Ethics Against Human Dignity . Amsterdam; New York: Rodopi, p. 180.

ISBN 90-420-1633-7 .

^ Simone Gigliotti, Berel Lang .

The Holocaust: a reader . Malden, MA; Oxford, England; Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Publishing, 2005, p. 14.

^ a b Simone Gigliotti, Berel Lang.

The Holocaust: A Reader . Malden, MA; Oxford; Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Publishing, 2005, p. 14.

^ William W. Hagen (2012). " German History in Modern Times: Four Lives of the Nation Archived 2 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine ". Cambridge University Press, p. 313.

ISBN 0-521-19190-4 ^ Sandner (1999): 385 ( 66 in PDF Archived 12 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine ) Note 2. The author claims that the term Aktion T4 was not used by the Nazis and that it was first used in the trials of the doctors and later included in the historiography.

^ Hitler, Adolf (1961).

Hitler's Secret Book . New York: Grove Press. pp.

8– 9, 17– 18.

ISBN 978-0-394-62003-9 .

OCLC 9830111 .

Sparta must be regarded as the first Völkisch State. The exposure of the sick, weak, deformed children, in short, their destruction, was more decent and in truth a thousand times more humane than the wretched insanity of our day which preserves the most pathological subject.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Mike Hawkins (1997).

Social Darwinism in European and American Thought, 1860–1945: nature as model and nature as threat . Cambridge University Press. p. 276.

ISBN 978-0-521-57434-1 .

OCLC 34705047 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Clarence Lusane .

Hitler's Black Victims: The Historical Experiences of Afro-Germans, European Blacks, Africans, and African Americans in the Nazi Era . Routledge, 2002. pp. 112–113, 189.

^ Bryan Mark Rigg (2004).

Hitler's Jewish Soldiers: The Untold Story Of Nazi Racial Laws And Men Of Jewish Descent In The German Military . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-1358-8 .

^ Evans 2005 , p. 507.

^ This was the result of either a club foot or osteomyelitis . Goebbels is commonly said to have had club foot ( talipes equinovarus ), a congenital condition.

William L. Shirer , who worked in Berlin as a journalist in the 1930s and was acquainted with Goebbels, wrote in The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich (1960) that the deformity was caused by a childhood attack of osteomyelitis and a failed operation to correct it.

^ Anne Maxwell (2010 [2008]).

Picture Imperfect: Photography and Eugenics, 1870–1940 . Eastbourne, England; Portland, OR: Sussex Academic Press p. 150.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ John Cornwell.

Hitler's Scientists: Science, War, and the Devil's Pact . Penguin, 2004.

[1] Archived 6 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Racisms Made in. Germany (Racism Analysis |Yearbook 2 – 2011) Ed. by Wulf D. Hund, Christian Koller, Moshe Zimmermann p. 19 ^ a b Max Weinreich.

Hitler's Professors: The Part of Scholarship in Germany's Crimes Against the Jewish People . Yale University Press, 1999, p. 111.

^ a b c Steinweis 2008 , p. 28.

^ Steinweis 2008 , pp. 31–32.

^ Steinweis 2008 , p. 29.

^ Sources: Müller, Rolf-Dieter; Ueberschar, Gerd R. (2009).

Hitler's war in the East, 1941–1945 . New York: Berghahn Books. p. 245.

ISBN 978-1-84545-501-9 .

"Der Untermensch" .

Bulmash Family Holocaust Collection . January 1942. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020.

E. Aschheim, Steven (1992). "8: Nietzsche in the Third Reich".

The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890–1990 . Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp.

236– 237.

ISBN 0-520-08555-8 .

^ André Mineau.

Operation Barbarossa: Ideology and Ethics Against Human Dignity . Rodopi, 2004. pp. 34–36.

^ Steve Thorne.

The Language of War . London: Routledge, 2006, p. 38.

^ Anton Weiss-Wendt (2010).

Eradicating Differences: The Treatment of Minorities in Nazi-Dominated Europe . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 63.

ISBN 978-1-4438-2449-1 .

^ Wendy Lower .

Nazi Empire-building and the Holocaust In Ukraine . The University of North Carolina Press, 2005, p. 27.

^ Marvin Perry. Western Civilization: A Brief History. Cengage Learning, 2012, p. 468.

^ E. Aschheim, Steven (1992). "8: Nietzsche in the Third Reich".

The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890–1990 . Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp.

236– 237.

ISBN 0-520-08555-8 .

^ Müller, Rolf-Dieter; Ueberschar, Gerd R. (2009).

Hitler's war in the East, 1941–1945 . New York: Berghahn Books. p. 245.

ISBN 978-1-84545-501-9 .

^ E. Aschheim, Steven (1992). "8: Nietzsche in the Third Reich".

The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890-1990 . Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 236.

ISBN 0-520-08555-8 .

^ Bendersky, Joseph W. (2007).

A Concise History of Nazi Germany . Plymouth, England: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers Inc. pp.

161– 162.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5363-7 .

^ Norman Davies.

Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory . Pan Macmillan, 2008. pp. 167, 209.

^ Richard A. Koenigsberg.

Nations have the Right to Kill: Hitler, the Holocaust, and War . New York: Library of Social Science, 2009, p. 2.

^ a b Goebbels, Joseph; Mjölnir (1932).

Die verfluchten Hakenkreuzler. Etwas zum Nachdenken . Munich: Franz Eher Nachfolger . English translation: Those Damned Nazis Archived 10 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Mason 1993 , p. 6.

^ a b Mason 1993 , p. 7.

^ Bendersky 1985 , p. 40.

^ Fritz, Stephen.

Frontsoldaten: The German Soldier in World War II.

University Press of Kentucky, 1997.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Bendersky 1985 , p. 48.

^ a b David Nicholls.

Adolf Hitler: A Biographical Companion . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2000, p. 245.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Grunberger, Richard, A Social History of the Third Reich , Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1971. pp. 167, 175–176 ^ Alf Lüdtke, "The 'Honor of Labor': Industrial Workers and the Power of Symbols under National Socialism", in Nazism and German Society, 1933–1945 , edited by David F. Crew (New York: Routledge, 1994), pp. 67–109.

^ a b Richard Grunberger , The 12-Year Reich , p. 46, ISBN 0-03-076435-1 ^ Burleigh, Michael.

The Third Reich: A New History , New York: Hill and Wang, 2000. pp. 76–77.

^ Mason 1993 , pp. 48–50.

^ a b Mason 1993 , p. 49.

^ Mason 1993 , p. 44.

^ Burleigh, Michael.

The Third Reich: A New History , New York: Hill and Wang, 2000, p. 77.

^ Mason 1993 , p. 48.

^ Fischer, Conan, ed. The rise of national socialism and the working classes in Weimar Germany. Berghahn Books, 1996.

^ Mühlberger, Detlef. "The sociology of the NSDAP: The question of working-class membership." Journal of Contemporary History 15, no. 3 (1980): 493–511.

^ Fritz, Stephen. Frontsoldaten: The German Soldier in World War II. University Press of Kentucky, 1997, p. 210 ^ Tooze 2008 , p. 143.

^ Spielvogel, Jackson J. Hitler and Nazi Germany: A History. Routledge, 2016.

^ Beck, Hermann (2016).

"The Antibourgeois Character of National Socialism" .

The Journal of Modern History .

88 (3). The University of Chicago Press: 572– 609.

doi : 10.1086/687528 .

S2CID 157869544 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 7 October 2021 .

^ Steele, David Ramsay. "The Mystery of Fascism." Liberty Magazine (2001).

^ For more elucidation about this conception and its oversimplification, see: Renate Bridenthal and Claudia Koonz, "Beyond Kinder, Küche, Kirche : Weimar Women in Politics and Work" in Renate Bridenthal, et al. (eds), When Biology Became Destiny in Weimar and Nazi Germany (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1984), pp. 33–65.

^ Claudia Koonz , Mothers in the Fatherland: Women, the Family and Nazi Politics (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1988), pp. 53–59.

^ Hitler on 23 November 1937. In Max Domarus ed., Hitler: Reden und Proklamationen, 1932–1945 , (vol I). Triumph. (Würzburg: Verlagsdruckerei Schmidt, 1962), p. 452.

^ Adolf Hitler in a speech to the National Socialist Women's Congress, published in the Völkischer Beobachter , 15 September 1935 (Wiener Library Clipping Collection). Cited from: George Mosse, Nazi Culture: Intellectual, Cultural and Social Life in the Third Reich (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2003), p. 40.

^ Claudia Koonz , Mothers in the Fatherland: Women, the Family and Nazi Politics (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1988), pp. 149, 185–187.

^ Jill Stephenson, Women in Nazi Germany (London and New York: Longman, 2001), pp. 37–40.

^ Gerda Bormann was concerned by the ratio of racially valuable women that outnumbered men and she thought that the war would make the situation worse in terms of childbirths, so much so that she advocated a law (never passed) which allowed healthy Aryan men to have two wives. See: Anna Maria Sigmund, Women of the Third Reich (Ontario: NDE, 2000), pp. 17–19.

^ Anna Maria Sigmund, Women of the Third Reich (Ontario: NDE, 2000), p. 17.

^ Himmler was thinking about members of the SS fulfilling this task. See: Felix Kersten, Totenkopf und Treue. Aus den Tagebuchblättern des finnischen Medizinalrats Felix Kersten (Hamburg: Mölich Verlag, 1952), pp. 228–229.

^ a b Leila J. Rupp (1978).

Mobilizing Women for War: German and American Propaganda, 1939–1945 . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-04649-5 .

^ Helen Boak.

"Nazi policies on German women during the Second World War – Lessons learned from the First World War?" . pp.

4– 5.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ Robert Gellately (2001).

Backing Hitler: Consent and Coercion in Nazi Germany . Oxford University Press. p.

155 .

ISBN 978-0-19-160452-2 .

^ Friedmann, Jan (21 January 2010).

"The 'Dishonorable' German Girls: The Forgotten Persecution of Women in World War II" .

Der Spiegel .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2022 . Retrieved 21 January 2010 .

^ Robert Gellately (1990).

The Gestapo and German Society: Enforcing Racial Policy, 1933–1945 . Clarendon Press. p. 224.

ISBN 978-0-19-820297-4 .

^ Richard J. Evans (2012).

The Third Reich at War: How the Nazis Led Germany from Conquest to Disaster . Penguin Books Limited. p. 355.

ISBN 978-0-14-191755-9 .

^ Majer 2003 , p. 369.

^ Majer 2003 , pp. 331–32.

^ Jill Stephenson (2001).

Women in Nazi Germany . Longman. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-582-41836-3 .

^ Peter Longerich (2012).

Heinrich Himmler: A Life . Oxford University Press. p.

475 .

ISBN 978-0-19-959232-6 .

^ " The Jewish Question in Education Archived 25 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine " ^ Nunn, Zavier (2022).

"Trans Liminality and the Nazi State" .

Past & Present (260): 123– 157.

doi : 10.1093/pastj/gtac018 .

^ "Paper: Trans Identities and "Cross Dressing" in Nazi Germany: Trans People as a Discrete Target of State Violence (134th Annual Meeting (January 3–6, 2020))" .

aha.confex.com .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ Sutton, Katie (2012).

" 'We Too Deserve a Place in the Sun': The Politics of Transvestite Identity in Weimar Germany" .

German Studies Review .

35 (2): 348.

doi : 10.1353/gsr.2012.a478043 .

JSTOR 23269669 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Paragraph 175 and the Nazi Campaign against Homosexuality" .

The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 March 2023 .

Not everyone arrested under Paragraph 175 identified as a man. During the German Empire and the Weimar Republic, Germany was home to a developing community of people who identified as 'transvestites.' [...] Initially, this term encompassed people who performed in drag, people who cross-dressed for pleasure, as well as those who today might identify as trans or transgender.

^ "Transgender Experiences in Weimar and Nazi Germany" .

Museum of Jewish Heritage – A Living Memorial to the Holocaust .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

^ Marhoefer, Laurie (6 June 2023).

"Historians are learning more about how the Nazis targeted trans people" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2024 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

^ Plant 1988 , p. 99.

^ Pretzel, Andreas (2005).

"Vom Staatsfeind zum Volksfeind. Zur Radikalisierung der Homosexuellenverfolgung im Zusammenwirken von Polizei und Justiz" . In Zur Nieden, Susanne (ed.).

Homosexualität und Staatsräson. Männlichkeit, Homophobie und Politik in Deutschland 1900–1945 . Frankfurt/M.: Campus Verlag. p. 236.

ISBN 978-3-593-37749-0 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 14 August 2015 .

^ Friedman 2011 , p. 392.

^ Neander, Biedron.

"Homosexuals. A Separate Category of Prisoners" . Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum. Archived from the original on 14 January 2014 . Retrieved 10 August 2013 .

^ Plant 1988 , pp. 1–276.

^ J Noakes and G Pridham, Documents on Nazism, 1919–1945 , London 1974 ^ a b McNab 2009 , p. 182.

^ a b David Redles.

Hitler's Millennial Reich: Apocalyptic Belief and the Search for Salvation . New York; London: New York University Press, 2005, p. 60.

^ Scholarship for Martin Luther's 1543 treatise, On the Jews and their Lies , exercising influence on Germany's attitude: * Wallmann, Johannes. "The Reception of Luther's Writings on the Jews from the Reformation to the End of the 19th Century", Lutheran Quarterly , n.s. 1 (Spring 1987) 1:72–97. Wallmann writes: "The assertion that Luther's expressions of anti-Jewish sentiment have been of major and persistent influence in the centuries after the Reformation, and that there exists a continuity between Protestant anti-Judaism and modern racially oriented anti-Semitism, is at present wide-spread in the literature; since the Second World War it has understandably become the prevailing opinion." * Michael, Robert.

Holy Hatred: Christianity, Antisemitism, and the Holocaust . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006; see chapter 4 "The Germanies from Luther to Hitler", pp. 105–151. * Hillerbrand, Hans J. "Martin Luther," Encyclopædia Britannica , 2007. Hillerbrand writes: "[H]is strident pronouncements against the Jews, especially toward the end of his life, have raised the question of whether Luther significantly encouraged the development of German anti-Semitism. Although many scholars have taken this view, this perspective puts far too much emphasis on Luther and not enough on the larger peculiarities of German history." ^ Ellis, Marc H .

"Hitler and the Holocaust, Christian Anti-Semitism" Archived 10 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Baylor University Center for American and Jewish Studies, Spring 2004, slide 14. Also see Nuremberg Trial Proceedings Archived 21 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine , Vol. 12, p. 318, Avalon Project, Yale Law School, 19 April 1946.

^ Robert Anthony Krieg.

Catholic Theologians in Nazi Germany . London: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2004. pp. 4–8.

^ a b c Robert Anthony Krieg.

Catholic Theologians in Nazi Germany , 2004, p. 4.

^ Ausma Cimdiņa, Jonathan Osmond.

Power and Culture: Hegemony, Interaction and Dissent . PLUS-Pisa University Press, 2006.

^ a b c Roger Griffin.

Fascism, Totalitarianism and Political Religion . Oxon; New York: Routledge, 2005, p. 85.

^ "DÖW – Erinnern – Biographien – Spurensuche – Maria Restituta (Helene Kafka, 1894–1943)" .

www.doew.at .

Archived from the original on 27 October 2022 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "Zur Erinnerung an Dr. Roman Karl Scholz" .

roman-karl-scholz.zurerinnerung.at .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "Gedenken an Widerstandskämpfer Roman Scholz" .

www.noen.at . 25 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "DöW – Dokumentationsarchiv des Österreichischen Widerstandes" .

ausstellung.de.doew.at .

Archived from the original on 8 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ Stehle, Hansjakob (5 January 1996).

"Die Spione aus dem Pfarrhaus" .

Die Zeit .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ "Im Netz der Verräter" .

Der Standard .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ Hecht, Rauch, Rodt: Geköpft für Christus & Österreich. (1995).

^ Pirker, Peter (2012). Suberversion deutscher Herrschaft. Der britische Geheimdienst SOE und Österreich. Zeitgeschichte im Kontext. 6. Göttingen: V & R Unipress. p. 252.

ISBN 978-3-86234-990-6 .

^ Erika Weinzierl: Kirchlicher Widerstand gegen den Nationalsozialismus. In: Themen der Zeitgeschichte und der Gegenwart. Vienna 2004, ISBN 3-8258-7549-0 , p. 76.

^ Helga Thoma "Mahner-Helfer-Patrioten: Porträts aus dem österreichischen Widerstand" (2004), p 159.

^ Benedicta Maria Kempner: "Priester vor Hitlers Tribunalen" (1966).

^ Roger Griffin.

Fascism, Totalitarianism and Political Religion , 2005, p. 93.

^ a b DeLong, J. Bradford (February 1997).

"Slouching Towards Utopia?: The Economic History of the Twentieth Century. XV. Nazis and Soviets" .

econ161.berkeley.edu . University of California at Berkeley. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008 . Retrieved 21 April 2013 .

^ R.J. Overy , War and Economy in the Third Reich (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), pp. 1–5.

^ R. J. Overy , War and Economy in the Third Reich (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), pp. 7–11.

^ Richard Grunberger, The 12-Year Reich: A Social History of Nazi Germany, 1933–1945 (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1971), p. 19.

^ Beck Hermann, The Fateful Alliance: German Conservatives and Nazis in 1933: The Machtergreifung in a New Light (New York: Berghahn Books, 2008), p. 243.

^ a b Bel, Germà (April 2006).

"Against the mainstream: Nazi privatization in 1930s Germany" (PDF) .

Economic History Review .

63 (1). University of Barcelona: 34– 55.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0289.2009.00473.x .

hdl : 2445/11716 .

S2CID 154486694 .

SSRN 895247 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 20 September 2020 .

^ Overy, Richard (2006).

Why The Allies Won . London: Random House.

ISBN 978-1-84595-065-1 .

^ Tooze 2006 , p. 49.

^ Tooze 2006 , p. 37.

^ Tooze 2007 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ W. Dick; A. Lichtenberg (4 August 2012).

"The myth of Hitler's role in building the German autobahn" Archived 16 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine . Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 4 August 2012.

^ a b Tooze 2006 , p. 38.

^ Overy, R.J.

(1996).

The Nazi economic recovery 1932–1938 (2nd ed.). Cambridge [u.a.]: Cambridge Univ. Press. p. 42.

ISBN 0-521-55767-4 .

^ William L. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011), p. 260.

^ Tooze 2006 , p. 55.

^ Tooze 2006 , p. 66.

^ Evans 2008 , p. 333.

^ a b Tooze 2006 , p. 100.

^ Tooze 2006 , p. 102.

^ Tooze 2006 , p. 114.

^ Guillebaud, Claude W. 1939.

The Economic Recovery of Germany 1933–1938 . London: MacMillan and Co. Limited.

^ a b Overy, R.J., The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia , W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2004, p. 403.

^ Temin, Peter (November 1991).

"Soviet and Nazi economic planning in the 1930s" (PDF) .

The Economic History Review . New Series.

44 (4): 573– 593.

doi : 10.2307/2597802 .

hdl : 1721.1/64262 .

JSTOR 2597802 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ Barkai, Avaraham 1990.

Nazi Economics: Ideology, Theory and Policy.

Oxford Berg Publisher.

^ Hayes, Peter. 1987 Industry and Ideology IG Farben in the Nazi Era.

Cambridge University Press.

^ a b Evans 2005 , pp. 483–484.

^ Evans 2005 , p. 484.

^ Evans 2005 , pp. 484–485.

^ Evans 2005 , pp. 486–487.

^ Evans 2005 , p. 489.

^ Richard Grunberger, The 12-Year Reich , p. 79, ISBN 0-03-076435-1 ^ Ian Kershaw, Hitler, the Germans, and the Final Solution (New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 2008), pp. 52–53.

^ Rafael Scheck, Germany, 1871–1945: A Concise History , p. 167.

^ a b Berman, Sheri (2006).

The Primacy of Politics: Social Democracy and the Making of Europe's Twentieth Century . Cambridge University Press. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-521-52110-9 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ R.J. Overy , War and Economy in the Third Reich (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), pp. 1–30.

^ Klaus Hildebrand, The Third Reich (London & New York: Routledge, 1986), pp. 39–48.

^ Jost Dülffer, Nazi Germany 1933–1945: Faith and Annihilation (London: Bloomsbury, 2009), pp. 72–73.

^ a b Bendersky, Joseph W.

A History of Nazi Germany: 1919–1945 . 2nd ed. Burnham Publishers, 2000, p. 72.

^ Bendersky, Joseph W.

A History of Nazi Germany: 1919–1945 . 2nd ed. Burnham Publishers, 2000, p. 40.

^ Carroll Quigley, Tragedy and Hope , 1966, p. 619.

^ Hitler, Adolf, Mein Kampf , Hurst and Blackett ltd., 1939, p. 343 ^ Bendersky 1985 , p. 51.

^ Bendersky 1985 , pp. 49–50.

^ "They must unite, [Hitler] said, to defeat the common enemy, Jewish Marxism." A New Beginning, Adolf Hitler, Völkischer Beobachter.

February 1925. Cited in: Toland, John (1992).

Adolf Hitler . Anchor Books. p. 207.

ISBN 978-0-385-03724-2 .

^ Kershaw, Ian (2008).

Hitler, the Germans, and the Final Solution . Yale University Press. p.

53 .

ISBN 978-0-300-12427-9 .

^ a b Bendersky 1985 , p. 52.

^ "The Nazi-Sozi" [Joseph Goebbels, Der Nazi-Sozi (Elberfeld: Verlag der Nationalsozialistischen Briefe, 1927)].

Archived from the original on 29 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 August 2017 .

^ Carsten, Francis Ludwig The Rise of Fascism , 2nd ed. University of California Press, 1982, p. 137. Quoting: Hitler, A., Sunday Express , 28 September 1930.

^ David Nicholls.

Adolf Hitler: A Biographical Companion . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2000, p. 50.

^ Ben Fowkes.

Communism in Germany under the Weimar Republic . St. Martin's Press, New York, 1984. pp. 166–167 ^ Ben Fowkes.

Communism in Germany under the Weimar Republic . St. Martin's Press, New York, 1984. pp. 170–171 ^ Ben Fowkes.

Communism in Germany under the Weimar Republic . St. Martin's Press, New York, 1984, p. 171 ^ Bendersky, Joseph W.

A History of Nazi Germany: 1919–1945 . 2nd ed. Burnham Publishers, 2000. pp. 58–59.

^ a b c d Overy, R.J., The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia , W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2004, p. 399 ^ a b Tooze (2006) , pp. 8–11 ^ Overy, R.J.

, The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia , W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2004, p. 230.

^ Kritika: explorations in Russian and Eurasian history , Volume 7, Issue 4. Slavica Publishers, 2006, p. 922.

^ a b c Overy, R.J., The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia , W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2004, p. 402.

^ "The Economic System of Corporatism" . San José University Department of Economics. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 October 2021 .

^ Gat, Azar (1 July 2007).

"The Return of Authoritarian Great Powers" .

Foreign Affairs .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2022 . Retrieved 8 June 2019 .

^ Fuchs, Christian (29 June 2017).

"The Relevance of Franz L. Neumann's Critical Theory in 2017: Anxiety and Politics in the New Age of Authoritarian Capitalism" (PDF) .

Media, Culture & Society .

40 (5): 779– 791.

doi : 10.1177/0163443718772147 .

S2CID 149705789 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 October 2019 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

^ De Grand, Alexander J. (2000) [1938].

Italian fascism: Its Origins and Development (3rd ed.). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0-8032-6622-3 .

OCLC 42462895 .

^ Edwin, Black (2001).

IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance Between Nazi Germany and America's Most Powerful Corporation (1st ed.). New York: Crown Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-609-60799-2 .

OCLC 45896166 .

^ Paxton, Robert O.

(2005).

The Anatomy of Fascism (1st ed.). New York: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-1-4000-3391-1 .

OCLC 58452991 .

– Read online, registration required ^ Tooze 2006 , pp. 99–100.

^ Read, Anthony, The Devil's Disciples: Hitler's Inner Circle , New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2004, p. 138 ^ Read, Anthony, The Devil's Disciples: Hitler's Inner Circle , New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2004, p. 142 ^ Nyomarkay 1967 , pp. 1110–111.

^ Nyomarkay 1967 , p. 113.

^ Nyomarkay 1967 , p. 119.

^ Nyomarkay 1967 , pp. 123–124.

^ Mosse, George Lachmann (1966).

Nazi Culture: Intellectual, Cultural and Social Life in the Third Reich . Univ of Wisconsin Press. p. 239.

ISBN 978-0-299-19304-1 .

^ Fest, Joachim (2013).

Hitler . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 418.

ISBN 978-0-544-19554-7 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Parker, David, ed. (2000).

Revolutions and the Revolutionary Tradition: In the West 1560–1991 . London: Routledge. pp. 3, 192, 193, 194.

ISBN 0-415-17294-2 .

^ Browder, George C (2004).

Foundations of the Nazi Police State: The Formation of Sipo and SD . University Press of Kentucky. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-8131-9111-9 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Griffin, Roger (1995).

Fascism . Oxford University Press. pp. 133, 134.

ISBN 978-0-19-289249-2 .

^ Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (Orlando, FL Harcourt Inc., 1973), pp. 305–459.

^ Michael Geyer and Sheila Fitzpatrick, eds., "Introduction – After Totalitarianism: Stalinism and Nazism Compared", in Beyond Totalitarianism: Stalinism and Nazism Compared (Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008), pp. 20–21.

^ Griffin, Roger (2000). "11: Revolution from the Right: Fascism". In Parker, David (ed.).

Revolutions and the Revolutionary Tradition: In the West 1560–1991 . London: Routledge. p. 193.

ISBN 0-415-17294-2 .

^ Griffin, Roger (1995).

Fascism . Oxford University Press. pp. 138, 139.

ISBN 978-0-19-289249-2 .

^ Griffin, Roger (1995).

Fascism . Oxford University Press. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-19-289249-2 .

^ a b Bracher 1970 , pp. 19–20.

^ Bracher 1970 , p. 165.

^ Eksteins, Modris. Rites of spring: The Great War and the birth of the modern age. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2000, p. 303 ^ Kershaw, Ian (2016).

To Hell and Back: Europe 1914–1949 . New York: Penguin Books . p. 265.

ISBN 978-0-14-310992-1 .

^ Housden, Martyn (2000) Hitler: Study of a Revolutionary?

. New York: Routledge, p. 193.

ISBN 0-415-16359-5 ^ Bracher 1970 , p. 179.

^ Bracher 1970 , pp. 421–422.

^ Sarti, Wendy Adele-Marie (2011).

Women and Nazis: Perpetrators of Genocide and Other Crimes During Hitler's Regime, 1933–1945 . Academica Press. p. 19.

ISBN 978-1-936320-11-0 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 .

^ Kershaw 1999 , p. 82.

^ Broszat 1981 , pp. 21–22.

^ Bracher 1970 , pp. 231–232.

^ Evans 2003 , p. 274.

^ Kershaw 1999 , pp. 501–503.

^ Bracher 1970 , pp. 300–302.

^ Balfour 1964 , p. 419.

^ Gunther, John (1936).

Inside Europe . Harper & Brothers. pp.

321– 323.

Archived from the original on 29 November 2019 . Retrieved 4 February 2024 .

^ Dan van der Vat (4 July 2011).

"Otto von Habsburg obituary" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2013 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ "Biography" .

Otto von Habsburg Foundation . 12 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 28 November 2023 . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .

^ Omeidl "Rudolf Hess, der Stellvertreter des Führers, hatte den deutschen Invasionstruppen für das neutrale Belgien den Befehl erteilt, Otto von Habsburg und seine Brüder, falls sie gefasst würden, ohne jedes weitere Verfahren sofort zu erschießen." "Monarch" . Archived from the original on 5 October 2010 . Retrieved 1 November 2011 .

^ Zoch, Irene (22 February 2004).

"Habsburgs demand return of estates seized by Nazis in 1938" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ "Otto von Habsburg dies at age 98" .

Newser .

AP . Archived from the original on 26 October 2019 . Retrieved 4 February 2024 .

^ Blamires, Cyprian P. (2006). Blamires, C. P.; Jackson, Paul (eds.).

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia . Vol. 1: A–K. ABC-CLIO. pp.

459– 461.

ISBN 978-1-57607-940-9 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

Cite error: A list-defined reference named "Kobrak2004" is not used in the content (see the help page ).

Bibliography Bendersky, Joseph W. (1985).

A History of Nazi Germany . Nelson-Hall.

Bracher, Karl Dietrich (1970).

The German Dictatorship . Translated by Jean Steinberg. New York: Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-013724-8 .

Broszat, Martin (1981).

The Hitler State: The foundation and development of the internal structure of the Third Reich . Translated by John W. Hiden. New York: Longman.

ISBN 0-582-48997-0 .

Broszat, Martin (1987) [1984].

Hitler and the Collapse of Weimar Germany . Translated by V. R. Berghahn. Providence, Rhode Island: Berg Publishers.

ISBN 0-85496-517-3 .

Childers, Thomas (2001a).

"The Weimar Republic and the Rise of the Nazi Party" .

A History of Hitler's Empire, 2nd Edition . Episode 3.

The Great Courses .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 .

Evans, Richard J.

(2003).

The Coming of the Third Reich . New York: Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-303469-8 .

Evans, Richard J.

(2005).

The Third Reich in Power . New York: Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-303790-3 .

Evans, Richard J. (2008).

The Third Reich at War . New York: Penguin.

Friedman, Jonathan C., ed. (2011).

The Routledge history of the Holocaust . The Routledge histories. Abingdon, Oxon ; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-77956-2 .

OCLC 633145422 .

Fritzsche, Peter (1990).

Rehearsals for Fascism: Populism and Political Mobilization in Weimar Germany . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-505780-5 .

Gerwarth, Robert (2007).

The Bismarck Myth: Weimar Germany and the Legacy of the Iron Chancellor . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-923689-3 .

Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas (2004) [1985].

The Occult Roots of Nazism : Secret Aryan Cults and Their Influence on Nazi Ideology: The Ariosophists of Austria and Germany, 1890–1935 . Wellingborough, England: The Aquarian Press.

ISBN 0-85030-402-4 , 1860649734 .

Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas (2003) [2002].

Black Sun: Aryan Cults, Esoteric Nazism and the Politics of Identity . New York University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-3155-0 .

Jaworska, Sylvia (2011).

"Anti-Slavic imagery in German radical nationalist discourse at the turn of the twentieth century: A prelude to Nazi ideology?" (PDF) .

Patterns of Prejudice .

45 (5): 435– 452.

doi : 10.1080/0031322x.2011.624762 .

S2CID 3743556 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2018 . Retrieved 22 May 2017 .

Kershaw, Ian (1999).

Hitler 1889–1936: Hubris . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-013363-9 .

Klemperer, Victor (2006) [1957] The Language of the Third Reich: LTI – Lingua Tertii Imperii: A Philologist's Notebooks . New York: Continuum.

ISBN 0-8264-9130-8 Majer, Diemut (2003).

"Non-Germans" Under the Third Reich: The Nazi Judicial and Administrative System in Germany and Occupied Eastern Europe with Special Regard to Occupied Poland, 1939–1945 . JHU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-6493-3 .

Mason, Timothy W.

(1993).

Social Policy in the Third Reich . Providence, RI: Berg Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-85496-410-9 .

McNab, Chris (2009).

The Third Reich . Amber Books Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-906626-51-8 .

Miller, Barbara (2014).

Nazi Ideology Before 1933: A Documentation . University of Texas Press.

ISBN 978-1-4773-0445-7 .

Nyomarkay, Joseph (1967).

Charisma and Factionalism in the Nazi Party . Univ Of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0-8166-0429-6 .

Paxton, Robert (2005).

The Anatomy of Fascism . London: Penguin Books Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-14-101432-6 .

Peukert, Detlev (1989).

Inside Nazi Germany: Conformity, Opposition, and Racism in Everyday Life . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-04480-5 .

Plant, Richard (1988).

The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War Against Homosexuals . Owl Books.

ISBN 0-8050-0600-1 .

Redles, David (2005).

Hitler's Millennial Reich: Apocalyptic Belief and the Search for Salvation . New York: University Press.

ISBN 0-8147-7524-1 .

Ryback, Timothy W.

(2010).

Hitler's Private Library: The Books That Shaped His Life . New York; Toronto: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0-307-45526-0 .

Steigmann-Gall, Richard (2003).

The Holy Reich: Nazi Conceptions of Christianity, 1919–1945 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-82371-5 Steinweis, Alan (2008).

Studying the Jew: Scholarly Antisemitism in Nazi Germany . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-02761-9 .

Tooze, Adam (2006).

The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy . New York: Viking.

ISBN 978-0-670-03826-8 .

Tooze, Adam (2007).

The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy . New York: Viking.

ISBN 978-0-670-03826-8 .

Tooze, Adam (2008).

The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy . London: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-311320-1 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Socialism .

The dictionary definition of Nazi at Wiktionary The dictionary definition of Hitlerism at Wiktionary Nazism at the Encyclopædia Britannica Works by or about Nazism at the Internet Archive Hitler's National Socialist Party platform Exhibit on Hitler and the Germans – slideshow by The New York Times v t e Nazism Organisation Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Atrocities and war crimes Action T4 Nazi concentration camps Extermination camp Final Solution Human experimentation Romani genocide Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Role and impact in German society The Wehrmacht Economy Nobility Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Category Links to related articles v t e Nazi Party Leader Anton Drexler (1919–1921) Adolf Hitler (1921–1945) Martin Bormann (1945) History Adolf Hitler's rise to power Beer Hall Putsch Brown House, Munich Denazification Enabling Act of 1933 German Workers' Party National Socialist Program Nazism Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Röhm scandal SA Thule Society Party offices Amt Rosenberg Hitler Youth Hitler's Chancellery Nazi Party Chancellery Office of Colonial Policy Office of Military Policy Office of Racial Policy Office of Foreign Affairs NSDAP/AO SS SS Education Office Publications Völkischer Beobachter Das Schwarze Korps Das Reich Innviertler Heimatblatt Arbeitertum Der Angriff Panzerbär Der Stürmer Kampfverlag Notable members Artur Axmann Houston Stewart Chamberlain Kurt Daluege Richard Walther Darré Rudolf Diels Karl Dönitz Dietrich Eckart Adolf Eichmann Hans Frank Roland Freisler Wilhelm Frick Walther Funk Joseph Goebbels Hermann Göring Ernst Hanfstaengl Rudolf Hess Reinhard Heydrich Heinrich Himmler Rudolf Höss Ernst Kaltenbrunner Robert Ley Josef Mengele Konstantin von Neurath Joachim von Ribbentrop Ernst Röhm Alfred Rosenberg Bernhard Rust Fritz Todt Baldur von Schirach Arthur Seyss-Inquart Albert Speer Gregor Strasser Otto Strasser Julius Streicher Derivatives Black Front ( Strasserism ) / German Social Union Deutsche Reichspartei / The Homeland Socialist Reich Party Third Way (Germany) Related articles Adolf Hitler Schools Munich Documentation Centre National Political Institutes of Education Nazi concentration camps Nazi Germany Nazi songs Horst-Wessel-Lied Ranks and insignia of the Nazi Party Samoan branch of the Nazi Party v t e Adolf Hitler Politics Führer Führerprinzip Political views Political directives List Speeches Prophecy Mein Kampf in Arabic in English Zweites Buch Last will and testament Books Nazism Events Military career Rise to power Hitler cabinet Nazi Germany World War II The Holocaust Assassination attempts Death conspiracy theories Places of residence Führer Headquarters Berghof ( Kehlsteinhaus ) Reich Chancellery ( Führerbunker / Vorbunker ) Adlerhorst Anlage Süd Felsennest Tannenberg Werwolf Wolf's Lair Wolfsschlucht I Wolfsschlucht II Special train ( Führersonderzug ) Civilian residences Braunau am Inn Linz Vienna ( Meldemannstraße dormitory ) Munich ( 16 Prinzregentenplatz ) Obersalzberg ( Kampfhäusl ) Personal life Health possible monorchism Wealth and income Religious views Sexuality Vegetarianism Staff Bodyguard August Kubizek Stefanie Rabatsch Reinhold Hanisch Psychopathography Hitler's Table Talk Paintings 50th birthday German naturalization Personal belongings Hitler's Globe Private library Perceptions Books Cult of personality In popular culture Killing baby Hitler The Victory of Faith Triumph of the Will Hitler: The Last Ten Days The Meaning of Hitler Hitler Diaries Moloch Hitler: The Rise of Evil Downfall Shigeru Mizuki's Hitler Apocalypse: Hitler Family Eva Braun (wife) Alois Hitler (father) Klara Hitler (mother) Johann Georg Hiedler (grandfather) Maria Schicklgruber (grandmother) Angela Hitler (half-sister) Paula Hitler (sister) Leo Rudolf Raubal Jr.

(half-nephew) Geli Raubal (half-niece) William Stuart-Houston (half-nephew) Heinz Hitler (half-nephew) Jean-Marie Loret (possible illegitimate son) Blondi (dog) Other Streets named after Hitler Mannerheim recording Category v t e Fascism Themes Core tenets Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Economic interventionism Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Indoctrination Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Fascism and ideology Fascism worldwide Symbolism Variants Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Banderism Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Mexican synarchism Clerical Crypto Eco English Falangism French Doriotism Pétainism Neo-Pétainism Jeune Nation L'Œuvre Française Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Irish Islamic Ziaism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Statism Restoration Ultra Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Korean Ilminism Nyulaiteu Latvian Mystical Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Neo-Nazism Russian Strasserism Swedish Neo Finnish NRx Pan-Turkic Rexism Polish Romanian Legionarism Neo-Legionarism Romanianism/Stelism Russian Neo-Eurasianism Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno Third Positionism National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism Ustašism Movements Africa Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging Coalition for the Defence of the Republic Greyshirts Muslim Association of the Lictor National Revolutionary Movement for Development Ossewabrandwag Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines Republican Democratic Movement Young Egypt Party (1933) Asia Abhinav Bharat Al-Muthanna Club Aria Party Azerbaijan National Democrat Party Azure Party Black Dragon Society Brit HaBirionim Concordia Association Grey Wolves Golden Square Hindu Mahasabha Iran-e-No Party Jewish National Front Kach Kataeb Party Kenkokukai Kokumin Dōmei Korea Nationalist Party Korean National Youth Association Lehi Liberal Party (South Korea) Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf National Socialism Association National Socialist Japanese Workers' Party Nationalist Movement Party Nationalist Task Party National Will Party Nation Party of Iran Otzma Yehudit Pan-Iranist Party Palestine Arab Party Patrol 36 Progress Party (Iran) Philippine Falange Rastakhiz Party Rastriya Prajatantra Party Reform bureaucrats Religious Zionist Party Sakurakai Sangh Parivar Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal Bharatiya Janata Party Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Bharatiya Jana Sangh Bharatiya Kisan Sangh Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh Bharat Vikas Parishad Ekal Vidyalaya Hindu Makkal Katchi Hindu Munnani Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh Jammu Praja Parishad Muslim Rashtriya Manch Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas Rashtra Sevika Samiti Rashtriya Sikh Sangat Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana Seva Bharati Vidya Bharati Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram Vishva Hindu Parishad Bajrang Dal Durga Vahini SUMKA Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tōhōkai Tsagaan Khas Turkish Union Party Wang Jingwei Kuomintang Northern / Northwestern Europe Academic Karelia Society Ailtirí na hAiséirghe Autonome Nationalisten Bases Autónomas Black Front (Netherlands) Blood & Honour Blueshirts Breton Social-National Workers' Movement British Democratic Party British Fascists Britain First British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women British Movement British National Party (1960) British National Party British People's Party (1939) British People's Party (2005) British Union of Fascists The Britons La Cagoule Casuals United Centre Party '86 Clerical People's Party Dutch Defence League Dutch Fascist Union English Defence League European Defence League English National Association European Liberation Front Le Faisceau Fédération d'action nationale et européenne Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation Finnish People's Organisation Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party Flemish National Union French National-Collectivist Party French Nationalist Party French Popular Party General Dutch Fascist League Greater Britain Movement Groupe Collaboration Heathen Front Imperial Fascist League International Third Position Jeune Nation Lalli Alliance of Finland Lapua Movement League of Saint George Les Identitaires Mouvement d'Action Civique Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Action (UK) National Alliance (Sweden) National Corporate Party National Fascisti National Front (UK) National League of Sweden Nationalist Party National Popular Rally National Rally National Socialist Bloc National Socialist Dutch Workers Party National Socialist Front National Socialist League National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962) National Socialist Movement (United Kingdom) National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Norway National Socialist Union of Finland National Socialist Workers' Party (Sweden) National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark National Socialists of Finland National Syndicalists National Union (Netherlands) National Union (Portugal) New Party Nipsters Nordic League The Nordic Realm Party Nordic Resistance Movement Northern League Norwegian Defence League Nouvelle Droite GRECE L'Œuvre Française Official National Front Order of Flemish Militants Order of Nine Angles Organisation of National Socialists Parti Communautaire National-Européen Party of Finnish Labor Party of the Swedes Patriotic Alternative Patriotic People's Movement Patriotic People's Movement (1993) Pērkonkrusts Phalange Française Ragnarock Rebelles Européens Rexist Party Rising Finland Scottish Democratic Fascist Party Scottish Protestant League Skrewdriver Skullhead Stormers Terre et Peuple Third Way (France) Third Way (UK) Union Movement Verdinaso Vigrid White Aryan Resistance World Union of National Socialists Central Europe Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists Arrow Cross Party Artgemeinschaft Austrian Nazism Black Front (Germany) Bund Deutscher Osten Christian National Socialist Front Deutsche Reichspartei Eidgenössische Sammlung Falanga Free German Workers' Party German Faith Movement German National Movement in Liechtenstein German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia) German Party (Slovakia) German Social Union Honor Hungarian National Front Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party Hungarian National Socialist Party Combat League of German Socialists Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia Landser Liechtenstein Homeland Service National Democratic Party (Austria) National Democratic Party of Germany National Fascist Community National Front (Hungary) National Front (Switzerland) National Movement of Switzerland National Radical Camp National Radical Camp (1993) National Revival of Poland National Union (Switzerland) Nationalist Front (Germany) Nazi Party Greater German People's Community Nazi Germany National Socialist Freedom Movement National Socialist Working Association New Order Nipsters No Colours Records PC Records Positive Christianity German Christians Republic Movement The Right (Germany) Rock-O-Rama Records Shield and Sword Slovak People's Party Socialist Reich Party Stahlgewitter Sudeten German Party The Third Path United Hungarian National Socialist Party Vlajka Volksdeutsche Bewegung Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit Wiking-Jugend Southern Europe ADÑ–Spanish Identity Albanian Fascist Party Balli Kombëtar Brothers of Italy CEDADE Democratic Fascist Party European Nation State Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Sección Femenina La Falange (1999) Falange Auténtica Falange Española Falange Española Auténtica Falange Española de las JONS Falange Española de las JONS (1976) Falange Española Independiente Falangist Movement of Spain Freethinkers' Party Imperium Europa Italian fascism National Fascist Party (Italy) Italian Social Republic Republican Fascist Party Italian Social Movement Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista Juntas Españolas National Alliance (Spain) National Alliance July 18 National Democracy (Italy) National Democracy (Spain) National Front (Spain, 1986) National Front (Spain, 2006) National Union (Italy, 1923) National Union (Spain) New Force (Italy) New Force (Spain) Republican Social Movement The Right (Italy) Sammarinese Fascist Party Spanish Military Union Struggle of the People Student Action Terza Posizione Tricolour Flame Unidad Falangista Montañesa Youth Front Eastern and Southeastern Europe Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights Bosnian Movement of National Pride Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party Croatian Liberation Movement Croatian National Resistance Croatian Party of Rights Crusade of Romanianism Ethnic National Union Eurasia Movement Eurasia Party Format18 For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action German Party German People's Party Golden Dawn Greek National Socialist Party Hosank Iron Guard Kolovrat LEPEN Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Lithuanian Nationalist Union National Agrarian Party National Bolshevik Front National Bolshevik Party National-Christian Defense League National Christian Party National Fascist Movement National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement National Party – Greeks National Socialist Patriotic Organisation National Socialist Society National Social Movement National Romanian Fascio National Renaissance Front National Salvation Front Nokturnal Mortum National Socialism / White Power Obraz Occupy Pedophilia Order of Nine Angles Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Pamyat Patriotic Alliance People's Party Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Ratniks (Bulgaria) Romanian Front Russian Imperial Movement Russian Fascist Party Russian National Unity Russian Women's Fascist Movement Serbian Action Serbian Radical Party Steel Shield Svoboda Union of Bulgarian National Legions Ustaše Ustaše in Australia Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Yugoslav Radical Union ZBOR North America Fascism in Canada Aryan Guard Aryan Nations Canadian Association for Free Expression Canadian Union of Fascists Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform Heritage Front Parti national social chrétien Fascism in the United States American Front American Nazi Party Betar US Creativity Fascist League of North America German American Bund Goyim Defense League Hammerskins Identity Evropa League of the South National Alliance (United States) National Renaissance Party Nationalist Social Club-131 National Socialist Legion National Socialist Liberation Front National Socialist Movement National States' Rights Party National Vanguard Nationalist Front (United States) Patriot Front Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Silver Legion of America Christian Party (United States, 1930s) Traditionalist Worker Party Vanguard America Volksfront White Aryan Resistance Wotansvolk Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Mexican Democratic Party Mexican Fascist Party National Pro Patria Party National Synarchist Union Nationalist Front of Mexico Order of Nine Angles Oceania Action Zealandia Antipodean Resistance Australia First Movement Australia First Party Australian Defence League Australian National Socialist Party Centre Party Lads Society National Action (Australia) National Socialist Network National Socialist Party of Australia Progressive Nationalist Party Reclaim Australia True Blue Crew United Patriots Front South America Agrarian Labor Party Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Argentine Fascist Party Argentine Nationalist Action Argentine Patriotic League Bolivian Socialist Falange Brazilian Integralism Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Falangism in Latin America Female Peronist Party Iron Guard (Argentina) Nacionalismo National Fascist Party (Argentina) National Fascist Union Nationalist Liberation Alliance National Liberation Movement National Socialist Movement of Chile National Universitary Concentration New Triumph Party Patriot Front (Argentina) Popular Dignity Popular Freedom Alliance Popular Representation Party Popular Socialist Vanguard Republican League La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia Revolutionary Union Tacuara Nationalist Movement People Australia Campbell (Eric) Campbell (Graeme) Cottrell Groot Mills Saleam Austria Dollfuss Miklas Pfrimer Planetta Schuschnigg Seyss-Inquart Starhemberg Belgium Daye Declercq Degrelle Denis Elias Eriksson Hermans Lagrou Poulet Severen Streel van de Wiele Croatia Boban Francetić Kraljević Kvaternik Luburić Pavelić Pavičić Rover Servatzy Finland Helanen Isotalo Kalsta Konkka Kosola Orko Simojoki Somersalo Törni Varjonen France Augier Bardèche Benoist-Méchin Béraud Brasillach Bucard Châteaubriant Déat Déroulède Dior Doriot La Rochelle Lagardelle Laval Pétain Rebatet Valois Vial Germany Abetz Andrae Baeumler Berchtold Berger Best Brunner Bühler Darré Falkenhausen Hocke Feder Forster Frank Franz V Gesche Goebbels Göring Graf Greiser Günther Hanke Heiden Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Klintzsch Kuhn Ludendorff Maurice Müller Niekisch Ploetz Rahn Reitsch Renthe-Fink Ribbentrop Rieger Rosenberg Schmitt Schreck Skorzeny Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Terboven Thadden Krosigk Zündel Greece Dragoumis Kasidiaris Koryzis Lagos Michaloliakos Papadopoulos India Adityanath Advani Bose Godse Golwalkar Hedgewar Modi Mukherjee Savarkar Thakur Vajpayee Iran Forouhar Kashani Monshizadeh Pezeshkpour Teymourtash Israel Ahimeir Ben-Ari Ben-Gvir Eldad Eliyahu Goldstein Gopstein Greenberg Ha'ivri Heruti Kahane Marzel Natan-Zada Stern Yeivin Italy Acerbo Alfieri Ambris D'Annunzio Azara Badoglio Balbo Torrente Ballester Bastianini Bianchi Boni Bono Boselli Bottai Ciano (Costanzo) Ciano (Galeazzo) Cogni Corradini Freda Gentile Giuriati Gozi Grandi Graziani Guidi Malaparte Marinetti Michels Morgagni Mussolini Olivetti Panunzio Papini Pavolini Rauti Ricci Ridruejo Rocco Rossoni Sarfatti Soffici Spirito Volpi Japan Akao Araki Chō Hashimoto Honjō Kita Kodama Matsuoka Nonaka Ōkawa Sasakawa Romania Antonescu Bacaloglu Codreanu Crainic Cuza Gigurtu Goga Manoilescu Moța Ogoranu Sima Russia Astroŭski Borovikov Ilyin Kaminski Martsinkevich Milchakov Oktan Prilepin Prokhanov Rodzaevsky Spain Arrese Bau Nolla Bilbao Eguía Carrero Blanco Fernández-Cuesta Franco Franco y Polo Giménez Caballero Primo de Rivera Ramos Sánchez Mazas Serrano Suñer Ukraine Bandera Biletsky Dontsov Gubarev Klyachkivsky Lebed Rebet Samchuk Shukhevych Stetsko Tyahnybok Vitrenko United Kingdom Beckett Chamberlain Chesterton Lake Leese Mosley (Diana) Mosley (Oswald) Pankhurst Pearson Ramsay Robinson Southgate Tyndall Wellesley United States Auernheimer Collins Fuentes Joyce Pelley Pound Yockey Other Burdi Celmiņš Martínez Quisling Ramírez Riva-Agüero y Osma Šešelj Szálasi Works Literature 1776 Returns La Conquista del Estado The Culture of Critique Defiance Did Six Million Really Die?

The Doctrine of Fascism Essentials of Hindutva Fascist Manifesto For My Legionaries The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia The Fourth Political Theory Hitlers Zweites Buch Hutu Ten Commandments Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus Kokutairon and Pure Socialism The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Manifesto of Race Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals Mein Kampf My Autobiography My Life The Myth of the Twentieth Century OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World Protestantische Rompilger A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews A Warning to the Hindus Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals Action Ajan Suunta L'Alba El Alcázar The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt La Conquista del Estado The Daily Stormer Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung Das Deutsche Mädel La Difesa della Razza Eleftheros Kosmos The European Fashist Fashizmi La France au travail Fritt Folk Fronten Gândirea Gioventù Fascista Golden Dawn Hamaas Hrvatski Domobran Je suis partout Kangura Kansallissosialisti Limonka Masada2000 Münchener Beobachter Nash Put' Nástup Nation Europa Neue Anthropologie Neues Volk Het Nieuwe Volk Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Novopress Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Organiser Panchjanya Panzerbär Parole der Woche Le Pays Réel Der Pimpf Il Popolo d'Italia Das Reich Revue d'histoire du fascisme Das Schwarze Korps Sfarmă-Piatră Signal Siniristi Spearhead Der Stürmer Türkische Post Der Umbruch Vairas Vlajka Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter Die Wehrmacht Wochenspruch der NSDAP Film L'Armata Azzurra Bengasi Condottieri The Daughter of the Samurai Erbkrank Europa: The Last Battle The Great Appeal The Old Guard Raza Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal Der Sieg des Glaubens The Siege of the Alcazar Lo squadrone bianco Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht Triumph of the Will Music Fashwave Hindutva pop National Socialist black metal Nazi punk Rock Against Communism White power music Other Allach StoneToss Related topics Art of the Third Reich Fascist architecture Heroic realism Nazi architecture Nazism and cinema Organizations Institutional Ahnenerbe Chamber of Fasces and Corporations Grand Council of Fascism Imperial Way Faction Italian Nationalist Association National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise Quadrumvirs Activist Adelaide Institute Agrarian Trade Union Federation The Britons Casuals United DeVlag European Social Movement Finnish Realm Union Francisco Franco National Foundation Friends of New Germany German American Bund GRECE The Link Mladorossi National Party of Europe National Policy Institute National Popular Consciousness Panzerfaust Records Popular Force Party Right Club Russian Fascist Organization Youth Adler und Falke Albanian Lictor Youth Arab Lictor Youth Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Blue-and-Blacks Ethiopian Lictor Youth Fascist Union of Youth Frente de Juventudes Al-Futuwwa Gioventù Italiana del Littorio Great Japan Youth Party Hitler Youth Faith and Beauty Society Deutsches Jungvolk Jungmädelbund League of German Girls Jeunesse Populaire Française Juventudes de Acción Popular Korean National Youth Association Levente Mocidade Portuguesa Nationale Jeugdstorm National League of Sweden National Socialist Liberation Front National Youth (Sweden) National Youth (Italy) National Youth Alliance National Youth Organisation (Greece) Opera Nazionale Balilla Österreichisches Jungvolk Patriotic/Eureka Youth League Union of Fascist Little Ones Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys) Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls) Ustaše Youth Wiking-Jugend Youth Front Paramilitary and terrorist Abhinav Bharat Albanian Fascist Militia Atomwaffen Division Azov Brigade Bajrang Dal Black Brigades Black Legion Blackshirts Blueshirts (Canada) Blueshirts (Ireland) Column 88 Combat Terrorist Organization Confederation of the Nation Corpul Muncitoresc Legionar Croatian Defence Forces Croatian National Resistance Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Bugojno group Einsatzgruppen Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Armata Falange Militia Flemish Guard Flemish Legion Frontbann Goldshirts Greenshirts Hilfspolizei Hitler Youth Greyshirts Heimwehr Hirden Hlinka Guard Hungarian National Defence Association Impuzamugambi Interbrigades Interahamwe Iron Wolf Jewish Defense League Jewish Defense Organization Kataeb Regulatory Forces Lăncieri Legion Wasa Lehava Lehi Levente Makapili Mano Blanca Misanthropic Division National Republican Guard New Guard Ostmärkische Sturmscharen Rodobrana Russian Imperial Movement Russian National Unity (2000) S14 Schutzstaffel Serbian Volunteer Corps Sicarii Sich Battalion Silver Shirts Sturmabteilung Sudetendeutsches Freikorps Terror Against Terror Third Klan Ukrainian Insurgent Army Ukrainian People's Militsiya Ustaše Militia Volkssport Walloon Guard Walloon Legion Waffen-SS Wagner Group Rusich Group Weerbaarheidsafdeling Werwolf Westland New Post Yokusan Sonendan Youth Front Student Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Avanguardia Giovanile Fascista Frente de Estudiantes Sindicalistas German Student Union National Socialist German Students' League Sindicato Español Universitario Student Action International Axis powers NSDAP/AO ODESSA History 1900s Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust 1910s Arditi Fascio Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Armenian genocide and the Holocaust 1920s March on Rome Corfu incident Acerbo Law Beer Hall Putsch Aventine Secession Italian economic battles Le Faisceau 28 May 1926 coup d'état Libyan genocide 1930s March of the Iron Will November 1932 German federal election March 1933 German federal election Enabling Act Austrian Civil War July Putsch 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Romani Holocaust 4th of August Regime Anti-Comintern Pact Spanish Civil War 1940s World War II Nazi crimes against the Polish nation The Holocaust Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia End in Italy Nuremberg Trials Tokyo Trials Lists Anti-fascists Books about Hitler British fascist parties Fascist movements by country ( A-F G-M N-T U-Z ) Nazi ideologues Nazi leaders Secretaries of Italian fascist parties Speeches by Hitler SS personnel Related topics Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Khomeinism Maurrassisme Pinochetism Putinism Ziaism Alt-right Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Alt-tech Identitarian movement Anti-fascism Bahutu Manifesto Berlusconism Conservative Revolution Criticism of fascism Europe a Nation Fascist (epithet) Fascist mysticism Feudal fascism F-scale (personality test) Garveyism Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions Italianization of South Tyrol Japanization Morenazi Neosocialism Para-/semi-fascism Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Red–green–brown alliance Roman salute Saffronisation Sansepolcrismo Scientific racism Aryanism Nordicism Social fascism Sorelianism Synarchism Szeged Idea Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Völkisch movement Women in Nazi Germany Category v t e Antisemitism See also: Massacres or pogroms against Jews Core topics Canards Economics Eliminationist antisemitism Geography History Religious antisemitism Persecution of Jews Antisemitism studies Nazism Adolf Hitler Americas Propaganda New antisemitism Three Ds Working definition Racial antisemitism Rootless cosmopolitan Secondary antisemitism Stereotypes of Jews Timeline 19th C.

20th 21st Antisemitism and Christianity New Testament Healthcare Islam Middle Ages Nation of Islam Olympic Games Soviet mathematics Social media Reddit Universities Columbia Related topics Anti-Indigenous sentiment Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-Polish sentiment Anti-Romani sentiment Anti-Zionism Christian Identity Cultural Marxism Double genocide theory International Jewish conspiracy The International Jew Jewish Bolshevism Żydokomuna Khazar theory Ku Klux Klan Mein Kampf in Arabic in English Normalization of antisemitism Persecution of Jews during the Black Death On the Jews and Their Lies Philosemitism The Protocols of the Elders of Zion Contemporary imprints Racism Rothschild conspiracy theories The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews Self-hating Jew George Soros conspiracy theories Xenophobia Weaponization White genocide conspiracy theory Zhyd Zionist antisemitism Religious antisemitism Anti-Judaism Jewish deicide Catholic Inquisition Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Rhineland massacres Martin Luther Blood curse Blood libel Host desecration Judensau Pogrom Antisemitic laws, policies and government actions Ghetto benches Hep-Hep riots Pogroms in the Russian Empire May Laws 1968 Polish political crisis Jewish Anti-Zionist League Leo Frank trial (US) Expulsions of Poles and Jews by Germany (DE/PL) Prussian deportations Act of 5th November Generalplan Ost Dreyfus affair (FR) Beilis trial (Russian Empire) Farhud (Iraq) Anti-Zionist League (IQ) General Order No. 11 (US, 1862) Racial policy of Nazi Germany Madagascar Plan Final Solution The Holocaust Anti-cosmopolitan campaign Night of the Murdered Poets Slánský trial Doctors' plot Holocaust denial Yellow badge ZOG conspiracy Antisemitism on the internet Bible Believers The Daily Stormer Institute for Historical Review Jew Watch Metapedia Podblanc QAnon Radio Islam Redwatch The Right Stuff (blog) Stormfront Terrorgram Wikipedia and antisemitism Persecution Rhineland massacres Black Death persecutions Boycotts Expulsions Jewish quarter Ghettos in Europe Mellah The Holocaust Jewish hat Jewish quota Judensau Martyrdom in Judaism Nuremberg Laws Pale of Settlement Pogroms Refuseniks Segregation Spanish Inquisition Expulsion Yellow badge Organizations working against antisemitism Anti-Defamation League (ADL) Bay Area Holocaust Oral History Project (BAHOHP) Community Security Trust Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Stephen Roth Institute Yad Vashem By region Arab world Saudi Arabia Argentina Australia Canada China Chile Costa Rica Europe Austria Belgium France 21st century Germany Greece Hungary Italy Norway Romania Russia Imperial Soviet Spain Sweden Ukraine United Kingdom Conservative Party Labour Party Japan Mexico New Zealand Palestinian Territories Pakistan South Africa Turkey United States History 21st century Venezuela v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government Forms Absolute monarchy Autocracy Liberal Tsarist Communist state Counterintelligence state Dictatorship Benevolent Civilian Constitutional Dictablanda Grassroots Military Proletarian Right-wing Dominant-party system Illiberal democracy Totalitarian Libertarian authoritarianism Mafia state Managerial state Mediacracy Ochlocracy One-party state Oligarchy Police state Theocracy Islamic state Tyranny Majoritarian Soft Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Putinism Metaxism Authoritarian capitalism Pinochetism Authoritarian socialism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Maoism Deng Xiaoping Theory Xi Jinping Thought Juche Despotism Enlightened Soft Ecoauthoritarianism Fascism Eco Neo Imperialism Nazism Neo Religious Caesaropapism Khomeinism Ziaism Shōwa Statism Techno See also Democracy indices Deep state Inverted totalitarianism Personality Leadership style Left-wing Right-wing Social dominance orientation Statism Strongman List of totalitarian states Portals : Politics Germany History Nazism at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Argentina Poland Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐d6gpr
Cached time: 20250817094807
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.655 seconds
Real time usage: 4.169 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25365/1000000
Revision size: 244259/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1104975/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 216523/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 47/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 817503/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.099/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21422483/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3180.883      1 -total
 32.16% 1022.879      2 Template:Reflist
 21.29%  677.270     99 Template:Cite_book
 13.47%  428.326     12 Template:Navbox
 12.25%  389.532    111 Template:Sfn
 11.35%  361.138      1 Template:Nazism
 10.27%  326.728      8 Template:Excerpt
  8.82%  280.524      1 Template:Nazism_sidebar
  8.73%  277.718      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.40%  235.478     95 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31045316:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817094807 and revision id 1306361748. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nazism&oldid=1306361748 " Categories : Nazism Anti-Masonry Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-communism Antisemitism Authoritarianism Fascism Fascist movements Genocide German words and phrases The Holocaust Homophobia Politics of Nazi Germany Racism Right-wing ideologies Totalitarian ideologies Totalitarianism White supremacy Xenophobia Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles containing French-language text Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2011 Pages with reference errors Pages with incorrect ref formatting Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use British English from January 2021 Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles that may be too long from October 2024 All articles that may be too long Articles containing German-language text Pages including recorded pronunciations Pages with German IPA Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Commons category link is locally defined Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with excerpts Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 09:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nazism 121 languages Add topic

