Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Explanations 3 Connected concepts 4 Theories Toggle Theories subsection 4.1 Labor theory of value 4.2 Monetary theory of value 4.3 Power theory of value 4.4 Subjective theory of value and marginalism 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Value (economics) 49 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Русский Саха тыла Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Benefit provided by a good or service in an economy Not to be confused with Market value or Value theory .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Value" economics – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e In economics , economic value is a measure of the benefit provided by a good or service to an economic agent , and value for money represents an assessment of whether financial or other resources are being used effectively in order to secure such benefit. Economic value is generally measured through units of currency , and the interpretation is therefore "what is the maximum amount of money a person is willing and able to pay for a good or service?” Value for money is often expressed in comparative terms, such as "better", or "best value for money", [ 1 ] but may also be expressed in absolute terms, such as where a deal does, or does not, offer value for money.

[ 2 ] Among the competing schools of economic theory there are differing theories of value .

Economic value is not the same as market price , nor is economic value the same thing as market value . If a consumer is willing to buy a good, it implies that the customer places a higher value on the good than the market price. The difference between the value to the consumer and the market price is called " consumer surplus ".

[ 3 ] It is easy to see situations where the actual value is considerably larger than the market price: purchase of drinking water is one example.

Overview [ edit ] The economic value of a good or service has puzzled economists since the beginning of the discipline. First, economists tried to estimate the value of a good to an individual alone, and extend that definition to goods that can be exchanged. From this analysis came the concepts value in use and value in exchange .

Value is linked to price through the mechanism of exchange . When an economist observes an exchange, two important value functions are revealed: those of the buyer and seller. Just as the buyer reveals what he is willing to pay for a certain amount of a good, so too does the seller reveal what it costs him to give up the good.

Additional information about market value is obtained by the rate at which transactions occur, telling observers the extent to which the purchase of the good has value over time.

Said another way, value is how much a desired object or condition is worth relative to other objects or conditions. Economic values are expressed as "how much" of one desirable condition or product will, or would be given up in exchange for some other desired condition or product. Among the competing schools of economic theory there are differing metrics for value assessment and the metrics are the subject of a theory of value . Value theories are a large part of the differences and disagreements between the various schools of economic theory.

Value for money forms part of the "economic dimension" of the five "cases" required to validate a UK government investment or spending proposal.

[ 4 ] UK government guidance in this context speaks of "assessing" and of "maximising" value for money.

[ 5 ] Explanations [ edit ] In neoclassical economics , the value of an object or service is often seen as nothing but the price it would bring in an open and competitive market.

[ citation needed ] This is determined primarily by the demand for the object relative to supply in a perfectly competitive market . Many neoclassical economic theories equate the value of a commodity with its price, whether the market is competitive or not. As such, everything is seen as a commodity and if there is no market to set a price then there is no economic value.

In classical economics , the value of an object or condition is the amount of discomfort/labor saved through the consumption or use of an object or condition (Use value) . Though exchange value is recognized, economic value is not, in theory, dependent on the existence of a market and price and value are not seen as equal. This is complicated, however, by the efforts of classical economists to connect price and labor value.

Karl Marx , for one, saw exchange value as the "form of appearance" (This interpretation of Marx is along the lines of the Marxist thinker Michael Heinrich ) [ Erscheinungsform ] of value, in his critique of political economy which implies that, although value is separate from exchange value, it is meaningless without the act of exchange.

In this tradition, Steve Keen makes the claim that "value" refers to "the innate worth of a commodity, which determines the normal ('equilibrium') ratio at which two commodities exchange." [ 6 ] To Keen and the tradition of David Ricardo , this corresponds to the classical concept of long-run cost-determined prices, what Adam Smith called "natural prices" and Marx called " prices of production ". It is part of a cost-of-production theory of value and price. Ricardo, but not Keen, used a " labor theory of price " in which a commodity's "innate worth" was the amount of labor needed to produce it.

"The value of a thing in any given time and place", according to Henry George , "is the largest amount of exertion that anyone will render in exchange for it. But as men always seek to gratify their desires with the least exertion this is the lowest amount for which a similar thing can otherwise be obtained." [ 7 ] In another classical tradition, Marx distinguished between the "value in use" ( use-value , what a commodity provides to its buyer), labor cost which he calls "value" (the socially-necessary labour time it embodies), and " exchange value " (how much labor-time the sale of the commodity can claim, Smith's "labor commanded" value). By most interpretations of his labor theory of value , Marx, like Ricardo, developed a "labor theory of price" where the point of analyzing value was to allow the calculation of relative prices .

Others [ broken anchor ] see values as part of his sociopolitical interpretation and critique of capitalism and other societies, and deny that it was intended to serve as a category of economics. According to a third interpretation, Marx aimed for a theory of the dynamics of price formation but did not complete it.

In 1860, John Ruskin published a critique of the economic concept of value from a moral point of view. He entitled the volume Unto This Last , and his central point was this: "It is impossible to conclude, of any given mass of acquired wealth, merely by the fact of its existence, whether it signifies good or evil to the nation in the midst of which it exists. Its real value depends on the moral sign attached to it, just as strictly as that of a mathematical quantity depends on the algebraic sign attached to it. Any given accumulation of commercial wealth may be indicative, on the one hand, of faithful industries, progressive energies, and productive ingenuities: or, on the other, it may be indicative of mortal luxury, merciless tyranny, ruinous chicanery." Gandhi was greatly inspired by Ruskin's book and published a paraphrase of it in 1908.

[ non sequitur ] Economists such as Ludwig von Mises asserted that "value" is a subjective judgment. Prices can only be determined by taking these subjective judgments into account, and that this is done through the price mechanism in the market. Thus, it was false to say that the economic value of a good was equal to what it cost to produce or to its current replacement cost.

Connected concepts [ edit ] The theory of value is closely related to that of allocative efficiency , the quality by which firms produce those goods and services most valued by society. The market value of a machine part, for example, will depend upon a variety of objective facts involving its efficiency versus the efficiency of other types of part or other types of machine to make the kind of products that consumers will value in turn. In such a case, market value has both objective and subjective components.

Economy, efficiency and effectiveness , often referred to as the "Three Es", may be used as complementary factors contributing to an assessment of the value for money provided by a purchase, project or activity. The UK National Audit Office uses the following summaries to explain the meaning of each term: Economy: minimising the cost of resources used or required (inputs) – spending less ; Efficiency: the relationship between the output from goods or services and the resources to produce them – spending well ; and Effectiveness: the relationship between the intended and actual results of public spending (outcomes) – spending wisely .

[ 8 ] Sometimes a fourth 'E', equity , is also added.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In philosophy, economic value is a subcategory of a more general philosophical value , as defined in goodness and value theory or in the science of value .

Value or price Theories [ edit ] Adam Smith agreed with certain aspects of labor theory of value , but believed it did not fully explain price and profit. Instead, he proposed a cost-of-production theory of value (to later develop into exchange value theory) that explained value was determined by several different factors, including wages and rents. This theory of value, according to Smith, best explained the natural prices in the market. While an underdeveloped theory at the time, it did offer an alternative to another popular value theory of the time.

The utility theory of value was the belief that price and value were solely based on how much "use" an individual received from a commodity. However, this theory is rejected in Smith's work The Wealth of Nations . The famous diamond–water paradox questions this by examining the use in comparison to price of these goods. Water, while necessary for life, is far less expensive than diamonds, which have basically no use. Which value theory holds true divides economic thinkers, and is the base for many socioeconomic and political beliefs.

[ 10 ] Silvio Gesell denied value theory in economics. He thought that value theory is useless and prevents economics from becoming science and that a currency administration guided by value theory is doomed to sterility and inactivity.

[ 11 ] Labor theory of value [ edit ] Main article: Labor theory of value See also: Cost-of-production theory of value In classical economics , the labor theory of value asserts that the economic value of a commodity is determined by the total amount of socially necessary labor required to produce it. When speaking in terms of a labor theory of value, value without any qualifying adjective theoretically refers to the amount of labor necessary for the production of a marketable commodity , including the labor necessary for the development of any capital used in the production process. Both David Ricardo and Karl Marx attempted to quantify and embody all labor components in order to develop a theory of the real, or natural, price of a commodity.

[ 12 ] In either case, what is being addressed are general prices—i.e., prices in the aggregate, not a specific price of a particular good or service in a given circumstance. Theories in either class allow for deviations when a particular price is struck in a real-world market transaction, or when a price is set in some price fixing regime.

Monetary theory of value [ edit ] See also: Value-form Critics of traditional Marxian economics , especially those associated with the Neue Marx-Lektüre (New Readings of Marx) such as Michael Heinrich , emphasize a monetary theory of value , where "Money is the necessary form of appearance of value (and of capital) in the sense that prices constitute the only form of appearance of the value of commodities." [ 13 ] Similarly to the exchange theory, this theory emphasizes value as being socially determined, rather than having a physical substance.

According to this analysis, when money incorporates production into its M-C-M' circulation, it functions as capital implementing the capitalist relation and the exploitation of labor power constitutes the actual presupposition for this incorporation.

[ 14 ] Power theory of value [ edit ] Main article: Power theory of value Subjective theory of value and marginalism [ edit ] Main articles: Subjective theory of value and Marginalism The subjective theory of value emphasizes the role of consumer preferences [ 15 ] in influencing price. According to this theory, the consumer places a value on a commodity by determining the marginal utility , or additional satisfaction of one additional unit.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Marginalism employs concepts such as marginal utility , marginal rate of substitution , and opportunity costs [ 18 ] to explain consumer preferences and price.

Subjectivist or marginalist theories of value were created by William Stanley Jevons , Léon Walras , and Carl Menger in the late 19th century.

[ 19 ] These theories contradicted earlier labour theories of values proposed by classical economists which emphasize the role of socially necessary labour in producing value.

[ 20 ] The subjective theory of value helped answer the " diamond–water paradox ," which many believed to be unsolvable. The diamond–water paradox questions why diamonds are so much more valuable than water when water is necessary for life. This paradox was answered by the subjective theory of value by realizing that water, in total, is more valuable than diamonds because the first few units are necessary for life. The key difference between water and diamonds is that water is more plentiful and diamonds are rare. Because of the availability, one additional unit of diamonds exceeds the value of one additional unit of water.

[ 20 ] The subjective theory emphasizes the role of supply and demand in determining price.

See also [ edit ] Business and economics portal Asset pricing Labour theory of value Law of value Marginal theory of value Market price Non-extractive economic value Objective theory of value Paradox of value Real versus nominal value (economics) Store of value Subjective theory of value Use value Utility Valuation (finance) Value (marketing) Value form Value network References [ edit ] ^ Department of Finance (Northern Ireland), Definition of best value for money , endorsed by the Northern Ireland Executive on 22 March 2011, accessed 8 December 2023 ^ BBC News, Ferry to be built at Ferguson yard despite not being 'value for money' , published 16 May 2023, accessed 8 December 2023 ^ "Consumer Surplus" (PDF) . p. 7-1, 7-2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-12-15 . Retrieved 2017-10-28 .

^ Department for Transport , Value for Money Framework: Moving Britain Ahead , section 1.1 (page 6), published in July 2017, accessed on 7 October 2024 ^ HM Treasury, The Green Book: Central Government Guidance on Appraisal and Evaluation , section 5.56, 2020 edition published with minor updates in 2022, accessed on 7 October 2024 ^ Steve Keen, Debunking Economics , New York, Zed Books (2001) p.  271, ISBN 1-86403-070-4 , OCLC 45804669 ^ " The Science of Political Economy , Chapter 8" . Politicaleconomy.org . Retrieved 2012-04-17 .

^ a b National Audit Office, Assessing value for money , accessed 15 March 2019 ^ Jackson, P., Value for money and international development: Deconstructing myths to promote a more constructive discussion , OECD , May 2012 ^ Hunt, E.K. (2015).

History of Economic Thought: A Critical Perspective . London: Routledge.

^ Silvio Gesell (1916, trsl. 1929), The Natural Economic Order , Part III. Chapter 3. So-called "Value" ^ Junankar, P. N., Marx's economics , Oxford: Philip Allan, 1982, ISBN 0-86003-125-X ; Peach, Terry "Interpreting Ricardo", Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1993, ISBN 0-521-26086-8 .

^ Milios, John (2003).

"Marx's Value Theory Revisited. A 'Value-form' Approach." (PDF) .

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference in Economics . Ankara: METU . p. 9 . Retrieved 2015-01-12 .

^ John Milios , "Marx's Monetary Theory of Value, Fictitious Capital and Finance" , 6 November 2015, p. 6.

^ Investopedia Staff (2011-01-20).

"Subjective Theory Of Value" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2017-03-02 .

^ Investopedia Staff (2003-11-23).

"Marginal Utility" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2017-03-02 .

^ "What is utility theory? definition and meaning" .

BusinessDictionary.com . Archived from the original on 2020-08-12 . Retrieved 2017-03-02 .

^ Investopedia Staff (2008-02-13).

"Marginalism" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2017-03-02 .

^ Stigler, George J. (1950-01-01). "The Development of Utility Theory. I".

Journal of Political Economy .

58 (4): 307– 27.

doi : 10.1086/256962 .

JSTOR 1828885 .

S2CID 153732595 .

^ a b "Austrian school of economics" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2017-03-02 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Value Resources in your library W. G. Langworthy Taylor. 1985. " Some Important Phases in the Evolution of the Idea of Value ".

Journal of Political Economy .

3 (4): 414–433.

Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

"Value (political economy)" .

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Value_(economics)&oldid=1306389232 " Categories : Political economy Theory of value (economics) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from March 2024 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Pages with broken anchors Pages containing broken anchor template with unsupported parameters Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2020 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 13:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Value (economics) 49 languages Add topic

