Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discovery 2 Luminosity law 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Reflection nebula 47 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Clouds of interstellar dust which reflect the light of nearby stars The Witch Head reflection nebula (IC2118), about 900 light years from Earth, is associated with the bright star Rigel in the constellation Orion . The nebula glows primarily by light reflected from Rigel, located just outside the top right corner of the image. Fine dust in the nebula reflects the light. The blue color is caused not only by Rigel's blue color but because the dust grains reflect blue light more efficiently than red.

In astronomy , reflection nebulae are clouds of interstellar dust which might reflect the light of a nearby star or stars. The energy from the nearby stars is insufficient to ionize the gas of the nebula to create an emission nebula , but is enough to give sufficient scattering to make the dust visible. Thus, the frequency spectrum shown by reflection nebulae is similar to that of the illuminating stars. Among the microscopic particles responsible for the scattering are carbon compounds (e. g. diamond dust) and compounds of other elements such as iron and nickel. The latter two are often aligned with the galactic magnetic field and cause the scattered light to be slightly polarized .

[ 1 ] Discovery [ edit ] Reflection nebula IC 2631 .

[ 2 ] Reflection nebula vdB1 Analyzing the spectrum of the nebula associated with the star Merope in the Pleiades , Vesto Slipher concluded in 1912 that the source of its light is most likely the star itself, and that the nebula reflects light from the star (and that of the star Alcyone ).

[ 3 ] Calculations by Ejnar Hertzsprung in 1913 lend credence to that hypothesis.

[ 4 ] Edwin Hubble further distinguished between the emission and reflection nebulae in 1922.

[ 5 ] Reflection nebula are usually blue because the scattering is more efficient for blue light than red (this is the same scattering process that gives us blue skies and red sunsets).

Reflection nebulae and emission nebulae are often seen together and are sometimes both referred to as diffuse nebulae .

Some 500 reflection nebulae are known.  A blue reflection nebula can also be seen in the same area of the sky as the Trifid Nebula . The supergiant star Antares , which is very red ( spectral class M1), is surrounded by a large, yellow reflection nebula.

Reflection nebulae may also be the site of star formation .

Luminosity law [ edit ] Cosmic dust clouds in Messier 78 .

[ 6 ] In 1922, Edwin Hubble published the result of his investigations on bright nebulae . One part of this work is the Hubble luminosity law for reflection nebulae, which makes a relationship between the angular size ( R ) of the nebula and the apparent magnitude ( m ) of the associated star: 5 log ( R ) = − m + k where k is a constant that depends on the sensitivity of the measurement.

See also [ edit ] Variable nebula List of reflected light sources V1647 Orionis References [ edit ] ^ Kaler, 1997.

^ "A Star's Moment in the Spotlight" . Retrieved 10 February 2016 .

^ Slipher, Vesto M. (1922). "On the spectrum of the nebula in the Pleiades".

Lowell Observatory Bulletin .

2 : 26– 27.

Bibcode : 1912LowOB...2...26S .

^ Hertzsprung, E. (1913).

"Über die Helligkeit der Plejadennebel" .

Astronomische Nachrichten .

195 (23): 449– 452.

Bibcode : 1913AN....195..449H .

doi : 10.1002/asna.19131952302 .

^ Hubble, E. P. (1922).

"The source of luminosity in galactic nebulae" .

Astrophysical Journal .

56 : 400.

Bibcode : 1922ApJ....56..400H .

doi : 10.1086/142713 .

^ "Sifting through Dust near Orion's Belt" .

ESO Press Release . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

Bibliography [ edit ] James B. Kaler (1997).

Cosmic Clouds -- Birth, Death, and Recycling in the Galaxy , Scientific American Library, Freeman, New York, 1998.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Reflection nebulae .

v t e Nebulae Visible nebula Dark nebula Diffuse nebula Emission nebula Planetary nebula Supernova remnant Nova remnant H II region Reflection nebula Variable nebula Protoplanetary nebula Pre-stellar nebulae Giant molecular cloud Bok globule Evaporating gaseous globule Solar nebula Stellar nebula Nova remnant Protoplanetary nebula Wolf–Rayet nebula Post-stellar nebulae Planetary nebula Supernova remnant Pulsar wind nebula Supershell Clouds Interstellar cloud Molecular cloud Infrared cirrus Integrated Flux Nebula High-velocity cloud H I region Morphology Bipolar nebula Pinwheel nebula Intergalactic blobs Lyman-alpha blob Lists Diffuse Largest Nebulae Planetary (PNe) Protoplanetary (PPNe) Supernova remnants (SNRs) Related Cometary knot Category Commons Wiktionary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reflection_nebula&oldid=1301033294 " Categories : Reflection nebulae Nebulae Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 18:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reflection nebula 47 languages Add topic

