Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Format 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Library of Congress Control Number 70 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Ligure Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 Zazaki 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from LCCN (identifier) ) Numbering system for catalog records "LCCN" redirects here. For the denomination, see Lutheran Church of Christ in Nigeria .

The Library of Congress Control Number ( LCCN ) is a serially based system of numbering cataloged records in the Library of Congress , in the United States. It is not related to the contents of any book, and should not be confused with Library of Congress Classification (LCC).

History [ edit ] The LCCN numbering system has been in use since 1898, at which time the acronym LCCN originally stood for Library of Congress Card Number.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It has also been called the Library of Congress Catalog Card Number, among other names. The Library of Congress prepared cards of bibliographic information for their library catalog and would sell duplicate sets of the cards to other libraries for use in their catalogs. This is known as centralized cataloging. Each set of cards was given a serial number to help identify it.

Although most of the bibliographic information is now electronically created, stored, and shared with other libraries, there is still a need to identify each unique record, and the LCCN continues to perform that function.

Librarians all over the world use this unique identifier in the process of cataloging most books which have been published in the United States.  It helps them reach the correct cataloging data (known as a cataloging record), which the Library of Congress and third parties make available on the Web and through other media.

In February 2008, the Library of Congress created the LCCN Permalink service, providing a stable URL for all Library of Congress Control Numbers.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Format [ edit ] In its most elementary form, the number includes a year and a serial number.  The year has two digits for 1898 to 2000, and four digits beginning in 2001.  The three ambiguous years (1898, 1899, and 1900) are distinguished by the size of the serial number.  There are also some peculiarities in numbers beginning with a "7" because of an experiment applied between 1969 and 1972 which added a check digit .

[ 2 ] Serial numbers are six digits long and should include leading zeros .

[ 5 ] The leading zeros padding the number are a more recent addition to the format, so many older works will show less-full codes. The hyphen that is often seen separating the year and serial number is optional. More recently, the Library of Congress has instructed publishers not to include a hyphen.

See also [ edit ] Accession number (library science) Authority control Books in the United States International Standard Book Number (ISBN) Library of Congress Linked Data Service Virtual International Authority File References [ edit ] ^ "Types of Numbers Found in LC Catalog Records" .

Library of Congress Catalog .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved January 18, 2021 .

^ a b "Structure of the LC Control Number" .

Network Development and MARC Standards Office . Library of Congress. June 16, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2011 . Retrieved January 18, 2021 .

^ "Library of Congress Update for 2008 ALA Annual Conference: January-May, 2008" .

Library of Congress . Archived from the original on August 28, 2017.

^ "General Questions About LCCN Permalink" . Library of Congress.

Archived from the original on January 19, 2021 . Retrieved January 18, 2021 .

^ "The LCCN Namespace" .

Network Development and MARC Standards Office . Library of Congress. November 10, 2003.

Archived from the original on October 30, 2017 . Retrieved January 18, 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the properties: Library of Congress item ID (LCCN bibliographic) (P1144) (see uses ) Library of Congress authority ID (P244) (see uses ) Library of Congress Name Authority File Bibliographic Processing Cataloging Rules: Library of Congress Control Number (LCCN) at the Wayback Machine (archived 2016-05-13) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Library_of_Congress_Control_Number&oldid=1300266698 " Categories : Library of Congress Identifiers Library cataloging and classification Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2023 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 08:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Library of Congress Control Number 70 languages Add topic

