Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical perspectives 2 Contemporary attitude and practice 3 In Australia 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Religious intolerance 13 languages العربية Español Esperanto فارسی हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Português Русский Shqip Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intolerance of another's religious beliefs or practices This article is about intolerance by and between religious communities or by communities of specific practices. For intolerance of religion itself, see Antireligion , Irreligion , and Antitheism .

See also: Religious tolerance This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( April 2019 ) This article is missing information about Ancient, Medieval and Early Modern history of religious intolerance and persecution and trends on religious intolerance in the 2010s.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( April 2019 ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Religious intolerance" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The Somnath Hindu Temple was first attacked by Muslim Turkic invader Mahmud of Ghazni and repeatedly rebuilt after being demolished by more Invaders.

Religious intolerance or religious bigotry is intolerance of another's religious beliefs, practices, faith or lack thereof.

Statements which are contrary to one's religious beliefs do not constitute intolerance. Religious intolerance, rather, occurs when a person or group (e.g., a society, a religious group, a non-religious group) specifically refuses to tolerate the religious convictions and practices of a religious group or individual.

Historical perspectives [ edit ] The intolerance, and even the active persecution of religious minorities (sometimes religious majorities as in modern Bahrain or the Pre-Dutch Indonesian kingdoms), has a long history. Almost all religions have historically faced and perpetrated persecution of other viewpoints.

The modern concept of religious tolerance developed out of the European wars of religion , more specifically out of the Peace of Westphalia which ended the 30 Years' War (1618–1648), during the Protestant Reformation and the ensuing conflicts between Protestants and Catholics in the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries. The doctrine of 'religious toleration' was established as a result of the 30 Years' War between the Catholic Hapsburgs and newly Protestant nations like Sweden under Gustavus Adolphus . At this time, rulers sought to eradicate religious sentiments and dogmas from their political demesnes . The 1648 Treaty gave nations the right of sovereignty and it also allowed minority Christian denominations to exist within the Holy Roman Empire .

[ 1 ] Contemporary attitude and practice [ edit ] A statue of the Buddha at Bamiyan before and after its March 2001 destruction by Taliban forces The constitutions of some countries contain provisions which expressly forbid the state from engaging in certain acts of religious intolerance and these same provisions also forbid the state from showing a preference for a particular religion within its own borders, examples of such provisions include the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , the Article 4 of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany , Article 44.2.1 of the Constitution of Ireland , Article 40 of the Estonian Constitution , [ 2 ] Article 24 of the Constitution of Turkey , Article 36 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China , [ 3 ] and Article 3 Section 5 of the Constitution of the Philippines .

[ 4 ] Other states, whilst not containing constitutional provisions which are directly related to religion, nonetheless contain provisions which forbid discrimination on religious grounds (see, for example, Article 1 of the Constitution of France , article 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and article 40 of the Constitution of Egypt ). These constitutional provisions do not necessarily guarantee that all elements of the state remain free from religious intolerance at all times, and practice can vary widely from country to country.

Mughal Emperor Babur demolished Gopalchal rock cut Jain Monuments .

Other countries, meanwhile, may allow for religious preference, for instance through the establishment of one or more state religions , but not for religious intolerance.

Finland , for example, has the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland and Finnish Orthodox Church as its official state religions, yet upholds the right of free expression of religion in article 11 of its constitution .

In Nazi Germany , smaller religious minorities such as the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Baháʼí Faith were banned in Germany, while the eradication of Judaism was attempted along with the genocide of its adherents.

Hundreds of religious riots have been recorded, in every decade of independent India. In these riots, the victims have included many Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Christians and Buddhists. The US Commission on International Religious Freedom classified India as Tier-2 in persecuting religious minorities, the same as that of Iraq and Egypt. In a 2018 report, USCIRF charged Hindu nationalist groups for their campaign to " Saffronize " India through violence, intimidation, and harassment against non-Hindus.

[ 5 ] Approximately one-third of state governments enforced anti-conversion and/or anti-cow slaughter [ 6 ] laws against non-Hindus, and mobs engaged in violence against Muslims whose families have been engaged in the dairy, leather, or beef trades for generations, and against Christians for proselytizing. "Cow protection" lynch mobs killed at least 10 victims in 2017.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Some countries retain laws which forbid the defamation of religious beliefs. Some constitutions retain laws which forbid all forms of blasphemy (e.g., Germany where, in 2006, Manfred van H.

was convicted of blasphemy against Islam ).

[ 9 ] The connection between intolerance and blasphemy laws is closest when the laws apply to only one religion. In Pakistan blasphemy directed against either the tenets of the Qur'an or the Prophet Mohammed is punishable by either life imprisonment or death.

Apostasy , the rejection of one's old religion, is also criminalized in a number of countries, notably Afghanistan with Abdul Rahman being the first to face the death penalty for converting to Christianity . Though, he was later released.

[ 10 ] Welsh Government advisory video: religious hate crime; 2021 The United Nations upholds the right to freely express one's religious beliefs, as listed in the UN's charter , and additionally in articles 2 and 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . Article 2 forbids discrimination based on religious grounds. Article 18 protects the freedom to change one's religion. 
As a treaty , not a declaration , is legally binding, the signing of the human rights declaration is a public pledge of commitment.

[ 11 ] [ clarification needed ] Out of a desire to avoid subservience to an international court, the United States chose in 1998 to pass the International Religious Freedom Act , creating the Commission on International Religious Freedom , and mandating that the United States government take action against any country found to violate the religious freedoms outlined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

[ 12 ] Human Rights Council in 2011 adopted Resolution 16/18 on "Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping and stigmatization of, and discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against, persons based on religion or belief" [ 13 ] which was hailed by stakeholders from all regions and faiths as a turning point in international efforts to confront religious intolerance.

[ 14 ] The European Convention on Human Rights , which is legally binding on all European Union states (following the passage of the Human Rights Act 1998 in the United Kingdom ), makes restricting the rights of an individual to practice or change their religion illegal in article 9, and discrimination on the basis of religion illegal in article 14.

In North Korea, The regime reportedly continues to repress the religious activities of unauthorized religious groups. North Korea is considered an atheist state , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] where refugees, defectors and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) continued to allege that they witnessed the arrests and execution of members of underground Christian churches by the regime in prior years. Due to the country's inaccessibility and the inability to gain timely information, this activity remains difficult to verify.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In its 2000 annual report on international religious freedom, the U.S. State Department cited China, Myanmar , Iran, Iraq and Sudan for persecuting people for their religious faith and practices.  The report, which covers July 1999 through June 2000, details U.S. policy toward countries where religious freedom is violated in the view of the State Department.

[ 19 ] The advocacy group Freedom House produced a report entitled "Religious Freedom in the World" in 2000 which ranked countries according to their religious freedom. The countries receiving a score of 7, indicating those where religious freedom was least respected, were Turkmenistan , Iran, Saudi Arabia, Sudan , Myanmar and North Korea . China was given a score of 6 overall, however Tibet was listed separately in the 7 category. Those countries receiving a score of 1, indicating the highest level of religious freedom, were Estonia , Finland , Ireland , the Netherlands , Norway and the United States.

[ 20 ] Within those countries that openly advocate religious tolerance there remain debates as to the limits of tolerance. Some individuals and religious groups, for example, retain beliefs or practices which involve acts contrary to established law, such as the use of cannabis by members of the Rastafari movement , the religious use of eagle feathers by non- Native Americans (contrary to the eagle feather law , 50 CFR 22), or the practice of polygamy amongst the LDS Church in the 19th century.

[ 21 ] In Australia [ edit ] Religious freedom has developed partly due to the agreeable relationship between religious groups in its society. Several non-governmental organizations promoted tolerance and better understanding among religions in the country, both indigenous and non-indigenous. These groups included the Columbian Centre for Christian-Muslim Relations, the National Council of Churches in Australia and its affiliated Aboriginal and Islander Commission, and the Australian Council of Christians and Jews . In Victoria, Australia the Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001 makes illegal "conduct that incites hatred against, serious contempt for, or revulsion or severe ridicule of, that other person or class of persons" on the grounds of religious belief.

[ 22 ] In 2003, in response to an increase in anti-Islamic sentiment , the HREOC undertook a project involving national consultations on eliminating prejudice against Arab and Muslim citizens. As part of the consultations, the commission considered whether Muslim citizens shared an ethnic origin or race, as well as a religion, which would entitle them to comprehensive protection under the Federal Race Discrimination Act. The commission's report, made public in June 2004, contained no findings on the racial status of Arab and Muslim citizens. In January 2005 the leader of the neo-Nazi Australian Nationalist Movement was connected to incidents in 2004 in which several Asian-owned businesses and a synagogue in Perth were firebombed or sprayed with racist graffiti. On December 11, 2005, there was a riot in the Sydney suburb of Cronulla, that erupted because a group of Lebanese-Australian youths had assaulted two lifeguards.

[ 23 ] Demonstrators against the assault displayed anti-Arab and anti-Muslim slogans. When the gathering turned violent, bystanders perceived to be of Middle Eastern origin or Muslim were attacked. The following day, retaliatory vandalism and other assaults were reported around Sydney.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Religion portal Antireligion – Opposition to religion Antitheism – Opposition to theism, and usually to religion Demonization – Characterization of individuals, groups, or political bodies as evil Forced conversion – Adoption of a different religion or irreligion under duress Fundamentalism – Unwavering attachment to a set of irreducible beliefs Religious discrimination – Treating a person or group differently because of their religious beliefs Religious fanaticism – Fanaticism towards a religion Religious freedom – Human right to practice, or not, a religion without conflict from governing powers Religious persecution – Persecution based on religious belief Religious tolerance – Allowing or permitting a thing, person, or idea of which one disapproves Religious violence – Violence practiced in the name of religion Religious supremacism – Ideology Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces Religious terrorism – Terrorism motivated by religious beliefs Religious war – War primarily over religious differences Sectarian violence – Violence motivated by conflict between sects of ideology or religion State atheism – Official promotion of atheism by a government State religion – Religion or creed endorsed by the state Toleration – Allowing or permitting a thing, person, or idea of which one disapproves Violence against LGBT people#Religious texts – Hateful actions towards sexuality or gender identity Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Specific religions Anti-cult movement Christian countercult movement – Social movement opposing certain religious sects Discrimination against atheists – Discrimination based on lack of religious belief Persecution of Baháʼís Persecution of Buddhists Persecution of Christians Anti-Mormonism – Hostility towards the Latter Day Saint movement Anti-Protestantism Persecution of Eastern Orthodox Christians Anti-Catholicism – Hostility or prejudice towards Catholics Anti-Christian sentiment – Discrimination against Christianity or Christians Persecution of Hindus Anti-Hinduism Persecution of Jews Anti-Judaism – Total or partial opposition to Judaism Antisemitism – Hostility, prejudice, or discrimination against Jews Persecution of Muslims Islamophobia – Discrimination against Islam or Muslims Religious nationalism – Relationship between national identity and religion Christian nationalism – Christianity-affiliated religious nationalism Islam and nationalism – Overview of Islamic views on nationalistic practices Hindutva – Form of right-wing Hindu nationalism Religious Zionism – Ideology that views Zionism as a fundamental component of Orthodox Judaism Specific examples 2012 Ramu violence Aranthalawa massacre – 1987 Buddhist monk massacre Bodh Gaya bombings – Set of terrorist bombings in India Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Buddhas of Bamiyan – Sculptures in Afghanistan before 2001 Buddhist crisis – 1963 political and religious tension in South Vietnam Demolition of the Babri Masjid – 1992 religious riot in India Destruction of cultural heritage by ISIL – Part of the War against the Islamic State (2014–present) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Conversion of non-Islamic places of worship into mosques References [ edit ] ^ Hobolt, Sara B.

; Brug, Wouter Van der; Vreese, Claes H. De; Boomgaarden, Hajo G.; Hinrichsen, Malte C. (2011-09-01). "Religious intolerance and Euroscepticism".

European Union Politics .

12 (3): 359– 79.

doi : 10.1177/1465116511404620 .

ISSN 1465-1165 .

S2CID 93065237 .

^ Tschentscher, Axel (1995) [28 July 1992].

"Estonia > Constitution" .

www.servat.unibe.ch . Translated by Martin Scheinin. International Constitutional Law Project . Retrieved 2023-01-02 .

^ "Constitution of the People's Republic of China" .

en.people.cn . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

^ "The 1987 Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines – Article III" .

Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines . Archived from the original on September 3, 2017 . Retrieved 22 August 2023 .

^ Annual Report of the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom (PDF) (Report).

U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom . April 2018. p. 37.

^ "States Where Cow Slaughter is Banned So Far, and States Where it Isn't" . 26 May 2017.

^ "Tracking mob lynching in two charts" .

The Hindu . 3 July 2018.

^ "India's Got Beef With Beef: What You Need To Know About The Country's Controversial 'Beef Ban' " .

Forbes .

^ "Suspended prison for German who insulted Koran" .

www.expatica.com . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

^ Afghan convert likely to be freed after Karzai intervention Archived January 15, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , by Sardar Ahmad, mq7.net , 26 March 2006, retrieved 28 March 2006 ^ "Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief" .

OHCHR.org .

^ "International Religious Freedom Act of 1998" Archived 2007-06-08 at the Wayback Machine , 27 January 1998, retrieved 25 May 2007.

^ "Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping and stigmatization of, and discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against, persons based on religion or belief" (PDF) . Retrieved 2019-12-05 .

^ "URG Policy Report: Combatting global religious intolerance" .

Universal Rights Group . Retrieved 2016-02-10 .

^ World and Its Peoples: Eastern and Southern Asia .

Marshall Cavendish . September 2007.

ISBN 9780761476313 . Retrieved 2011-03-05 .

North Korea is officially an atheist state in which almost the entire population is nonreligious.

^ The State of Religion Atlas .

Simon & Schuster . 1993.

ISBN 9780671793760 . Retrieved 2011-03-05 .

Atheism continues to be the official position of the governments of China, North Korea and Cuba.

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain : United States Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor.

North Korea: International Religious Freedom Report 2007 .

^ "Aid to the Church in Need | North Korea" .

Aid to the Church in Need . Retrieved 2019-07-03 .

^ "United States Commission on International Freedom of Religion" Archived 2005-11-03 at the Wayback Machine , Press Releases 2000, retrieved 25 May 2007.

^ "Freedom in the World 2000 | Freedom House" .

freedomhouse.org . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

^ "Official Declaration 1" .

www.churchofjesuschrist.org . Retrieved 2023-01-02 .

^ "Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001" .

www.austlii.edu.au . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

^ "Error | ACMA" (PDF) .

www.acma.gov.au . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-07-02 . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

^ "Australia" .

U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

Further reading [ edit ] Chopra, R.M., "A Study of Religions", Anuradha Prakashan, New Delhi, 2015 ISBN 978-93-82339-94-6 Garth Blake, "Promoting Religious Tolerance in a Multifaith Society: Religious Vilification Legislation in Australia and the UK." The Australian Law Journal , 81 (2007): 386–405.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Religious persecution .

"New Effort to Ban Religious Hate", BBC News, 11 June 2005 retrieved 25 May 2007 v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_intolerance&oldid=1300606985 " Categories : Religion and society Religious discrimination Religious persecution Toleration Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles to be expanded from April 2019 Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2018 Articles needing additional references from June 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2019 Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces via Module:Annotated link Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is locally defined Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 09:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious intolerance 13 languages Add topic

