Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Double genocide theory (Rwanda) 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of "counter-genocide" against Hutus The double genocide theory posits that, during the Rwandan genocide , the Tutsi -led Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) engaged in a "counter-genocide" against the Hutus .

[ 1 ] Most scholars of Rwanda, such as Scott Straus and Gerald Caplan , say that RPF violence against Hutus does not fully match the definition of " genocide ", considering that it instead consisted of war crimes [ 2 ] or crimes against humanity .

[ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] Black Furies, White Liars , a book by French investigative journalist Pierre Péan , accuses the RPF of genocide against Hutus. Jean-Pierre Chrétien, a French historian, criticized Péan's "amazing revisionist passion".

[ 4 ] A 2003 study by Philip Verwimp, based on 8 months of field research in central and southern Rwanda over a period of 2 years, found that the absolute number of Tutsis killed was double that for Hutus, and that the patterns of killing for the two groups differed.

[ 5 ] Verwimp acknowledged that his study was only a partial test of the double-genocide thesis as it excluded the prefectures where most RPF killings were purportedly committed, yet concluded by arguing that "for those prefectures in which we performed our fieldwork, the term genocide should be reserved for the killings committed by the Interahamwe and the FAR , and another word should be used for the killings committed by the RPF . That word could be massacre or terror or another word, depending on the event." [ 6 ] A great deal of effort has been extended to make sure the focus stays exclusively on the Francophone Tutsi victims and their Hutu executioners. But of the estimated one million people killed, between 300,000 and 500,000 of them were Tutsi, according to best estimates. What about the other 500,000 to 700,000 people? Who is responsible for their deaths?

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] —Christian Davenport Professor of Peace Studies at the University of Michigan In 2009, scholars Christian Davenport of the University of Michigan and Allan C. Stam of Dartmouth College argued that the anti-Tutsi genocide constituted only part of the slaughter of spring and summer 1994; that the RPF was "clearly responsible" for another major portion of the killings; that the victims were "fairly evenly distributed between Tutsi and Hutu"; that the majority of the dead were Hutu, rather than Tutsi; and that, "among other things, it appears that there simply weren't enough Tutsi in Rwanda at the time to account for all the reported deaths".

[ 9 ] In October 2014, a BBC documentary, Rwanda: The Untold Story , was aired featuring interviews with Davenport and Stam. It suggested that Kagame's RPF was involved in the shooting down of Habyarimana's plane. It aroused considerable controversy.

[ 10 ] Following this, the Rwandan government banned the BBC's Kinyarwanda-language radio broadcasts from the country [ 11 ] before conducting a three-week inquiry into the documentary.

[ 12 ] In 2018, the Canadian journalist Judi Rever released a book titled In Praise of Blood . Based on interviews with RPF defectors and top-secret documents that were leaked from the ICTR, Rever argued that ethnically targeted killings of Hutus by the RPF, beginning in 1990 in Rwanda and in 1996 in Zaire, should also be called "genocide." [ 13 ] Scholars had mixed reactions to Rever's description of these killings as "genocide." René Lemarchand called the book a "path-breaking inquest", "destined to become required reading for any one claiming competence on the Rwanda genocide".

[ 14 ] Political scientist Scott Straus was critical, writing that in his opinion the evidence showed that the RPF killings of Hutu civilians constituted crimes against humanity , but not a double genocide.

[ 3 ] Similarly, Gerald Caplan said that RPF had committed "war crimes" against Hutus but those crimes did not meet the definition of genocide .

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Double genocide theory – Equation of Soviet atrocities against Eastern Europeans to the Holocaust References [ edit ] ^ Jean-Paul Gouteux. "Mémoire et révisionnisme du génocide rwandais en France: Racines politiques, impact médiatique". Online posting.

Amnistia.net Archived 11 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine 12 February 2004.

^ a b Caplan 2018 , p. 186.

^ a b Straus 2019 , pp. 5, 13.

^ "Point de Vue: Un pamphlet teinté d'africanisme colonial".

Le Monde Archived 17 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine 9 December 2005. Qtd. by Thierry Perret in "Les dossiers de presse : Afrique-France: Rwanda/« l'affaire » Péan". Online posting.

RFI Service Pro Archived 19 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine 22 December 2005. Chrétien's "Point de Vue" posted online in Observatoire de l'Afrique centrale 8 (December 2005) Archived 19 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ Verwimp 2003 .

^ Verwimp 2003 , pp. 424, 441.

^ David Peterson (17 June 2011).

"Rwanda's 1991 Census" .

ZSpace .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2014 . Retrieved 9 August 2013 .

^ Fallon, Joan (24 March 2009).

"Research sheds new light on Rwanda killings" .

news.nd.edu .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2014 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

^ Christian Davenport; Allan C. Stam (6 October 2009).

"What Really Happened in Rwanda?" .

psmag.com .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2018 . Retrieved 10 August 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ For criticism of the documentary, see: Wallis, Andrew (6 October 2014).

" 'Rwanda: The Untold Story': questions for the BBC" .

openDemocracy .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 .

Musoni, Edwin (26 November 2014).

"BBC had an agenda to twist Rwanda history – UK expert" .

newtimes.co.rw .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 27 November 2014 .

Johnson, Richard (14 December 2014).

"The BBC and the West need to clean up their act on Rwanda" .

csmonitor.com . Christian Science Monitor.

Archived from the original on 19 December 2014 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 .

^ Baird, Dugald (24 October 2014).

"Rwanda bans BBC broadcasts over genocide documentary" .

theguardian.com .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 .

^ Musoni, Edwin (18 November 2014).

"BBC probe team begins work tomorrow" .

newtimes.co.rw . New Times (Rwanda).

Archived from the original on 21 November 2014 . Retrieved 27 November 2014 .

^ Rever 2018 , p. 223, 232.

^ Lemarchand, René (25 June 2018).

"Rwanda: the state of Research | Sciences Po Violence de masse et Résistance – Réseau de recherche" .

www.sciencespo.fr .

ISSN 1961-9898 .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2018 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Beloff, Jonathan R. (2022). " "Double Genocide" or Revenge Killings? Did the Liberators of a Genocide Commit Their Own?".

In the Shadow of Genocide . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-003-22859-2 .

Caplan, Gerald (2018).

"Rethinking the Rwandan Narrative for the 25th Anniversary" .

Genocide Studies International .

12 (2): 152– 190.

doi : 10.3138/gsi.12.2.03 .

S2CID 167056377 .

Rever, Judi (2018).

In Praise of Blood . Random House of Canada.

ISBN 978-0345812117 .

Straus, Scott (6 June 2019). "The Limits of a Genocide Lens: Violence Against Rwandans in the 1990s".

Journal of Genocide Research .

21 (4): 504– 524.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2019.1623527 .

ISSN 1462-3528 .

S2CID 196571351 .

Verwimp, Philip (2003). "Testing the Double-Genocide Thesis for Central and Southern Rwanda".

The Journal of Conflict Resolution .

47 (4): 423– 42.

doi : 10.1177/0022002703254478 .

JSTOR 3176203 .

S2CID 67832644 .

v t e Rwandan genocide Background History of Rwanda Origins of Hutu, Tutsi and Twa Kingdom of Rwanda Belgian colonial empire Rwandan Revolution Hutu Power Rwandan Civil War Arusha Accords Assassination of Juvénal Habyarimana and Cyprien Ntaryamira Events Initial events Chronology Massacres Gikondo Musha Church Nyarubuye Rape Perpetrators People indicted by the ICTR Genocidaires Akazu Impuzamugambi Interahamwe Kangura Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines Response Rwandan Patriotic Front International response France Opération Turquoise United States Operation Support Hope UNAMIR UNSC Resolution 935 Aftermath Great Lakes refugee crisis Kibeho massacre First Congo War Massacres of Hutus Second Congo War Rwandan genocide denial Gacaca court International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda National Unity and Reconciliation Commission Commemoration Genocide memorials Bisesero Kigali Murambi Ntarama Nyamata Kwibuka T20 Tournament Survivors Fund Historigraphy Double genocide theory Bibliography Filmography v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Double_genocide_theory_(Rwanda)&oldid=1306160644 " Categories : Rwandan genocide Rwandan Patriotic Front Historiography of Rwanda Historiography of genocide Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 07:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Double genocide theory (Rwanda) 1 language Add topic

