Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Photochemistry Toggle Photochemistry subsection 1.1 Creation 1.2 The ozone–oxygen cycle 1.3 Removal 1.4 Additional reactions 2 Main reactions in different atmospheric layers Toggle Main reactions in different atmospheric layers subsection 2.1 Thermosphere 2.2 Below thermosphere: Reaction rates at steady state 2.3 Mesosphere 2.4 Stratosphere 2.5 Troposphere 3 External links 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ozone–oxygen cycle 14 languages العربية भोजपुरी Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano Lombard Bahasa Melayu Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biogeochemical cycle Ozone–oxygen cycle in the ozone layer : 1. Oxygen photolyzed to atomic oxygen 2. Oxygen and ozone continuously interconverted. Solar UV breaks down oxygen; molecular and atomic oxygen combine to form Ozone. 3. Ozone is lost by reaction with atomic oxygen (plus other trace atoms).

The ozone– oxygen cycle is the process by which ozone is continually regenerated in Earth 's stratosphere , converting ultraviolet radiation (UV) into heat . In 1930 Sydney Chapman resolved the chemistry involved. The process is commonly called the Chapman cycle by atmospheric scientists.

Most of the ozone production occurs in the tropical upper stratosphere and mesosphere. The total mass of ozone produced per day over the globe is about 400 million metric tons. The global mass of ozone is relatively constant at about 3 billion metric tons, meaning the Sun produces about 12% of the ozone layer each day.

[ 1 ] Photochemistry [ edit ] Part of a series on Biogeochemical cycles Water cycle Water cycle deep water cycle Carbon cycle Global atmospheric terrestrial oceanic Sequestration carbon sink deep carbon cycle soil carbon mycorrhizal fungi Boreal forests Nutrient cycle Hydrogen cycle Nitrogen cycle human impact nitrification nitrogen and lichens fixation assimilation Oxygen cycle Phosphorus cycle assimilation Sulfur cycle assimilation Rock cycle Calcium cycle Silica cycle Carbonate–silicate cycle Marine cycle Marine biogeochemical cycles Biological pump microbial loop viral shunt Calcareous ooze Siliceous ooze Methane cycle Atmospheric methane Methane clathrate clathrate gun hypothesis Arctic methane emissions Other cycles aluminum arsenic boron bromine cadmium chlorine chromium copper fluorine gold iodine iron lead lithium manganese mercury ozone–oxygen selenium vanadium zinc Related topics Biogeochemistry geochemical cycle chemical cycling environmental chemistry Biosequestration Deep biosphere Ocean acidification acid rain Biogeochemical planetary boundaries Research groups DAAC GEOTRACES IMBER NOBM SOLAS Category v t e The Chapman cycle describes the main reactions that naturally determine, to first approximation, the concentration of ozone in the stratosphere. It includes four processes - and a fifth, less important one - all involving oxygen atoms and molecules, and UV radiation: [ 2 ] Creation [ edit ] An oxygen molecule is split ( photolyzed ) by higher frequency UV light (top end of UV-B , UV-C and above) into two oxygen atoms (see figure): 1.

oxygen photodissociation : O 2 + ℎν (<242 nm) → 2 O Each oxygen atom may then combine with an oxygen molecule to form an ozone molecule: 2.

ozone creation : O + O 2 + A → O 3 + A where A denotes an additional molecule or atom, such as N 2 or O 2 , required to maintain the conservation of energy and momentum in the reaction. Any excess energy is produced as kinetic energy .

The ozone–oxygen cycle [ edit ] The ozone molecules formed by the reaction (above) absorb radiation with an appropriate wavelength between UV-C and UV-B . The triatomic ozone molecule becomes diatomic molecular oxygen, plus a free oxygen atom (see figure): 3.

ozone photodissociation : O 3 + ℎν (240–310 nm) → O 2 + O The atomic oxygen produced may react with another oxygen molecule to reform ozone via the ozone creation reaction (reaction 2 above).

These two reactions thus form the ozone–oxygen cycle, wherein the chemical energy released by ozone creation becomes molecular kinetic energy. The net result of the cycle is the conversion of penetrating UV-B light into heat, without any net loss of ozone. While keeping the ozone layer in stable balance, and protecting the lower atmosphere from harmful UV radiation, the cycle also provides one of two major heat sources in the stratosphere (the other being kinetic energy, released when  O 2 is photolyzed into individual O atoms).

Removal [ edit ] If an oxygen atom and an ozone molecule meet, they recombine to form two oxygen molecules: 4.

ozone conversion : O 3 + O → 2 O 2 Two oxygen atoms may react to form one oxygen molecule: 5.

oxygen recombination : 2O + A → O 2 + A as in reaction 2 (above), A denotes another molecule or atom, like N 2 or O 2 required for the conservation of energy and momentum.

Note that reaction 5 is of the least importance in the stratosphere, since, under normal conditions, the concentration of oxygen atoms is much lower than that of diatomic oxygen molecules. This reaction is therefore less common than ozone creation (reaction 2).

The overall amount of ozone in the stratosphere is determined by the balance between production from solar radiation and its removal. The removal rate is slow, since the concentration of free O atoms is very low.

Additional reactions [ edit ] In addition to these five reactions, certain free radicals - the most important being hydroxyl (OH), nitric oxide (NO), and atomic chlorine (Cl) and bromine (Br) - catalyze the recombination reaction , leading to an ozone layer that is thinner than it would be if the catalysts were not present.

Most OH and NO are naturally present in the stratosphere, but human activity - especially emissions of chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs ) and halons - has greatly increased the concentration of Cl and Br, leading to ozone depletion . Each Cl or Br atom can catalyze tens of thousands of decomposition reactions before it is removed from the stratosphere.

Main reactions in different atmospheric layers [ edit ] Thermosphere [ edit ] For given relative reactants concentrations, The rates of ozone creation and oxygen recombination (reactions 2 and 5) are proportional to the air density cubed, while the rate of ozone conversion (reaction 4) is proportional to the air density squared, and the photodissociation reactions (reactions 1 and 3) have a linear dependence on air density. Thus, at the upper thermosphere, where air density is very low and photon flux is high, oxygen photodissociation is fast while ozone creation is low, thus its concentration is low. Thus the most important reactions are oxygen photodissociation and oxygen recombination, with most of the oxygen molecules dissociated to oxygen atoms.

[ 3 ] As we go to the lower thermosphere (e.g. 100 km height and below), the photon flux in the <170 nm wavelengths drops sharply due to absorption by oxygen in the oxygen photodissociation reaction (reaction 1). This wavelength regime has the highest cross section for this reaction (10 −17 cm 2 per oxygen molecule), and thus the rate of oxygen photodissociation per oxygen molecule decreases significantly at these altitudes, from more than 10 −7 per second (about once a month) at 100 km to 10 −8 per second (about once every few years) at 80 km .

[ 4 ] As a result, the atomic oxygen concentration (both relative and absolute) decreases sharply, and ozone creation (reaction 2) is ongoing, leading to a small but non-negligible ozone presence.

[ 5 ] Note that temperatures also drop as altitude decreases, because lower photon photodissociation rates mean lower heat production per air molecule.

Below thermosphere: Reaction rates at steady state [ edit ] Odd oxygen species (atomic oxygen and ozone) have net creation rate only by oxygen dissociation (reaction 1), and net destruction by either ozone conversion or oxygen recombination (reactions 4 and 5). At steady state these processes are balanced, so the rates of these reactions obey: (rate of reaction 1) = (rate of reaction 4) + (rate of reaction 5).

At steady state, ozone creation is also balanced with its removal. so: (rate of reaction 2) = (rate of reaction 3) + (rate of reaction 4).

It thus follows that: (rate of reaction 2) + (rate of reaction 5) = (rate of reaction 3) + (rate of reaction 1).

The right-hand side is the total photodissociation rate, of either oxygen or ozone.

Below the thermosphere, the atomic oxygen concentration is very low compared to molecular oxygen.

[ 6 ] Therefore, oxygen atoms are much more likely to hit oxygen (diatomic) molecules than to hit other oxygen atoms, making oxygen recombination (reaction 5) far rarer than ozone creation (reaction 2). Following the steady-state relation between the reaction rates, we may therefore approximate: [ 7 ] (rate of reaction 2) = (rate of reaction 3) + (rate of reaction 1) Mesosphere [ edit ] In the mesosphere, oxygen photodissociation dominates over ozone photodissociation, so we have approximately: [ 4 ] (rate of reaction 2) = (rate of reaction 1) =  (rate of reaction 4) Thus, ozone is mainly removed by ozone conversion. Both ozone creation and conversion depend linearly on oxygen atom concentration, but in ozone creation an oxygen atom must encounter an oxygen molecule and another air molecule (typically nitrogen) simultaneously, while in ozone conversion an oxygen atom must only encounter an ozone molecule. Thus, when both reactions are balanced, the ratio between ozone and molecular oxygen concentrations is approximately proportional to air density.

Therefore, the relative ozone concentration is higher at lower altitudes, where air density is higher. This trend continues to some extent lower into the stratosphere, and thus as we go from 60 km to 30 km altitude, both air density and ozone relative concentration increase by ~40-50-fold.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Stratosphere [ edit ] Absorption by oxygen in the mesosphere and thermosphere (in the oxygen photodissociation reaction) reduces photon flux at wavelengths below 200 nanometer, where oxygen photodissociation is dominated by Schumann–Runge bands and continuum , with cross-section of up to 10 −17 cm 2 .
Due to this absorption, photon flux in these wavelengths is so low in the stratosphere, that oxygen photodissociation becomes dominated by the Hertzberg band of the 200-240 nm photon wavelength, even though the cross-section of this process is as low as 10 −24 - 10 −23 cm 2 . The ozone photodissociation rate per ozone molecule has a cross-section 6 orders of magnitude higher in the 220-300 nm wavelength range. With ozone concentrations in the order of 10 −6 -10 −5 relative to molecular oxygen, ozone photodissociation becomes the dominant photodissociation reaction, and most of the stratosphere heat is generated through this procsees, with highest heat generation rate per molecule at the upper limit of the stratosphere ( stratopause ), where ozone concentration is already relatively high while UV flux is still high as well in those wavelengths, before being depleted by this same photodissociation process.

In addition to ozone photodissociation becoming a more dominant removal reaction, catalytic ozone destruction due to free radicals (mainly atomic hydrogen , hydroxyl , nitric oxide , chlorine and bromide ) increases the effective ozone conversion reaction rate. Both processes act to increase ozone removal, leading to a more moderate increase of ozone relative concentration as altitude decreases, even though air density continues to increase.

[ 4 ] Due to both ozone and oxygen growing density as we go to lower altitudes, UV photon flux at wavelengths below 300 nm decreases substantially, and oxygen photodissociation rates fall below 10 −9 per second per molecule at 30 km.

[ 4 ] With decreasing oxygen photodissociation rates, odd-oxygen species (atomic oxygen and ozone molecules) are hardly formed de novo (rather than being transmuted to each other by the other reactions), and most atomic oxygen needed for ozone creation is derived almost exclusively from ozone removal by ozone photodissociation. Thus, ozone becomes depleted as we go below 30 km altitude and reaches very low concentrations at the tropopause .

[ 8 ] Troposphere [ edit ] In the troposphere, ozone formation and destruction are no longer controlled by the ozone-oxygen cycle. Rather, tropospheric ozone chemistry is dominated today by industrial pollutants other gases of volcanic source.

[ 4 ] External links [ edit ] Stratospheric Ozone: An Electronic Textbook The Sun and the Earth's Climate References [ edit ] ^ "Chapter 5: Stratospheric Photochemistry" .

Stratospheric Ozone: An Electronic Textbook . Archived from the original on 2011-07-27 . Retrieved 2011-06-16 .

^ Dütschکیر, H. U. (1968). The photochemistry of stratospheric ozone. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 94(402), 483-497.

^ UCAR Center for Science Education: The Thermosphere ^ a b c d e Photochemistry of Ozone ^ Mlynczak, M. G., Hunt, L. A., Mast, J. C., Thomas Marshall, B., Russell III, J. M., Smith, A. K., ... & Gordley, L. L. (2013). Atomic oxygen in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere derived from SABER: Algorithm theoretical basis and measurement uncertainty. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 118(11), 5724-5735.

^ Richter, H., Buchbender, C., Güsten, R., Higgins, R., Klein, B., Stutzki, J., ... & Hübers, H. W. (2021). Direct measurements of atomic oxygen in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere using terahertz heterodyne spectroscopy. Communications Earth & Environment, 2(1), 19.

^ Hingane, L. S. (1984). Ozone in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere. Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Earth and Planetary Sciences, 93, 91-103.

^ a b NASA Ozone Watch ^ Bakhmetieva, N. V., Kulikov, Y. Y., & Zhemyakov, I. N. (2020). Mesosphere ozone and the lower ionosphere under plasma disturbance by powerful high-frequency radio emission. Atmosphere, 11(11), 1154.

^ The Engineering Toolbox: U.S. Standard Atmosphere vs. Altitude v t e Biogeochemical cycles Cycles Carbon cycle carbonate–silicate cycle deep carbon cycle oceanic carbon cycle Chlorine cycle Hydrogen cycle Iron cycle Mercury cycle Mineral cycle Nitrogen cycle Nutrient cycle Oxygen cycle ozone Phosphorus cycle Rock cycle Selenium cycle Silica cycle Sulfur cycle Water cycle deep water cycle Marine biogeochemical cycles Research groups DAAC GEOTRACES IMBER NOBM SOLAS Related topics Biogeochemistry geochemical cycle chemical cycling environmental chemistry Biosequestration carbon sequestration carbon sink soil carbon biological pump viral shunt mycorrhizal fungi Ocean acidification acid rain Methane clathrate clathrate gun hypothesis Arctic methane emissions Human impact on the nitrogen cycle Lichens and nitrogen cycling Nitrification Nitrogen fixation Nitrogen assimilation Phosphorus assimilation Sulfur assimilation Planetary boundaries Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐4bbr4
Cached time: 20250812001322
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.300 seconds
Real time usage: 0.395 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1221/1000000
Revision size: 14057/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 35856/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5850/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86607/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.163/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3619429/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  323.438      1 -total
 34.00%  109.976      1 Template:Biogeochemical_cycle_sidebar
 29.01%   93.834      1 Template:Reflist
 25.14%   81.296      1 Template:Cite_web
 23.81%   77.008      1 Template:Short_description
 12.77%   41.312      2 Template:Pagetype
 12.37%   40.025     12 Template:Flatlist
 11.11%   35.924      1 Template:Biogeochemical_cycle
 10.31%   33.361      1 Template:Navbox
  8.36%   27.027     15 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:616752:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001322 and revision id 1270449363. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ozone–oxygen_cycle&oldid=1270449363 " Categories : Ozone depletion Oxygen Biogeochemical cycle Atmospheric chemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 January 2025, at 15:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ozone–oxygen cycle 14 languages Add topic

