Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Situations and Names of Winds 5 languages Íslenska Italiano 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Situations and Names of Winds ( Ancient Greek : Περὶ θέσεως ἀνέμων ; Latin : Ventorum Situs ) is a spurious fragment traditionally attributed to Aristotle . The brief text lists winds blowing from twelve different directions and their alternative names used in different places.

[ 1 ] According to the manuscript version of the work, The Situations and Names of Winds is an extract from a larger work entitled On Signs ( De Signis ) [ 2 ] likely written by a pseudo-Aristotle of the peripatetic school .

Situations is notable as an ancient text which reproduces the concepts of the Anemoi or "wind gods" and classical compass winds , both of which have been historical components of western culture .

Synopsis [ edit ] Situations is the shortest piece traditionally attributed to Aristotle as part of the Corpus Aristotelicum , occupying a single two-column page (973) in Bekker's standard reference edition of Aristotle's complete works.

The twelve winds, described in order in the text, are: Boreas (N) Meses (NNE) Caecias (NE) Eurus (E) Apeliotes (SE) Orthonotus (SSE) Notus (S) Leuconotus (SSW) Lips (SW) Zephyrus (W) Iapyx (NW) Thracias (NNW) In addition to these primary names, the document also gives partial information on other traditional names for the same winds, and geographic associations tied to various places.

Although the document usually provides geographic context as opposed to cardinal directions, it is clear by comparing its scheme to other classical accounts that the listing starts in the north, and proceeds clockwise.  In particular, the scheme presented in Situations is very similar to, but distinct from, the one given by Aristotle in his authentic text, Meteorology .

[ 3 ] A significant difference between the two texts is that Situations introduces the names Orthonotus and Leuconotus for the two southerly winds not treated in Meteorology .  For another treatment of the text, see the "Theophrastus" section in the classical compass winds article, listed below.

The winds, as represented in Aristotle's Meteorology .  Note that most, but not all names, agree with those given in Situations .

Nicolaus Germanus's 1467 manuscript copy of Ptolemy 's world map .  Note the Romanized names of the winds, very different from those stated in Situations , but in the same cultural tradition.

See also [ edit ] Bekker numbering Classical compass winds (Theophrastus) Classical compass winds (Aristotle) Corpus Aristotelicum Meteorology (Aristotle) Notes [ edit ] ^ Barnes, Jonathan (1984).

The Complete Works of Aristotle, Volume II . Princeton: Princeton . pp.

1537– 1538.

ISBN 9780691016511 .

Bekker number 973a-973b.

^ Ross (1995:7).

^ Barnes, Jonathan (1984).

The Complete Works of Aristotle, Volume I . Princeton: Princeton . pp.

588– 591.

ISBN 9780691016504 .

Book II, Chapter 6. Bekker number 363a-365a.

References [ edit ] Ross, David (1995).

Aristotle .

Routledge .

ISBN 0-415-12068-3 External links [ edit ] Archive.org navigate to page 973 for Bekker's presentation of the Greek.

v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany France BnF data Poland Vatican Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Situations_and_Names_of_Winds&oldid=1289144820 " Category : Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 6 May 2025, at 19:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Situations and Names of Winds 5 languages Add topic

