Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Purpose and ideology 3 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 3.1 Archives 3.2 Articles and interviews 3.3 Books 3.4 Additional material 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle the table of contents Radical Women 6 languages বাংলা Deutsch Español Galego Igbo 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socialist and feminist activists' organization Radical Women Formation 1967 Founder Clara Fraser, Gloria Martin, Melba Windoffer Founded at Seattle, WA Headquarters Seattle, WA Website radicalwomen.org Radical Women ( RW ) is an American socialist feminist [ 1 ] grassroots activist organization affiliated with the Freedom Socialist Party . It has branches in Seattle, Washington , and Melbourne, Australia .

History [ edit ] Radical Women emerged in Seattle from a "Free University" class on Women and Society conducted by Gloria Martin, [ 2 ] a lifelong communist and civil rights champion.

[ 3 ] As a result of the class, Martin teamed up with Clara Fraser [ 4 ] and Melba Windoffer (initiators of the Freedom Socialist Party ) and Susan Stern (a prominent figure in the local Students for a Democratic Society ) to launch Radical Women in 1967.

[ 3 ] In Socialist Feminism: The First Decade, 1966-76 [ 5 ] Martin writes that the new group was formed to "demonstrate that women could act politically, learn and teach theory, administer an organization, develop indigenous leadership, and focus movement and community attention on the sorely neglected matter of women's rights —and that women could do this on their own." Radical Women participated heavily in the anti-Vietnam War mobilization , and has opposed subsequent military interventions initiated by Western countries.

Members worked with African-American women from anti-poverty programs to initiate the abortion rights movement in Washington State with a historic march on the capitol in 1969.

[ 6 ] In the early 1970s, RW helped organize a strike and a union of low-paid employees (mostly female) at the University of Washington.

After working closely with the Freedom Socialist Party (FSP), Radical Women and the party formally affiliated in 1973 on the basis of a shared socialist feminist program. Some of its early members, such as Lynda Schraufnagel , were employed by the FSP's newspaper, The Freedom Socialist , and also wrote for it.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Many Radical Women members worked and organized in the nontraditional trades. At Seattle's public power company, Seattle City Light , Clara Fraser was recruited to craft and implement the country's first plan to train women as utility electricians. Three other members of Radical Women, Megan Cornish , Heidi Durham , and Teri Bach, participated in the program and went on to become some of the first women electricians in the country. Just weeks before the program began, however, Fraser participated in a walkout against new rules issued by City Light superintendent Gordon Vickery, which soured her relations with management. After their training, Cornish, Durham, and Bach were laid off in 1975 in an act seen largely as retaliatory against themselves and Fraser. The three women filed a lawsuit alleging discrimination on the basis of sex , and after a year a court ruled in their favor and ordered their reinstatement. Fraser was also laid off in 1975, and she filed her own separate lawsuit alleging discrimination on the basis of sex and political ideology . After a seven-year legal battle and a massive public relations campaign, Fraser won her reinstatement at City Light.

[ 9 ] In 1991, two members of Radical Women, Heidi Durham and Yolanda Alaniz, ran for Seattle City Council as members of the FSP. The two campaigned together on demands for guaranteed income for families living in poverty , domestic partnership rights for same-sex couples , and community control of the police .

[ 10 ] Alaniz advanced to the general election and finished with 21% of the vote.

[ 11 ] Purpose and ideology [ edit ] The Radical Women Manifesto: Socialist Feminist Theory, Program and Organizational Structure [ 12 ] defines Radical Women's purpose and ideology as follows: Radical Women is dedicated to exposing, resisting, and eliminating the inequities of women's existence. To accomplish this task of insuring survival for an entire sex, we must simultaneously address ourselves to the social and material source of sexism: the capitalist form of production and distribution of products, characterized by intrinsic class, race, sex, and caste oppression. When we work for the revolutionary transformation of capitalism into a socialist society, we work for a world in which all people may enjoy the right of full humanity and freedom from poverty, war, racism, sexism, homophobia, anti-Semitism, and repression.

Radical Women takes a multi-racial, multi-issue, working class and anti-capitalist approach to women's liberation . It advocates for free abortion on demand, an end to forced sterilization of women of color, and for affordable, quality, 24-hour childcare. Early efforts include the Action Childcare Coalition, the Feminist Coordinating Council (an umbrella organization made up of the whole spectrum of women's groups in Seattle), and the Coalition for Protective Legislation (a labor and feminist effort to extend female-designated workplace safeguards to men after passage of the Washington State Equal Rights Amendment ).

Radical Women has played a leading role in lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender liberation struggles.

[ 13 ] Members have helped build militant lesbian/gay rights organizations and have been involved in many coalitions devoted to preventing forced AIDS testing , opposing ballot-box attacks on gay rights, lobbying for state gay rights bills, and more. In the 1980s Radical Women leader Merle Woo , a college lecturer, writer and Asian American lesbian spokesperson, won a case against the University of California at Berkeley , which had fired her, charging discrimination on race, sex, sexuality, and political ideology.

[ 14 ] Further reading [ edit ] Archives [ edit ] Freedom Socialist Party Seattle Branch Records , 1984-1992. 3.14 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Freedom Socialist Party National Office (Seattle) Records , 1976-1998. 3.09 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Radical Women Seattle Office Records , 1991-1997. 0.37 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Radical Women National Office (Seattle) Records , 1976-1998. 1.28 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Melba Windoffer Papers , 1910-1993. 7.42 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Megan Cornish Papers , 1970-2003. 10.26 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Clara Fraser Papers , 1905-1998, 36.70 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Heidi Durham Papers and Oral History Interviews , 1937-2017, 1.57 cubic feet. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

United Front Against Fascism records , 1945-2021. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

Articles and interviews [ edit ] Megan Cornish , Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project, 2005.

Megan Cornish Interview with Nicole Grant and Alex Morrow, October 20, 2005, YouTube , uploaded by Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project, September 9, 2016, Megan Cornish - YouTube Megan Cornish, Conor Casey, and Ellie Belew Interview with Mike Dumovich , "We Do the Work," KSVR , February 22, 2019.

Nicole Grant, Challenging Sexism at City Light: The Electrical Trades Trainee Program , Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project, 2006.

Ellie Belew Interview with Mimi Rosenberg, YouTube , uploaded by Radical Women - U.S., uploaded March 28. 2019, HIGH VOLTAGE WOMEN: Interview & slideshow Books [ edit ] The Radical Women Manifesto: Socialist Feminist Theory, Program, and Organizational Structure, Red Letter Press, 2001 Ellie Belew, High Voltage Women: Breaking Barriers at Seattle City Light , Red Letter Press, 2019.

Gloria Martin, Socialist Feminism: The First Decade, 1966-76 , Freedom Socialist Publications, 1986 Additional material [ edit ] Radical Women Official site Freedom Socialist Party , affiliates University of Washington Libraries Digital Collections - Vietnam War Era Ephemera This collection contains leaflets and newspapers that were distributed on the University of Washington campus during the decades of the 1960s and 1970s. Includes ephemera from Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist Party.

Radical Women Publications A Report from the U.S. 2008 Radical Women Conference submitted to the International Museum of Women .

See also [ edit ] Freedom Socialist Party Clara Fraser Heidi Durham Megan Cornish History of feminism Marxist feminism Socialist feminism Notes [ edit ] ^ A bibliography of Socialist Feminism Archived 10 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine on Kristin Switala's Feminist Theory Website , Center for Digital Discourse and Culture at Virginia Tech . includes the work of RW's Gloria Martin and Clara Fraser. Accessed online 8 April 2007.

^ Gloria Martin, 1916-1995: Feminist Pioneer and Unabashed Lifelong Socialist (obituary notice put out by RW and Freedom Socialist Party, reproduced on the Progressive News & Views List archive). Accessed online 8 April 2007.

^ a b Murphy, Raymond (21 September 2017).

"Radical Women Celebrate A Half Century of Hell-Raising" .

The Seattle Star . Retrieved 12 October 2020 .

^ Clara Fraser, 1923-1998: American rebel and architect of socialist feminism Archived 1998-05-24 at the Wayback Machine , Socialism.com. Accessed online 8 April 2007.

^ Gloria Martin, Socialist Feminism: The First Decade, 1966-76 , Red Letter Press.

ISBN 0-932323-00-6 .

[1] ^ See Cassandra Tate, Marilyn Ward recalls the campaign to reform Washington's abortion law , HistoryLink essay #2675, HistoryLink.org, for an oppositional view of the protest.

^ "In this issue" (PDF) .

The Freedom Socialist .

4 (3): 2. Fall 1978 . Retrieved 26 November 2020 .

^ Schraufnagel, Lynda (Fall 1979).

"Abortion rights imperilled" .

Freedom Socialist Newspaper .

5 (3) . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ Nicole Grant, " Challenging Sexism at City Light " University of Washington, Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project ^ "Clara Fraser papers - Archives West" .

archiveswest.orbiscascade.org . Retrieved 6 July 2022 .

^ "General and Special Elections - CityArchives" . seattle.gov. 25 October 1963 . Retrieved 21 August 2022 .

^ Radical Women (2001), " Preamble ", in Radical Women, ed. (2001).

The Radical Women manifesto: socialist feminist theory, program and organizational structure . Seattle, Washington: Red Letter Press. pp.

17– 18.

ISBN 9780932323118 .

^ Don Poulson, " Seattle's Gay History: Jamma Phi (1959 -1963): Seattle's first Gay Organization Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine ", Seattle Gay News, ; and Gary Atkins, Gay Seattle, (University of Washington Press, 2003).

^ Ridinger, Robert B. (2004).

Speaking for Our Lives: Historic Speeches and Rhetoric for Gay and Lesbian Rights . Binghamton, New York: Harrington Park Press. pp.

436– 438.

ISBN 9781560231752 .

Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radical_Women&oldid=1301835590 " Categories : Feminism in Victoria (state) Feminism in Washington (state) Feminist organisations in Australia Feminist organizations in the United States Trotskyist organisations in Australia Trotskyist organizations in the United States Far-left politics in Australia Far-left politics in the United States Socialist feminist organizations Women's wings of political parties Women's political advocacy groups in the United States Organizations established in 1967 Freedom Socialist Party 1967 establishments in Washington (state) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 00:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radical Women 6 languages Add topic

