Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Premises 2 Displays 3 Events 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents National Postal Museum 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands پنجابی Русский Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′53″N 77°00′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89806°N 77.00833°W ﻿ / 38.89806; -77.00833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Museum of postal history in Washington, D.C.

Not to be confused with The British Postal Museum & Archive , formerly known as the National Postal Museum.

National Postal Museum National Postal Museum in 2008 Location of the National Postal Museum in Washington, D.C.

Show map of Central Washington, D.C.

National Postal Museum (the United States) Show map of the United States Established July 30, 1993 ( 1993-07-30 ) Location Postal Square Building Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Coordinates 38°53′53″N 77°00′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89806°N 77.00833°W ﻿ / 38.89806; -77.00833 Director Elliot Gruber [ 1 ] Public transit access at Union Station Amtrak / MARC / VRE at Washington Union Station Website postalmuseum .si .edu The National Postal Museum , located in Washington, D.C.

, is the primary postal museum of the United States. It covers large portions of the postal history of the United States and other countries. It was established through joint agreement between the United States Postal Service and the Smithsonian Institution and opened in 1993.

[ 2 ] Premises [ edit ] The museum is located in the building that served as the main post office of Washington, D.C. for decades, from its construction in 1914 until 1986. The building was designed by the Graham and Burnham architectural firm , which was led by Ernest Graham following the death of Daniel Burnham in 1912.

[ 3 ] The headquarters of the United States Department of Labor 's Bureau of Labor Statistics is based in this building, and there is also space for a data center for the United States Senate . It is located across the street from Washington Union Station .

Displays [ edit ] The museum's atrium features vehicles used to deliver mail throughout the history of the USPS, including planes , trains and automobiles .

[ 4 ] Historical exhibits guide visitors through the postal service's inception and expansion, as well as its role in significant national events such as World War II .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] "Systems at Work" explores historic and current technologies involved in mail processing and delivery, such as message boxes , ZIP codes , optical scanners and conveyor systems .

[ 7 ] The museum holds the National Philatelic Collection . The museum has a gift shop and a United States Postal Service philatelic sales window. Admission is free.

In 2005, the museum acquired the childhood stamp collection of the late singer/songwriter John Lennon .

[ 8 ] From June 2015 until December 2019, the museum displayed the 1856 British Guiana 1c magenta , the world's most valuable stamp, which sold for nearly $10 million.

[ 9 ] In September 2009, the museum received an $8 million gift from investment firm founder William H. Gross to help finance an expansion project.  The William H. Gross Stamp Gallery of the museum is named in his honor.

[ 10 ] Events [ edit ] Since 2002, the museum has presented the Smithsonian Philatelic Achievement Award every two years.

Gallery [ edit ] Opening sign for dedication of the National Postal Museum Mail-carrying stagecoach at National Postal Museum Air-mail plane anchored from the ceiling at the National Postal Museum Dead letters exhibit at Postal Museum Museum poster extolling value of postal delivery John Lennon's childhood stamp collection See also [ edit ] List of philatelic libraries Mission-based learning Owney (dog) U.S. Postal Museums Postal Museum References [ edit ] ^ "Meet our staff" . National Postal Museum. Archived from the original on 2017-07-04 . Retrieved 2017-10-08 .

^ "History of the Museum" .

postalmuseum.si.edu . Retrieved 2023-10-03 .

^ Weeks, Christopher. (1994) AIA Guide to the Architecture of Washington, D.C. (3rd Edition) , Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 0-8018-4713-3 .

^ "Current Exhibitions" .

postalmuseum.si.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-22 .

^ "Binding the Nation" .

postalmuseum.si.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-22 .

^ "Mail Call" .

postalmuseum.si.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-22 .

^ "Systems at Work" .

postalmuseum.si.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-22 .

^ John Lennon's First Album.

Archived 2017-07-30 at the Wayback Machine Owen Edwards, Smithsonian.com, September 2005. Retrieved 17 September 2016.

^ "British Guiana One-Cent Magenta" .

postalmuseum.si.edu .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-28 . Retrieved 2023-03-28 .

^ "William H. Gross Stamp Gallery" .

postalmuseum.si.edu .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-28 . Retrieved 2023-03-28 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Postal Museum .

National Postal Museum official website National Postal Museum Library Official website Smithsonian's National Postal Museum at Google Cultural Institute v t e United States Postal Service Organizations American Letter Mail Company American Postal Workers Union Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service Bureau of Transportation Citizens' Stamp Advisory Committee National Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees National Association of Letter Carriers National Association of Presort Mailers National Postal Mail Handlers Union National Rural Letter Carriers' Association Postal Regulatory Commission Postal Transportation Service PostalWatch Incorporated United States Postal Inspection Service United States Postal Service Office of Inspector General Systems Address Management System Advanced Facer-Canceler System Coding Accuracy Support System Delivery Bar Code Sorter Flats Sequencing System Locatable Address Conversion System United States Postal Savings System Services Click-N-Ship Express mail in the United States National Change Of Address Permit mail Permit Reply Mail Postal notes Railway Mail Service Registered mail Special Delivery Special handling Facilities Air mail facility Boat railway post office Community post office Dead letter office Highway post office J. W. Westcott II List of United States post offices National Postal Museum Network distribution center Railway mail service library Red Brick Roads Sectional center facility Streetcar railway post office Terminal railway post office Legal Comstock Act of 1873 Post Office Consolidation Act of 1872 Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act of 2006 Postal Reorganization Act of 1970 Postal Service Act of 1792 Postal Service Reform Act of 2022 Private Express Statutes Rural Post Roads Act of 1916 Title 39 of the United States Code Related 2020 United States Postal Service crisis United States airmail service CAR-RT SORT Catcher pouch Cimarron Redoubt Domestic Mail Manual Facing Identification Mark Flats Grumman LLV Information-Based Indicia The Inspectors Intelligent Mail barcode Label 228 List of postal killings List of U.S. state abbreviations List of United States airmail stamps Mail bag Mail cover Mail hook Mail Isolation Control and Tracking Mail jumping Mail pouch Mail sack Mail satchel The Mail Story Nixie ORM-D Owney (dog) Pony Express mochila Postage stamps and postal history of the United States Postal Alpha Numeric Encoding Technique Postal Clause Postal voting in the United States Postal worker Postmaster General Prohibitory Order Remote Bar Coding System Rural Free Delivery Rural letter carrier STD-4C United States post office murals List of murals USPS Post Office Box Lobby Recycling program United States Postal Service creed v t e Smithsonian Institution Museums African American History and Culture African Art Air and Space Udvar–Hazy American Art Renwick Gallery American History Jazz Masterworks Orchestra Numismatic Collection American Indian Heye Center Anacostia Arts and Industries Asian Art Freer Sackler Castle Cooper–Hewitt Design Gardens Archives of American Gardens Hirshhorn Latino Natural History Barcode of Life Encyclopedia of Life Global Volcanism Portrait Gallery Postal Women's History Zoo National Zoological Park Uncle Beazley Research Archives of American Art Caribbean Coral Reef Ecosystems Program Conservation and restoration Astrophysics Chandra Conservation Biology Environmental Research Libraries and Archives Biodiversity Heritage Library Marine Station Museum Conservation Institute Migratory Bird Tropical Research Cultural Asian Pacific Latino Folklife and Cultural Heritage Folklife Festival Folkways Global Sound Education Affiliations Ripley Center Media American Art Air & Space/Smithsonian STEM in 30 Smithsonian magazine Smithsonian Channel Smithsonian Contributions and Studies Series Awards James Smithson Medal Charles Lang Freer Medal Hodgkins Medal Langley Gold Medal National Design Awards Smithsonian Philatelic Achievement Award Woodrow Wilson Awards Other James Smithson John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Wilson Center ( The Wilson Quarterly ) Smithsonian Police U.S. National Tick Collection Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Norway Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Postal_Museum&oldid=1240997025 " Categories : United States Postal Service Post office buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C.

Government buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C.

Massachusetts Avenue (Washington, D.C.) Members of the Cultural Alliance of Greater Washington Neoclassical architecture in Washington, D.C.

Philatelic museums in the United States History museums in Washington, D.C.

Industry museums in Washington, D.C.

Smithsonian Institution museums Postal history of the United States Postal museums 1993 establishments in Washington, D.C.

Museums established in 1993 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2024, at 18:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Postal Museum 19 languages Add topic

