Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Themes Toggle Themes subsection 1.1 Abstract concept 1.2 Animal 1.3 Collection 1.4 Hero or archetype 1.5 Native American likeness 1.6 Common and uncommon names 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Athletic nickname 6 languages हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Shqip Simple English Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nickname for members of an athletic team This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Athletic nickname" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( October 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The athletic nickname , or equivalently athletic moniker , of a university or college within the United States and Canada is the name officially adopted by that institution for at least the members of its athletic teams .  Typically as a matter of engendering school spirit , the institution either officially or unofficially uses this moniker of the institution's athletic teams also as a nickname to refer to people associated with the institution, especially its current students , but also often its alumni , its faculty , and its administration as well.  This practice at the university and college tertiary higher-education level has proven so popular that it extended to the high school secondary-education level in the United States and Canada and even to the primary-education level as well.

Themes [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the United States and Canada, multiple recurring themes have appeared over time for choosing a school's athletic nickname.  In almost all cases, the institution chooses an athletic nickname with an overtly positive goal in mind, where that goal reflects the character of the institution—either a previously established characteristic or a characteristic hoped for as a goal henceforth.

Abstract concept [ edit ] Often by choosing an abstract concept as its athletic moniker, the institution wants to inspire its student-athletes on and off the field to achieve success that the abstract concept represents. Examples: Cornell Big Red , Stanford Cardinal , UIC Flames , Tulane Green Wave .

Animal [ edit ] Cy the Cardinal , mascot of Iowa State University Often by choosing an animal , the school wants to emphasize the instillation of fear of losing athletic competitions to the institution's teams, such as through an especially fierce or stealthy animal.  When the school chooses an animal as its athletic nickname, usually in the plural or as a collective noun for a group of that animal, then typically, the school has that animal (in the singular) as its mascot , [ 1 ] either specifically named with a proper noun or generically referred to without a proper noun. Examples: Michigan Wolverines , Oregon Ducks , Princeton Tigers , Iowa Hawkeyes , California Golden Bears , Minnesota Golden Gophers , Texas Longhorns and the Bowling Green Falcons .

Collection [ edit ] Often by choosing a collection that represents a summary of the institution's students or of its history.  Such a collection may refer to an ethnicity ; a profession ; religious designation, such as saints; or other groupings of people.  A portion of athletic monikers that fall into this collection category started originally as derogatory epithets from others, but as an act of defiance, the school embraced the term as a rallying cry to overcome the term's negative origin.  Because a collection is hard to represent or iconify , when a school chooses a collection as its athletic nickname, the school typically chooses a related but different mascot that symbolizes that collection. Examples: Notre Dame Fighting Irish , Oklahoma Sooners , Purdue Boilermakers , Illinois Fighting Illini , Texas A&M Aggies Hero or archetype [ edit ] A small number of schools choose an archetypical heroic person as their official athletic nickname.  This person may be a graduate of the school who is viewed as embodying the school's mission or an archetypal person who is symbolic of the school's area, such as the West Virginia University Mountaineer .  In religiously affiliated schools, this person may be an historical person who has received an official designation in that religion, such as a saint in the Roman Catholic or Eastern Orthodox Churches .

Native American likeness [ edit ] Main article: Native American mascot controversy The Atlanta Braves encouraged fans to gesture with the tomahawk chop , distributing foam tomahawks at games and other events.

[ 2 ] Likenesses to Native Americans were at one time widely popular athletic monikers, especially for schools that adopted them in the 19th or early 20th century.  In recent years, some Native American organizations have protested the unlicensed use of likenesses of Native Americans related to team names, team logos , athletic monikers, cheerleaders , and cheering techniques.  The granting of overtly expressed written licenses by Native American organizations to use likenesses of Native Americans in these ways is rare, although not unheard of. In one notable example, two major groups of the Seminole nation, the Seminole Tribe of Florida and Seminole Nation of Oklahoma, have expressly given Florida State University permission to use the nickname "Seminoles" and certain Seminole imagery.

Central Michigan University has a similar arrangement with the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe to use the name "Chippewas".

Because of protests from some Native American organizations, some schools have changed their athletic moniker and mascot and cheering practices without significant objection once the issue was raised, especially if such offense toward a group of people was viewed as incompatible with that school's stated mission or if the threat of legal action was too burdensome. Other schools or their student bodies have defended their use of Native American likenesses, especially if the institution views the use of Native American likenesses as respectful or so intimately tied with history to be inseparable from the institution, such as if the name of institution derives from the name of a tribe. Still other schools have embarked on a series of failed attempts to find a replacement.

[ 1 ] Common and uncommon names [ edit ] The official mascot of the Georgia Institute of Technology is the Ramblin' Wreck , a 1930 Ford Model A sport coupe .

Often, certain nicknames (animals and some abstract concepts, such as Giants , Broncos , or Wildcats ) become very common. However, some nicknames are unique to that school/team such as Illini , Demon Deacons or Fords .

See also [ edit ] Lists of nicknames – nickname list articles on Wikipedia References [ edit ] ^ a b "The New York Times - Search" .

topics.nytimes.com .

^ Anderson, L. V. (2012-09-26).

"Where Did the Tomahawk Chop Come From?" .

Slate Magazine . Retrieved 2019-10-10 .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐8487bf5649‐6zdwt
Cached time: 20250814011617
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.222 seconds
Real time usage: 0.282 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 709/1000000
Revision size: 7074/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 41410/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9087/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 16248/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.153/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4120239/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  247.481      1 -total
 29.46%   72.897      1 Template:Reflist
 25.75%   63.725      2 Template:Cite_web
 24.49%   60.618      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 20.66%   51.118      1 Template:Short_description
 17.77%   43.984      1 Template:Excerpt
 17.15%   42.451      3 Template:Ambox
 16.55%   40.949      1 Template:Refimprove
 11.11%   27.502      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.55%   16.204      4 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4237652:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814011617 and revision id 1299541933. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Athletic_nickname&oldid=1299541933 " Categories : College sports culture in the United States Informal personal names Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from October 2014 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles that may contain original research from April 2021 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 01:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Athletic nickname 6 languages Add topic

