Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Australia 2 Greece 3 Canada 4 United Kingdom 5 United States Toggle United States subsection 5.1 In the armed forces 5.2 In prisons 5.3 Wicca 5.4 Ásatrú 6 Soviet Union 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Religious discrimination against modern pagans 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Different instances of discrimination against modern paganism Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Modern pagans are a religious minority in every country where they exist [ 1 ] and have been subject to religious discrimination and/or religious persecution . The largest modern pagans communities are in North America, Russia and the United Kingdom, and the issue of discrimination receives most attention in those locations, but there are also reports from other countries.

This form of discrimination has been known online as "Wiccaphobia," [ 2 ] or "paganphobia." [ 3 ] Australia [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of religion in Australia In 2021, the Adelaide University Occult Club faced notable challenges in securing funding and campus access due to delays in reaffiliation from the student union , YouX . The club with multiple other clubs signed an open letter to the clubs committee while an online petition garnered 571 signatures.

[ citation needed ] In 2022, the club’s reaffiliation was rejected during an in camera decision with rejection of registration due to a complaint the club might summon Satan .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Greece [ edit ] Main articles: Hellenism (religion) and Religion in Greece In modern day Greece , the Greek Orthodox Church has the status of state religion , and consequently, alternative religions such as modern Hellenic paganism may be subject to discrimination.

[ 6 ] The Greek Society of Attic Friends was unsuccessful when it asked for recognition as a legal religion and was denied the right to build a temple in Athens [ 7 ] and to use existing temples for worship. 200 people illegally occupied a protected cultural site in Athens - a former  temple - in 2007 to perform ceremonies.

[ 8 ] In 2006, an Athens court ordered the worship of the old Greek gods to be unbanned and a place of worship has been recognized by court.

[ 9 ] Referring to the followers, Father Eustathios Kollas, who presides over a community of Greek Orthodox priests, said, "They are a handful of miserable resuscitators of a degenerate dead religion who wish to return to the monstrous dark delusions of the past." [ 10 ] Canada [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of religion in Canada In September 2012, Conservative Minister of Public Safety Vic Toews cancelled a tender that had been issued by Corrections Canada in British Columbia for a Wiccan prison chaplain .

[ 11 ] In October of that year, Toews ordered the termination of contracts for all non-Christian prison chaplains in BC and all but two throughout Canada, obliging not only modern pagan prisoners but also Muslims, Jews, Sikhs , Buddhists , practitioners of indigenous religions , and others to turn to Christian chaplains for their spiritual needs.

[ 12 ] Wiccans were among the prisoners who joined a lawsuit alleging that the terminations violated constitutional guarantees of religious equality.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main articles: Modern paganism in the United Kingdom and Freedom of religion in the United Kingdom In the United Kingdom, there have been occasional clashes between New Age travellers and authorities, such as the Battle of the Beanfield in 1985. There are also occasional charges of harassment against modern pagans such as the following examples: In 1999, Dr Ralph Morse was appointed by the Pagan Federation as their first national youth manager.

[ citation needed ] Following an article that appeared in the Independent on Sunday on April 2, 2000, Morse was summarily suspended from his post as head of drama, theatre arts and media studies at Shenfield High School in Essex.

[ 15 ] Morse was subsequently fully investigated by the school and reinstated with a full retraction released to the media.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In 2006, members of Youth 2000 , a conservative Catholic organization, on visit to Father Kevin Knox-Lecky of St Mary's church, Glastonbury , attacked pagans by throwing salt at them and told them they "would burn in hell". Knox-Lecky apologised and said he would not invite the group again. The police warned two women and arrested one youth on suspicion of harassment.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In 2006, the postal worker Donald Holden was fired from his position at Royal Mail PLC after 33 years of employment for printing photos of Odin for his personal religious use. Before firing him his employers tried to make him admit Odinism was not a real religion and tore up the pictures in front of him. The Manchester Industrial Tribunal of Royal Mail PLC v Holden (2006) found unequivocally in Mr. Holden's favour.

[ 20 ] In 2007, a teaching assistant in Brighton claimed she was sacked for being a Wiccan.

[ 21 ] A teacher at Shawlands Academy in Glasgow was denied time off with pay to attend Druid rites while members of other religions have their days of observance paid.

[ 22 ] A modern Druid group from Weymouth, Dorset , was subjected to threats and abuse.

[ 23 ] The University of St Andrews in Scotland have, since 2006, allowed equal rights to the St Andrews Pagan Society, but under some strict rules.

[ 24 ] United States [ edit ] Further information: Modern paganism in the United States and Freedom of religion in the United States According to Starhawk , " religious discrimination against Pagans and Wiccans and indigenous religions is omnipresent in the U.S." [ 25 ] Evidence exists that workplace discrimination is common from verbal ridicule to more systematic forms such as exclusion from work-related activities.

[ 26 ] In the armed forces [ edit ] Main article: Wiccans and pagans in the United States military Further information: Patrick Stewart (soldier) Emblem of Belief 37 – WICCA (Pentacle) Emblem of Belief 55 – Hammer of Thor In 1999, in response to a statement by Representative Bob Barr (R-GA) regarding Wiccan gatherings on military bases, the Free Congress Foundation called for U.S. citizens to not enlist or re-enlist in the U.S. Army until the Army terminated the on-base freedoms of religion, speech, and assembly for all Wiccan soldiers.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Though this movement died a "quiet death", on June 24, 1999, then-Governor George W. Bush stated on a television news program that "I don't think witchcraft is a religion and I wish the military would take another look at this and decide against it." [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] U.S. Army Chaplain Captain Don Larsen was dismissed from his post in Iraq in 2006 after changing his religious affiliation from Pentecostal Christianity to Wicca and applying to become the first Wiccan military chaplain. His potential new endorser, the Sacred Well Congregation based in Texas, was not yet an officially recognised endorsement organisation for the military, and upon hearing of his conversion, his prior endorser, the Chaplaincy of Full Gospel Churches, immediately revoked its endorsement. At this point, the U.S. Army was required to dismiss him from chaplaincy despite an exemplary service record.

[ 33 ] Prior to 2007, the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) did not allow the use of the pentacle as an approved emblem of belief on headstones and markers in military cemeteries . This policy was changed in April 2007 to settle a lawsuit.

[ 30 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] VA also added the Hammer of Thor to the list of approved emblems in May 2013.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] In prisons [ edit ] Further information: Prisons in the United States , Religion in the United States' prisons , Dettmer v. Landon , Cutter v. Wilkinson , and Wisconsin witch hunt The 1985, Virginia prisoner Herbert Daniel Dettmer sued Robert Landon, the Director of the Virginia Department of Corrections , in federal court, to get access to objects he claimed were necessary for his Wiccan religious practice. The district court for the Eastern District of Virginia decided in Dettmer's favor, although on appeal the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit ruled that, while Wicca was a religion, he was not being discriminated against. This case marked the first legal recognition of Wicca as a religion.

In Cutter v. Wilkinson , 544 U.S. 709 (2005), a case involving five Ohio prison inmates (two followers of Ásatrú , a minister of the Church of Jesus Christ–Christian , a Wiccan witch and a Satanist ) protesting denial of access to ceremonial items and opportunities for group worship was brought before the Supreme Court.

[ 39 ] Among the denied objects was instructions for runic writing requested by an Ásatrúarmaður, which was initially denied when prison officials raised concerns that runic writing could be used for coded gang communication.

In an interview about the role of race-based gangs and other extremists in America's prisons, the historian Mark Pitcavage came to the conclusion that "[n]on-racist versions of Ásatrú and Odinism are pretty much acceptable religions in the prisons", [ 40 ] but materials from racist variants of these religions may be prohibited by corrections departments.

In early 2011, a Stillwater prisoner named Stephen Hodgson filed a federal lawsuit against the state of Minnesota claiming his religious rights had been violated.

[ 41 ] Hodgson claimed he was prohibited from practising his Wiccan faith when guards and prison administrators refused to allow him to use prayer oils and herbs needed. He also claimed that his religious mail had been confiscated and that he had been prohibited from burning incense or using prayer oils and herbs. He claimed those items were necessary for the practice of his religion and that they posed no danger to guards or other inmates.  The Minnesota Department of Human Rights agreed with Hodgson, saying "probable cause exists to believe that an unfair discriminatory practice was committed." The discrimination case is awaiting trial.

[ citation needed ] Wicca [ edit ] According to Gerald Gardner , who popularised Wicca in the twentieth century, the religion is a survival of a European witch-cult that was persecuted during the witch trials (sometimes called the Burning Times ), and the strong element of secrecy that traditionally surrounds the religion was adopted as a reaction to that persecution. Since then, Margaret Murray 's theory of an organised pan-European witch-cult has been discredited, and doubts raised about the age of Wicca; many Wiccans no longer claim this historical lineage. However, it is still common for Wiccans to feel solidarity with the victims of the witch trials and, being witches, to consider the witch-craze to have been a persecution against their faith.

[ 42 ] There has been confusion that Wicca is a form of Satanism , despite important differences between these religions.

[ 43 ] Due to negative connotations associated with witchcraft, many Wiccans continue the traditional practice of secrecy, concealing their faith for fear of persecution. Revealing oneself as Wiccan to family, friends, or colleagues is often termed "coming out of the broom-closet".

[ 44 ] Wiccans have also experienced difficulties in administering and receiving prison ministry, although not in the UK of recent times.

[ 45 ] In 1985, as a result of Dettmer v. Landon [617 F. Supp. 592 (D.C. Va 1985)], the District Court of Virginia ruled that Wicca is a legally recognised religion and is afforded all the benefits accorded to it by law. This was affirmed a year later by Judge John D. Butzner, Jr.

of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit [ Dettmer v. Landon , 799 F. 2d 929 (4th Cir. 1986)]. Nevertheless, Wiccans are sometimes still stigmatised in America, and many remain secretive about their beliefs.

Also in 1985, conservative legislators in the United States introduced three pieces of legislation designed to take away the tax-exempt status of Wiccans. The first one was House Resolution (H.R.) 3389, introduced on September 19, 1985, by Congressman Robert S. Walker (R-Pennsylvania), which would have amended to the United States Internal Revenue Code that any organisation which promotes witchcraft would not be exempt from taxation. On the other side of Congress, Senator Jesse Helms (R-North Carolina) added Amendment 705 to H.R. 3036, "The Treasury, Postal, and General Government Appropriations Bill for 1986", which similarly stated that organisations promoting witchcraft would not be eligible for tax-exempt status. After being ignored for a time, it was attached to H.R. 3036 by a unanimous voice vote of the senators. Congressman Richard T. Schulze (R-Pennsylvania) introduced substantially the same amendment to the Tax Reform Bill of 1985. When the budget subcommittee met on October 30, the Helms Amendment was thrown out as it was not considered germane to the bill. Following this, Schulze withdrew his amendment from the Tax Reform Bill, leaving only H.R. 3389, the Walker Bill.

Joe Barton (R-Texas) was attracted to become a co-sponsor of this bill on November 14, 1985. The Ways and Means Committee set aside the bill and quietly ignored it, and the bill was allowed to die with the close of the 99th session of Congress in December 1986.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] In 2002, Cynthia Simpson of Chesterfield County, Virginia , submitted an application to be invited to lead prayer at the local Board of Supervisors meetings, but in a response was told that because the views of Wicca were not "consistent with the Judeo-Christian tradition", her application had been denied. After the Board reviewed and affirmed their policy, Simpson took the case to the U.S. District Court of Virginia , which held that the Board had violated the Establishment Clause by advancing limited sets of beliefs.

[ 48 ] The Board appealed to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals , which in 2005 reversed the ruling and held that the Supreme Court's holding in the Marsh case meant that "Chesterfield County could constitutionally exclude Simpson from leading its legislative prayers, because her faith was not 'in the Judeo-Christian tradition.'" [ 49 ] The Board had also since modified its policy to direct clerics to not invoke the name of Jesus.

[ 50 ] On October 11, 2005, the United States Supreme Court rejected an appeal by Simpson, [ 51 ] leaving in place the decision by the Fourth Circuit.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] However, in Town of Greece v. Galloway , the Supreme Court ruled that legislative prayer cannot be restricted on basis of belief, re-opening the debate about Simpson's case.

[ 55 ] In 2019, Pauline Hoffmann sued St. Bonaventure University after she allegedly was forced to resign as dean due to her religion.

[ 56 ] In 2019, a man was arrested for trying to stab a woman to death because "she was a witch and he had to slay her".

[ 57 ] Ásatrú [ edit ] Further information: Ásatrú in the United States The United States government does not officially endorse or recognise any religious group, and numerous Ásatrú groups have been granted non-profit religious status , like other religious faiths, going back to the 1970s.

[ 58 ] An inmate of the "Intensive Management Unit" at Washington State Penitentiary alleges that adherents of Ásatrú in 2001 were deprived of their Thor's Hammer medallions as well as denied religious literature, as well as complaints against the prison chaplain calling Ásatrú "'devil worship,' etc." [ 59 ] [ unreliable source?

] In 2007, a federal judge confirmed that Ásatrú adherents in US prisons have the right to possess a Thor's Hammer pendant. An inmate sued the Virginia Department of Corrections after he was denied it while members of other religions were allowed their medallions.

[ 60 ] In the Georgacarakos v. Watts case Peter N. Georgacarakos filed a pro se civil-rights complaint in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado against 19 prison officials for "interference with the free exercise of his Asatru religion" and "discrimination on the basis of his being Asatru".

[ 61 ] The Cutter v. Wilkinson case was partially about an adherent of Ásatrú being denied access to ceremonial items and opportunities for group worship.

[ 39 ] [ 62 ] The defendants on numerous occasions refused to answer or respond to letters, complaints, and requests for Ásatrú religious accommodations. They also refused to respond to complaints of religious discrimination. Ásatrú inmates were denied group worship and/or group study time as they did to other religions. They refused to hire a Gothi to perform blóts while providing priests for members of other religions. The Ásatrú inmates were also denied the right to have their own worship or study services.

[ 63 ] In a join press release the Odinic Rite , Ásatrú Alliance and Ásatrú Folk Assembly charged the FBI with violating its First Amendment rights to freedom of religion , free speech , and peaceful assembly by giving "False, misleading and deceptive information about our religion and its followers" in FBI's Project Megiddo report.

[ 64 ] The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) publishes lists of symbols used by antisemitic groups.

[ 65 ] Included in these publications are several Germanic pagan symbols that have been used by Nazi and neo-Nazi groups, but have also always been used by non-racist pagan religions. The ADL emphasises that these symbols are not necessarily racist and has amended its publications to categorise these symbols as "pagan symbols co-opted by extremists".

[ 66 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Main article: Religion in the Soviet Union The Soviet Union under Stalin ’s oppressive regime led to the rise of a Russian spiritual underground of the twentieth century. While Westerners often associate Soviet underground movements with political dissent , there was also a network of clandestine spiritual groups. The Communist Party and KGB targeted these groups, knowing that spiritual seekers were particularly resistant to indoctrination. Members and leaders of these spiritual and mystical groups faced severe persecution, including imprisonment in labour camps , and, from the 1960s onward, forced confinement in psychiatric hospitals with fraudulent diagnoses and antipsychotic treatments despite these harsh measures, the persistence of spiritual practices continued.

[ 67 ] See also [ edit ] Christian views on magic Heathenry in the United States References [ edit ] ^ Consistently below 0.5%. Estimated ratios may approach 0.4% in Iceland and the UK . In the US and Canada, modern pagans account for an estimated 0.2% of the population.

^ "Fear of Witches or Witchcraft Phobia - Wiccaphobia" .

FEAROF . March 9, 2017 . Retrieved November 30, 2023 .

^ "Paganphobia: Why fight against anti-Semitism seems stuck in insularity" .

Firstpost . November 9, 2023 . Retrieved November 30, 2023 .

^ "Occult club registration rejected after complaint it may summon Satan to University of Adelaide - ABC News" .

amp.abc.net.au . Retrieved September 13, 2024 .

^ "University occult club fights for funding and campus access with union registration decision delayed" .

ABC News . March 23, 2022 . Retrieved September 13, 2024 .

^ Moore, Charles.

"The Telegraph: Modern Athenians fight for the right to worship the ancient Greek gods" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on September 1, 2004 . Retrieved May 22, 2010 .

^ "Ongoing Persecution of Pagans in Modern Greece" . Archived from the original on June 23, 2007 . Retrieved July 20, 2007 .

^ "The Age: Modern pagans worship illegally in Athens" . Melbourne. January 22, 2007.

^ Miller, Korina (2010).

Greece (9th ed.). Lonely Planet. p.

62 .

ISBN 978-1-74220-342-3 .

^ Brabant, Malcolm (January 21, 2007).

"Ancient Greek gods' new believers" .

BBC News . Retrieved October 16, 2014 .

^ "Wiccan priest hire reversed by federal minister" . CBC News. September 5, 2012.

^ "Non-Christian prison chaplains chopped by Ottawa" . CBC News. October 4, 2012.

^ "B.C. prisoners' rights group protests non-Christian chaplain layoffs" . CBC News. March 15, 2013.

^ "DocumentCloud" .

www.documentcloud.org .

^ Independent on Sunday articles dated April 2 and 9, 2000 and The Foundation for Religious Freedom responding comment; CNS News Coverage (Foreign Bureaus) ^ Lucas, Phillip Charles; Robbins, Thomas (2004).

New Religious Movements in the 21st Century . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-96576-7 .

^ Strmiska, Michael F (2005).

Modern Paganism in World Cultures: Comparative Perspectives .

Santa Barbara : ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-85109-608-4 .

^ Gledhill, Ruth (November 4, 2006).

"Bad vibes in Glastonbury after Catholics against pagans" .

The Times . Archived from the original on December 2, 2008.

^ Shaikh, Thair (November 4, 2006).

"Catholic marchers turn on Glastonbury pagans" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved May 22, 2010 .

^ Witches, Odin, and the English State:  The Legal Reception of a Counter-Cultural Minority Religious Movement by G. J. Wheeler, Solicitor of the Senior Courts of England and Wales, 2018 ^ The Argus: Teaching assistant claims she was sacked for being a witch ; BBC: White witch 'sacked for days off' ; Personnel Today: Pagan teaching assistant brings tribunal claim for unfair dismissal ; The Guardian: Sacked witch 'told pupils she could teach them spells' . The case was settled out of court.

The Times: Weirdest workplace disputes ; The Guardian: White witch settles job dispute with school ^ "Pentacle Magazine: I Want Pagan Holidays" . Archived from the original on September 27, 2007.

^ Cited examples are a dead bird with a noose around its neck with an attached paper saying "Die Witches".

Dorset Echo: Pagans suffer ritual abuse Archived July 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Pagans get equal rights at St Andrews" .

The Scotsman . June 17, 2006. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015 . Retrieved May 7, 2015 .

^ "Washington Post: Discrimination Against Pagans" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on March 22, 2007 . Retrieved May 22, 2010 .

^ Tejeda, Manuel J. (July 24, 2014). "Skeletons in the broom closet: exploring the discrimination of Pagans in the workplace".

Journal of Management, Spirituality & Religion .

12 (2): 88– 110.

doi : 10.1080/14766086.2014.933710 .

S2CID 143862206 .

^ " 'Satanic' Army Unworthy of Representing United States" (Press release). Free Congress Foundation. June 9, 1999. Archived from the original on September 14, 2002 . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ Silk, Mark (Summer 1999).

"Something Wiccan This Way Comes" .

Religion in the News .

2 (2).

ISSN 1525-7207 . Archived from the original on May 24, 2007.

^ "Barr's Witch Project: Lawmaker Wants to Ban Witches from the Military" .

LawStreet Journal . November 1, 1999. Archived from the original on February 29, 2000 . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ a b Banerjee, Neela (April 24, 2007).

"Use of Wiccan Symbol on Veterans' Headstones Is Approved" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 1, 2013 .

^ Clifton, Chas S (November 20, 2000).

"Fort Hood's Wiccans and the Problem of Pacifism" .

Proceedings of the American Academy of Religion 2000 Meeting . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ Assortment of links regarding calls to ban Wicca from military establishments: "First Amendment Center | Freedom Forum Institute" . Archived from the original on June 13, 2006 . Retrieved October 3, 2007 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) , "First Amendment Center | Freedom Forum Institute" . Archived from the original on June 13, 2006 . Retrieved October 3, 2007 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) , "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on March 28, 2004 . Retrieved June 17, 2009 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) , "The Wall of Separation Blog" . Archived from the original on September 12, 2006 . Retrieved October 3, 2007 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Cooperman, Alan (February 19, 2007).

"For Gods and Country" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 5, 2007 .

^ "Veterans Affairs Department Must Accommodate Wiccan Symbol On Memorial Markers At Government Cemeteries, Says Americans United" (Press release). AU. June 8, 2006. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021 . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ "Stewart v. Nicholson" . AU . Retrieved August 5, 2013 .

^ "Veterans Win Right to Post Religious Symbol on Headstones" (Press release). ACLU. April 23, 2007 . Retrieved August 5, 2013 .

^ Elysia.

"Hammer of Thor now VA accepted symbol of faith" . Llewellyn . Retrieved May 12, 2013 .

^ "National Cemetery Administration: Available Emblems of Belief for Placement on Government Headstones and Markers" . U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs . Retrieved May 12, 2013 .

37 – WICCA (Pentacle), 55 – Hammer of Thor ^ a b Greenhouse, Linda (October 13, 2004).

"NY Times: Justices Will Hear 2 Church-State Cases" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 22, 2010 .

^ Interview with Mark Pitcavage – Behind the Walls Archived July 13, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Wiccan Prisoner sues State" .

Star Tribune . Archived from the original on April 13, 2011.

^ Buckland, Raymond (September 1, 2002) [1971].

Witchcraft From The Inside: Origins of the Fastest Growing Religious Movement in America (3rd ed.). St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications.

ISBN 978-1-56718-101-2 .

OCLC 31781774 .

^ Davis, Derek; Hankins, Barry (2003).

New Religious Movements and Religious Liberty in America (2nd ed.).

Waco : Baylor University Press. p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-918954-92-3 .

OCLC 52895492 .

Much to the chagrin of practitioners of Wicca, there has been confusion in the minds of many about their religion, which is often linked with Satanism, although there are important differences.

^ Bewitched (December 4, 2003).

"Witch Way" .

Slate.com . Retrieved May 16, 2008 .

Believe me, coming out of the "broom closet" is a one-way trip.

^ Spurr, Michael (August 31, 2005).

"Practice of Paganism in Prison" .

HM Prison Service . Archived from the original on October 17, 2007 . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ "Witch Busters: A Summary of Anti-Witchcraft Activity in the 99th Congress" .

soamc.dynu.com/tfh . Archived from the original on March 11, 2007 . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ Adler, Margot.

"Witches, Pagans, and the Media" .

Beliefnet.com . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ Simpson v. Chesterfield County Board of Supervisors Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , 292 F. Supp. 2d 805, 820 (E.D. Va. 2003) ^ "Simpson v. Chesterfield County, No. 04-1045" (PDF) .

United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit . 2005 . Retrieved August 16, 2008 .

^ Simpson v. Chesterfield County Board of Supervisors Archived November 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , 404 F.3d 276 (4th Cir. 2005) ^ Simpson v. Chesterfield County Board of Supervisors , 126 S. Ct. 426 (2005), p. 221 ^ "Fourth Circuit Holds That Local Government May Restrict the Leading of Its Invocations to Representatives of Judeo-Christian Religions" (PDF) .

Harvard Law Review .

119 (4). February 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2007 . Retrieved August 1, 2007 .

^ Markon, Jerry (April 15, 2005).

"Wiccan Bias Suit Against Va. County Dismissed" .

Washington Post . pp. B03 . Retrieved August 1, 2007 .

^ "High Court Grounds Broom Rider" .

CBS News . Associated Press. October 11, 2005 . Retrieved August 1, 2007 .

^ Buettner, Michael (May 28, 2014).

"County prayer: Which way is witch? After ruling, Wiccan just might return" .

Chesterfield Observer . Retrieved November 20, 2017 .

^ Fairbanks, Phil (June 6, 2019).

" 'Angry ... confused and hurt': Wiccan professor sues St. Bonaventure" .

The Buffalo News .

^ Williams, Tess.

"Grand Forks man tracked, stabbed woman because 'she was a witch and he had to slay her,' court documents say" .

Bemidji Pioneer . No. October 10, 2018 . Retrieved October 11, 2019 .

^ Linzie, Bil (2000).

"Drinking at the Well of Mimir" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 16, 2007.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Walla Walla's Suppression of Religious Freedom ^ "First Amendment Center: Va. inmate can challenge denial of Thor's Hammer" . Archived from the original on October 30, 2010.

^ "Georgacarakos v. Watts" . Archived from the original on September 27, 2007.

^ "Spokesman Review: Sweet air of religious freedom could turn sour" . Archived from the original on September 26, 2007.

^ "Portions of the Ásatrú Complaint" . Archived from the original on November 27, 2007.

^ "CESNUR - Updates on FBI and Project Megiddo, November 10, 1999" .

www.cesnur.org .

^ "Hate On Display: A Visual Database of Extremist Symbols, Logos and Tattoos" . ADL. Archived from the original on October 2, 2007 . Retrieved October 3, 2007 .

^ "Hate On Display: A Visual Database of Extremist Symbols, Logos and Tattoos" . ADL. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007.

^ Kungurtsev, Igor; Luchakova, Olga (September 1, 1996).

"Pagan Sorcery, Christian Yoga, and Other Esoteric Practices in the Former Soviet Union" .

International Journal of Transpersonal Studies .

15 (3).

ISSN 1321-0122 .

v t e Modern paganism Approaches Eclectic Nature religion New Age Neoshamanism Reconstructionism Secular Western esotericism Western philosophy Arts and institutions Festivals and events Music Temples By country or region Australia German-speaking Europe Hungary Ireland Italy Scandinavia South Africa United Kingdom United States Minnesota Movements ( list ) Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism Heathenry Armenian Baltic Dievturi Romuva Burkhanism Canarian (Berber) Caucasic Abkhaz Ossetian-Scythian Celtic Druidry Wicca Daco-Thracian (Romanian) Egyptian Kemetic Orthodoxy Germanic Greco-Roman Hellenic Roman Natale di Roma Korean Semitic Slavic Rodnovery (list) RUNVira Peterburgian Vedism Ynglism Turko-Mongolic list Uralic Estonian Erzyan Finnish Hungarian Mari Udmurt Zuism Interfaith: European Congress of Ethnic Religions · Foundation for Traditional Religions Syncretic Adonism Christo-Paganism Church of All Worlds Church of Aphrodite Covenant of Unitarian Universalist Pagans Goddess movement Ivanovism Pagan Federation Radical Faeries Ringing Cedars' Anastasianism Secular paganism Temple of Priapus Neopagan witchcraft : Wicca Cochranianism Feri Reclaiming Stregheria In society Criticism Crypto-paganism Discrimination LGBTQ+ and paganism Pagan studies Technopaganism Writers on modern paganism Related articles Ariosophy Witch-cult hypothesis Hermeticism Neotribalism Platonism in the Renaissance Thelema Theosophy Traditionalist School v t e New religious movements Major groups Brahmoism Adventism CoG7 SDA Aetherius Society Ahmadiyya Lahore Ahmadiyya Ananda Marga AMORC Anthroposophy Antoinism Armstrongism Bábism Baháʼí Faith Bible Students / Jehovah's Witnesses Black Hebrew Israelites Brahma Kumaris Branch Davidians Brotherhood of the Cross and Star Caodaism Charismatic Christianity Chinese salvationist religions Chinmaya Mission Christadelphians Christian Science Church of Divine Science Church of Scientology Church of the Guanche People Creativity Discordianism Eastern Lightning Falun Gong The Family International Friends of Man Fourth Way Goddess Godianism Heaven's Gate Iglesia ni Cristo International Peace Mission movement ISKCON Invitation to Life Kingdom of Jesus Christ Kopimism Latter Day Saints / Mormonism Mahikari movement Sukyo Mahikari World Divine Light Messianic Judaism Modern paganism Druidry Heathenry Rodnovery Moorish Science Temple of America Nation of Islam New Acropolis The New Church New Kadampa Tradition New Thought Religious Science Unity Church Nuwaubian Nation Oomoto Order of the Solar Temple Palmarian Catholic Church Peoples Temple Pilgrims of Arès Prathyaksha Raksha Daiva Sabha The Process Church Raëlism Rajneesh movement Ramakrishna Mission Rastafari Risshō Kōsei Kai Sahaja Yoga Sant Mat Radha Soami Sant Nirankari Mission Santa Muerte Santo Daime Satanism LaVeyan Church of Satan Temple of Set The Satanic Temple Theistic Sathya Sai Baba Shakers Shambhala Buddhism Shri Ram Chandra Mission Soka Gakkai Spiritualism Spiritism Tenrikyo Thelema Theosophy Theosophical Society Transcendental Meditation True Buddha School Twelve Tribes communities Unarius Academy of Science Unification Church Unitarian Universalist Association Universal Church of the Kingdom of God Universal White Brotherhood Vipassana movement The Way International Weixinjiao Wicca Word of Faith World Mission Society Church of God Notable figures Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Noble Drew Ali Marshall Applewhite Michael Angelo Aquino Herbert W. Armstrong Shoko Asahara Sri Aurobindo Báb Sathya Sai Baba Baháʼu'lláh Alice Bailey Chinmayananda Saraswati David Berg Helena Blavatsky Sri Chinmoy Aleister Crowley Mary Baker Eddy Josemaría Escrivá Louis Farrakhan Charles Fillmore Kelsang Gyatso Hak Ja Han L. Ron Hubbard Li Hongzhi David Koresh Anton LaVey Jorge Ángel Livraga Rizzi Lu Sheng-yen Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Meher Baba Nikkyō Niwano Sun Myung Moon Elijah Muhammad Nakayama Miki A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Phineas Parkhurst Quimby Raël Rajneesh Ramakrishna Prem Rawat Helena Roerich Charles Taze Russell Joseph Franklin Rutherford Ahn Sahng-hong Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar Menachem Mendel Schneerson Shiv Dayal Singh Joseph Smith Nirmala Srivastava Rudolf Steiner Sudiksha Emanuel Swedenborg Joseph W. Tkach Chögyam Trungpa Ellen G. White Poykayil Yohannan By region Pacific Northwest Concepts African-initiated church Buddhist modernism Chabad messianism Christian denomination Classifications of religious movements Conspiracy theories Cult Cybersectarianism Doomsday cult Heresy Hindu reform movements In-group favoritism Japanese new religions Neoshamanism New Age Open-source religion Polytheistic reconstructionism Prosperity theology Religious conversion Religious syncretism Schism Sect Self religion Spiritual evolution UFO religion Public education CESNUR INFORM (Information Network Focus on Religious Movements) World Religions and Spirituality Project Scholarship Academic study of new religious movements Anthropology of religion History of religion Journal of Contemporary Religion Nova Religio Philosophy of religion Psychology of religion Religious studies Sociology of religion When Prophecy Fails Opposition Anti-cult movement Christian countercult movement Anti-Mormonism Persecution of Ahmadis Persecution of Baháʼís Persecution of Falun Gong Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses Persecution of Rastafari Religious discrimination against modern pagans Lists Academic study In popular culture New religious movements v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_discrimination_against_modern_pagans&oldid=1305010783 " Categories : Discrimination against modern pagans Minority rights Religion and politics Wicca Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2022 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2007 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious discrimination against modern pagans 1 language Add topic

