Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Contemporary application Toggle Contemporary application subsection 2.1 Word of the year shortlisting 3 Notable ngangkari 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ngangkari 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Traditional healers of Anangu and Arrernte peoples of Australia Ngangkari are the traditional healers of the Anangu , the Aboriginal peoples who live mostly in the Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara (APY Lands) of South Australia and the Western Desert region , which includes parts of the Northern Territory and Western Australia . The word in the Arrernte languages of Central Australia is ngangkere . Ngangkari have been part of Aboriginal culture for thousands of years, and attend to the physical and psychic health of Anangu.

Background [ edit ] Ngangkari have  nurtured the physical, emotional and social wellbeing of their people for thousands of years.

[ 1 ] The term applies to traditional healers of the Anangu, who live mostly in the APY Lands, which encompass about 103,000 square kilometres (40,000 sq mi) of South Australia, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and are part of the Western Desert cultural bloc of Aboriginal peoples. The variant spelling, ngangkere, is used in translating the Arrernte languages.

[ 4 ] To become a ngangkari you must be "born into" the ability, and both the ability and knowledge are passed on through family lines.

[ 5 ] Elders choose ngangkari at birth, and pass on their cultural knowledge.

[ 6 ] The powers ngangkari are given, called mapanpa , [ 1 ] heal spiritual as well as physical ailments.

[ 6 ] Before colonisation of South Australia the Anangu were fit, happy and healthy; living their traditional lifestyle of hunting, gathering and eating traditional foods. In these times the ngangkari were primarily needed for simple injuries such as burns and people who had been in the sun too long, but that role has changed significantly. Following colonisation, and the introduction of a number of epidemics , being moved off Country , and the introduction of drugs and alcohol (and associated issues), ngangkari are having to work harder than ever to help their people and adjust to these new demands.

[ 1 ] Contemporary application [ edit ] The ngangkari tradition continues to the present day, with ngangkari continuing to help people from their communities as well as in hospitals, nursing homes , gaols , hostels and a variety of health services. Ngangkari also work in partnership with the western health system in order to deliver the best health and wellbeing outcomes for their people.

[ 7 ] Using ngangkari in partnership with western medicine has proven to be very successful and in some places, including the Royal Adelaide Hospital . Ngangkari healers are popular with clients from different backgrounds, assisting with pain management and relief and, especially for Aboriginal patients, improving attendance rates at medical appointments.

[ 8 ] Word of the year shortlisting [ edit ] The Pitjantjatjara word ngangkari , defined as an Indigenous practitioner of bush medicine , was short-listed for the Macquarie Dictionary 2019 word of the year.

[ 9 ] Notable ngangkari [ edit ] Ngangkari include Pitjantjatjara artists Bill Whiskey Tjapaltjarri [ 10 ] and Betty Muffler of Iwantja Arts , whose work was featured in the 2020 Tarnanthi exhibition [ 11 ] as well as on the cover of the September 2020 issue of Vogue Australia .

[ 12 ] Muffler has a reputation of being one of the best ngangkari in the APY lands , and her healing powers have been in demand to help with anxiety caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia (2020–2021).

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c NPY Women's Council (2013).

Traditional healers of Central Australia : Ngangkari . Broome: Magabala Books.

ISBN 9781921248825 .

^ "About Us" .

Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara . Retrieved 22 March 2020 .

^ "APY Lands Regional Partnership Agreement" .

ATNS (Agreements, Treaties and Negotiated Settlements) . 31 March 2013 . Retrieved 22 March 2020 .

^ "Programs" .

Akeyulerre Inc . Retrieved 6 July 2020 .

^ Korff, Jens (2 October 2019).

"Traditional Aboriginal health care" .

Creative Spirits . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

^ a b c Cole, Kelli; Hartshorn, Aidan (5 January 2021).

"Betty Muffler: hope and healing" .

National Gallery of Australia . Retrieved 12 July 2021 .

This interview was first published in the Spring 2020 edition of Artonview .

^ "Ngangkari - Traditional Healers" .

NPY Women's Council . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

^ Hanifie, Sowaibah (28 March 2018).

"Aboriginal healers' complementary medicine finds a place in hospitals" .

ABC News . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

^ Petelin, Roslyn (2 December 2019).

"Cancel culture, cleanskin, hedonometer … I'm not sure I like any of Macquarie Dictionary's words of the year" . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

^ "Profile" .

cooeeart.com.au . Cooee Art . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ "Betty Muffler" .

Art Gallery of South Australia . 9 October 2020 . Retrieved 15 November 2020 .

^ Kerin, Lindy (9 September 2020).

"Stunning artwork by Betty Muffler makes latest Vogue cover" .

NITV . Retrieved 15 November 2020 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ngangkari&oldid=1158452491 " Categories : Indigenous Australian culture Western Desert cultural bloc Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from December 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from December 2019 This page was last edited on 4 June 2023, at 05:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ngangkari 1 language Add topic

