Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable staff and contributors 3 Podcasts Toggle Podcasts subsection 3.1 The Bulwark Podcast With Tim Miller 3.2 The Next Level 3.3 George Conway Explains It All (To Sarah Longwell) 3.4 The Mona Charen Show 3.5 The Focus Group 3.6 Shield of the Republic 3.7 The Michael Steele Podcast 3.8 How to Fix It with John Avlon 3.9 The Bulwark Goes to Hollywood 3.10 Across the Movie Aisle 3.11 FYPod 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Bulwark (website) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia News and opinion website The Bulwark Type of site News and opinion website Available in English Owner Defending Democracy Together Institute Editor Jonathan V. Last URL thebulwark .com Launched December 2018 ; 6 years ago ( 2018-12 ) Current status Online This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Bulwark is an American center-right news and opinion website launched in 2018 by Sarah Longwell , with the support of Bill Kristol and Charlie Sykes .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] It initially launched as a news aggregator but in 2019 was revamped using key staffers from the recently closed The Weekly Standard .

[ 5 ] The Bulwark is owned by Center Enterprises, Inc., which operates under the trade name Bulwark Media.

The Bulwark has been described as a moderate and right of center publication; it has frequently published pieces critical of president Donald Trump and his allies.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 1 ] History [ edit ] Following the end of publication of The Weekly Standard in December 2018, [ 8 ] editor-in-chief Charlie Sykes said that "the murder of the Standard made it urgently necessary to create a home for rational, principled, fact-based center-right voices who were not cowed by Trumpism ." [ 9 ] The site was created in December 2018 as a news aggregator as a project of the Defending Democracy Together Institute, a 501(c)(3) conservative advocacy group led in part by The Weekly Standard co-founder Bill Kristol .

[ 10 ] Several former editors and writers of The Weekly Standard soon joined the staff and within weeks of launch began publishing original news and opinion pieces.

[ 5 ] The website has frequently published pieces critical of Donald Trump and of pro-Trump elites in politics and the media.

[ 1 ] Originally, as a non-profit project, The Bulwark did not run advertising, and was supported by donations.

[ 7 ] By January 2019, approximately $1 million had already been raised for the site, which was said to be adequate to keep the site running for one year.

[ 5 ] In 2021, The Bulwark launched Bulwark+, a program that provides paid subscribers with "exclusive podcasts, newsletters, and live-streams" for about $100 a year; within a few months, the website reported roughly 16,000 subscribers.

[ 7 ] Bulwark+ is published on the Substack platform. In February 2025, The Bulwark claimed to have 76,000 paid subscribers to its newsletter, and was adding hundreds of new subscribers every few days.

[ 11 ] More recently [ when?

] , The Bulwark has added video content to their repertoire with a dedicated YouTube page that as of May 2025 has 1.26 million subscribers, and has started reading ads on their podcasts (which are put out in audio form on all podcast platforms and many in video form on YouTube and Substack), however Bulwark+ members are able to avoid these ads as a perk of their paid subscription.

In 2021, Washingtonian magazine observed that content on The Bulwark is primarily geared toward readers seeking "serious coverage of events through a center-right filter" but that its editors have sought to attract centrist Democratic readers who may be "uncomfortable with the excesses of the progressive left".

[ 7 ] In 2024, Sarah Longwell, Bill Kristol, and Tim Miller sent the Democratic campaign the names of prominent Republicans who they thought could be persuaded to endorse the Democratic candidate for President. Miller, a former Republican strategist, described his role as "outside cajoler," as he encouraged the Harris campaign to ratchet up its efforts to pitch prominent Republicans on publicly supporting the vice president.

[ 12 ] In October of that year, Will Saletan wrote that Trump was running an "openly fascist campaign".

[ 13 ] Notable staff and contributors [ edit ] Sarah Longwell is the publisher of The Bulwark , and also co-hosts several podcasts for the publication.

Jonathan V. Last is the editor. The staff and writers also include editors William Kristol , Adam Keiper, Jim Swift, Martyn Wendell Jones, Benjamin Parker, Sonny Bunch, Mona Charen , Sam Stein , Tim Miller , Will Saletan , Cathy Young , Joe Perticone, Adrian Carrasquillo, and Andrew Egger.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Other notable contributors include Lauren Egan, Jonathan Cohn, and Will Sommer.

Podcasts [ edit ] The Bulwark produces and distributes several podcasts , which cover news, political analysis, culture, and foreign affairs.

[ 16 ] They also publish weekly private podcasts exclusively for Bulwark+ members.

[ 17 ] The Bulwark Podcast With Tim Miller [ edit ] The Bulwark Podcast is a news, opinion and interview show hosted by Tim Miller . The podcast is released every weekday and published in audio and video form.

[ 18 ] Until February 2024, the podcast was hosted by Charlie Sykes .

[ 19 ] The show launched on December 21, 2018.

[ 20 ] The Bulwark's Publisher Sarah Longwell said that each of the podcast's January 2021 episodes were downloaded about 100,000 times.

[ 7 ] The Next Level [ edit ] Co-hosted by Sarah Longwell , Tim Miller , and Jonathan V. Last , The Next Level is a weekly podcast that covers the news of the week, with a focus on politics and elections.

[ 21 ] George Conway Explains It All (To Sarah Longwell) [ edit ] Co-hosted by attorney George Conway and Sarah Longwell , George Conway Explains It All covers legal and political news, with a particular emphasis on Donald Trump's legal issues.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The Mona Charen Show [ edit ] The Mona Charen Show , hosted by Mona Charen , is a weekly interview-style podcast that covers politics and cultural issues.

[ 24 ] Charen previously hosted the panel-style podcast Beg to Differ .

[ 25 ] The Focus Group [ edit ] The Focus Group is a weekly podcast hosted by Sarah Longwell . Longwell invites a guest to review audio clips of focus groups to learn what voters think about candidates, issues, and events.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Shield of the Republic [ edit ] Co-hosted by former diplomat Eric S. Edelman and political scientist Eliot A. Cohen , Shield of the Republic is a weekly podcast on national security and foreign policy.

[ 28 ] The Michael Steele Podcast [ edit ] Hosted by former Maryland Lt. Governor Michael Steele , The Michael Steele Podcast is a weekly "barbershop-style" discussion of political and cultural events.

[ 29 ] How to Fix It with John Avlon [ edit ] A weekly podcast hosted by journalist, speechwriter, and congressional candidate John Avlon .

[ 30 ] The Bulwark Goes to Hollywood [ edit ] Hosted by Sonny Bunch, The Bulwark Goes to Hollywood includes interviews with interesting people who work in the entertainment industry.

[ 31 ] Across the Movie Aisle [ edit ] Co-hosted by Sonny Bunch, Alyssa Rosenberg, and Peter Suderman, Across the Movie Aisle is a discussion of movies between writers with different political perspectives.

[ 32 ] FYPod [ edit ] Co-hosted by Tim Miller and Cameron Kasky , FYPod is a podcast on how younger Americans, especially Gen Z , are shaping politics as a distinctive bloc. The show was launched in February 2025, and guests have ranged from conservative influencer and journalist Natalie Winters to progressive congressional candidate Kat Abughazaleh .

[ 33 ] See also [ edit ] List of Republicans who opposed the Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign References [ edit ] ^ a b c Coppins, McKay (February 22, 2019).

"Naming and Shaming the Pro-Trump Elite" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on October 19, 2021 . Retrieved August 15, 2020 .

The Bulwark, the anti–Donald Trump conservative news site ^ Mike DeBonis; Jeremy Barr (February 28, 2021).

"Rewriting January 6th: Republicans push false and misleading accounts of Capitol riot" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2021 . Retrieved March 23, 2021 .

the Bulwark, an anti-Trump conservative website ^ Darcy, Oliver (January 4, 2019).

"Former Weekly Standard staffers find new home at The Bulwark" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2021 . Retrieved August 15, 2020 .

^ Morrison, Patt (October 9, 2019).

"How Never Trumpers can get the GOP to stand up for constitutional conservatism again" .

Los Angeles Times (editorial).

Archived from the original on March 4, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .

^ a b c Darcy, Oliver (January 4, 2019).

"Former Weekly Standard staffers find new home at The Bulwark , a conservative site unafraid to take on Trump" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2019 . Retrieved January 10, 2019 .

^ "The Bulwark: How could it be wrong when it feels so center-right?" .

Washington Post . May 28, 2024. Archived from the original on May 29, 2024 . Retrieved July 22, 2025 .

^ a b c d e Andrew Beaujon, The Bulwark Was Founded to Oppose Trump. Now What?

Archived August 29, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , The Washingtonian (March 3, 2021).

^ Farhi, Paul (December 14, 2018).

" The Weekly Standard , influential conservative magazine, will shutter" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2019 . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ Rubin, Jennifer (January 8, 2019).

"A bulwark against Trump and Trumpism" .

The Washington Post (editorial).

Archived from the original on January 10, 2019 . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ "Defending Democracy Together Institute (DDTI)" .

InfluenceWatch .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2019 . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ Klein, Charlotte.

"Resistance Media Lives! The explosive success of The Bulwark" .

New York .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2025 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ Pager, Tyler (September 30, 2024).

"Harris team quietly courts big-name GOP endorsements" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2024 . Retrieved October 4, 2024 .

^ Saletan, Will (October 21, 2024).

"Let's Be Honest, Trump's Running As a Fascist" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2024 . Retrieved October 22, 2024 .

^ "About" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2024 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ "The Bulwark builds its newsroom with Sam Stein hire" . June 20, 2024.

Archived from the original on December 7, 2024 . Retrieved December 5, 2024 .

^ "The Bulwark Podcasts" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2025 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ Tani, Max.

"How Tim Miller and The Bulwark became 2024's unlikely YouTube stars" .

Semafor .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2025 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ "The Bulwark Podcast" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2025 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ Sykes, Charlie.

"Getting Off the Daily Hamster Wheel of Crazy" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2024 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ "Welcome to the Bulwark Podcast" .

The Bulwark . Archived from the original on May 2, 2020 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "The Next Level" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2025 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "George Conway Explains It All (To Sarah Longwell)" .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ Suter, Tara.

"George Conway: Trump a 'global, planetary joke' to the world" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "The Mona Charen Show" .

The Bulwark .

^ "The Final Beg to Differ" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2025 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "The Focus Group Podcast" .

Audioboom .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ Rodríguez, Jesús.

"The Bulwark: How could it be wrong when it feels so center-right?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on May 29, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "Shield of the Republic" .

Audioboom .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "The Michael Steele Podcast" .

The Bulwark .

Archived from the original on January 30, 2025 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "How to Fix It with John Avlon" . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "The Bulwark Goes to Hollywood" .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "Across the Movie Aisle" .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

^ "FYPod | the Bulwark | Substack" .

The Bulwark . Retrieved June 11, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Never Trump movement Groups 43 Alumni for America The Bulwark Delegates Unbound Free the Delegates Haley Voters for Harris The Lincoln Project TV series MeidasTouch Our Principles PAC Republican Accountability Project Republican Political Alliance for Integrity and Reform Republicans for the Rule of Law Right Side PAC Vote Common Good Opposition to presidential campaigns Republicans opposition in the 2016 campaign Mitt Romney's 2016 speech Republicans opposition in the 2020 campaign Mark Sanford presidential campaign Joe Walsh presidential campaign Bill Weld presidential campaign Trump administration officials who endorsed Joe Biden Republicans opposition in the 2024 campaign Trump administration officials who endorsed Kamala Harris Other 2016 efforts Evan McMullin 2016 presidential campaign Faithless electors in the 2016 United States presidential election Chiafalo v. Washington External podcast links (?) Apple Podcasts Listen Notes Podchaser Spotify RSS feed Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Bulwark_(website)&oldid=1302030977 " Categories : 2018 establishments in the United States American conservative websites American news websites Internet properties established in 2018 Never Trump movement Centre-right politics Neoconservatism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from June 2025 This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 00:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Bulwark (website) Add languages Add topic

