Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Telescopes 3 Public access 4 Nearby observatories 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Fuertes Observatory Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°27′10″N 76°28′28.16″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.45278°N 76.4744889°W ﻿ / 42.45278; -76.4744889 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Observatory Fuertes Observatory Named after Estevan Antonio Fuertes Organization Cornell University Location Ithaca , New York (United States) Coordinates 42°27′10″N 76°28′28.16″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.45278°N 76.4744889°W ﻿ / 42.45278; -76.4744889 Altitude 274 m Established 1917 Website Fuertes Website Architect L.P. Burnham, Cornell Professor of Architecture [ 1 ] Telescopes Irving Porter Church Memorial Telescope 30 cm (12") Brashear refractor on Warner & Swasey mount.

Obsession 15" 38 cm (15") Obsession Newtonian reflector on Dobsonian altazimuth mount Celestron C-14 35 cm (14") Schmidt-Cassegrain reflector on equatorial fork mount Meade LX200 30 cm (12") Schmidt-Cassegrain reflector on tripod.

Location of Fuertes Observatory Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] Fuertes Observatory is an astronomical observatory located on the North Campus of Cornell University in Ithaca , New York .  The observatory was designed by L.P. Burnham, Cornell Professor of Architecture [ 1 ] and completed in fall of 1917. It was originally used by the Civil Engineering Department as an instructional field office for navigation and surveying. Today, the observatory is primarily used for public outreach, welcoming over two thousand visitors per year with open houses on every Friday night during the academic year.

The facility is currently maintained by the Cornell Department of Astronomy, though open houses are routinely managed by the Cornell Astronomical Society , a group of Cornell undergraduate and graduate students. 
The observatory is named after the Puerto Rican-American astronomer and builder of Cornell's first observatory, Estevan Antonio Fuertes .

History [ edit ] Professor Samuel L. Boothroyd looks through the Irving Porter Church Telescope in 1923, soon after its completion. Cornell Alumni News, May 3, 1923.

Several observatories existed on Cornell's Central Campus in the later part of the 19th century and first decade of the 20th century. However, due to the development of the campus and the need to build a drill hall ( Barton Hall ), the predecessors to Fuertes were demolished, and plans were made to build a new observatory on the undeveloped North Campus. In 1916, construction of the Fuertes Observatory began under the supervision of the Cornell Department of Civil Engineering. The building was completed in Fall of 1917 with a 24-foot-diameter steel dome; 30-foot-long I-beams were incorporated to provide support for a future telescope. This differed from the typical masonry pier used to support a telescope in most observatories.

The first telescope in the dome room of Fuertes was a 4.5-inch refractor telescope used in some of Cornell's previous observatories, and was mounted on an equatorial clock-driven mount. Soon after, in 1919, Civil Engineering Professor Irving Porter Church acquired two glass blanks from the Yerkes Observatory in Wisconsin . The glass blanks were ground and polished into a 12-inch achromatic lens by Brashear & Co in 1920. Professor Church spearheaded a campaign to raise money from civil engineering alumni to build the telescope and equatorial mounting. In January 1922, the order was placed with the Warner & Swasey Company to build the equatorial mount. After modifications were made to the original dome, the telescope was installed during the summer and fall of 1922, and was completed on October 16, 1922. It was officially dedicated on June 15, 1923 as the “Irving Porter Church Memorial Telescope.” Additionally, the observatory was built with a classroom, transit room (with a clamshell roof), and an office. A large backlit display case containing numerous astronomical slides was featured (and remains today) in the lobby of the building. Many civil engineering instruments were housed in Fuertes, including zenith telescopes, theodolites, sextants, transit instruments, and a chronograph. The transit room has since been converted into a museum to display many of the historic instruments.

[ 2 ] Telescopes [ edit ] The Irving Porter Church Memorial Telescope residing in the dome room of Cornell's Fuertes Observatory. The instrument is a 12" f/15 refracting telescope installed in 1922.

The Irving Porter Church Telescope on its original German Equatorial Mount built by Warner & Swasey .

The observatory contains a 12-inch refracting telescope with a weight-driven mechanical clock drive. The original glass blanks that were to become the optics were procured in 1919 by Prof. Irving P. Church, head of the Cornell Department of Civil Engineering; the two-element lens was ground and polished by the well-known firm of Brashear & Co. and delivered to Cornell in 1920. In January 1922, a contract was given to the Warner and Swasey Co. of Cleveland, Ohio to build the mount. On October 16, 1922, the telescope was erected upon its German equatorial mount in the central dome of the Fuertes Observatory. The observatory's original 4.5-inch telescope was mounted onto the 12-inch refractor, and currently serves as the finder scope.

[ 3 ] The observatory also contains several transit telescopes, zenith scopes, and other antique astronomical instruments used by Civil Engineers in the late 19th and early 20th centuries for geodesy and timekeeping. These instruments are on display in a museum that occupies the east wing of the building.

Public access [ edit ] North Campus with Fuertes Observatory in the lower left of the picture Fuertes is open to Cornell students and the general public every Friday night, hosted by the Cornell Astronomical Society. When clear, observing will take place from 8 PM until midnight. Tours of the observatory and its historic telescopes will be given regardless of the weather. During the academic year, a lecture or astronomy-related documentary is often presented before observing.

Nearby observatories [ edit ] Clinton B. Ford Observatory , Ithaca College , Ithaca , New York Hartung-Boothroyd Observatory , Cornell University , Ithaca , New York Kopernik Space Education Center , Vestal , New York See also [ edit ] List of astronomical observatories List of largest optical refracting telescopes References [ edit ] ^ a b Nicholson, Phil.

"History of the Fuertes Observatory" .

Cornell Astronomy Society . Cornell Astronomy Society . Retrieved 10 November 2018 .

^ http://topics.sirtf.com/Fuertes/FuertesHistory A Brief History of the Fuertes Observatory at Cornell by Prof. Phil Nicholson. Retrieved 2016-03-31 ^ "ChurchTelescopeDedication < Fuertes < Don's Course Wiki" .

topics.sirtf.com . Retrieved 2015-10-19 .

External links [ edit ] Fuertes Observatory Website Cornell Astronomical Society Website Fuertes Observatory Open House Website v t e Astronomical observatories of New York Public Kopernik ( Vestal ) Custer ( Southold ) Martz ( Frewsburg ) Darling Hill ( Tully ) Beaver Meadow ( Java ) Barton-Brown ( Waterville ) Adirondack Public ( Tupper Lake ) Farash ( Ionia ) Buffalo Museum of Science ( Buffalo ) University Hartung–Boothroyd ( Ithaca ) Fuertes ( Ithaca ) Clinton B. Ford ( Ithaca ) C. E. K. Mees ( Naples ) Eileen Collins ( Corning ) Reynolds ( Potsdam ) Foggy Bottom ( Hamilton ) Hirsch ( Troy ) Mount Stony Brook ( Stony Brook ) RIT ( Henrietta ) College of Staten Island ( Staten Island ) Stull ( Alfred ) SUNY Oneonta College ( Oneonta ) Vassar Class of 1951 ( Poughkeepsie ) Catipovic ( Buffalo ) v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Portals : New York (state) Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Education Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fuertes_Observatory&oldid=1278175009 " Categories : Astronomical observatories in New York (state) Cornell University buildings Tourist attractions in Tompkins County, New York 1917 establishments in New York (state) Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using Infobox observatory using locally defined parameters Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 22:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fuertes Observatory Add languages Add topic

