Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Unit Toggle Unit subsection 2.1 Equipment 2.2 Organization 2.3 Tactics and use 3 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 3.1 Hellenistic kingdoms 3.2 Eastern Roman Empire 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Companion cavalry 29 languages Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Macedonian cavalry This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Alexander Mosaic , showing the Battle of Issus , from the House of the Faun , Pompeii The Companions ( Greek : ἑταῖροι , Greek: [heˈtairoi̯] , hetairoi ) were the elite heavy cavalry of the Macedonian army from the time of King Philip II of Macedon , achieving their greatest prestige under Alexander the Great , and regarded as the first or among the first shock cavalry used in Europe.

[ 1 ] Chosen Companions, or Hetairoi, formed the elite guard of the king ( Somatophylakes ).

Etymology [ edit ] The name of the military unit derives from Greek Hetairoi , those near the king. The Hetairoi (Companions) could be members of the Macedonian aristocracy or commoners of any origin who enjoyed the trust and friendship of the Macedonian regent. The Hetairideia , a festival pertaining to the sacred relationship which bound the king and his companions together [ 2 ] was celebrated and even Euripides , the famed Athenian playwright, was honoured as an hetairos of the king Archelaus .

[ 3 ] The Royal friends ( Philoi ) or the king's Companions (basilikoi hetairoi) were named for life by the king among the Macedonian aristocracy.

Unit [ edit ] Equipment [ edit ] A heavy cavalryman of Alexander the Great's army, possibly a Thessalian, though the Companion cavalry would have been almost identical (the shape of the cloak of the latter was more rounded). He wears a cuirass (probably a linothorax) and a Boeotian helmet, and is equipped with a scabbarded xiphos straight-bladed sword.

Alexander Sarcophagus .

Companion cavalry was composed of the most powerful nobles, and as such, had access to the best horses and equipment available. In Alexander's day, they mostly carried a xyston (long thrusting spear), and wore a bronze muscle cuirass or linothorax , shoulder guards and Boeotian helmets , but bore no shield .

[ 4 ] A kopis (curved slashing sword) or xiphos (cut and thrust sword) was also carried for close combat, should the xyston be lost or broken.

Organization [ edit ] The Companion cavalry was composed of the Hetairoi of the king, mainly upper class citizens who were able to acquire and maintain armour and horses. In the age of Philip II and Alexander they were organized into 8 territorial squadrons, termed ilai . Each ile numbered between 200 and 300 horsemen.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] They were originally commanded by a single leader, Philotas under Alexander the Great, but following his execution would see the leadership split between two men, Cleitus the Black and Hephaestion .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Arrian claims this would be because, Alexander "did not want anyone, not even his intimate friend, to be the centre of attention".

[ 9 ] After receiving reinforcements in Susa, Alexander established two companies in each squadron.

[ 10 ] They were referred to by the name of the territory they were mustered in or by the name of its captain. The Royal Ile was commanded by Alexander himself and contained twice the number of soldiers the other units contained, c. 400.

[ 6 ] These cavalry squadrons would sometimes be combined in groups of two, three or four to form a hipparchy , which was commanded by a hipparch , though the whole Companion force was generally commanded by Alexander.

[ 6 ] In Alexander's Balkan campaigns, we find mention of Companions from upper Macedonia, the central Macedonian plain and Amphipolis .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] During the advance on Granicus, a squadron commanded by Socrates of Macedon (not to be confused with the philosopher) hailed from Apollonia on Lake Bolbe.

[ 12 ] During the Battle of Issus , Arrian names the ile of Anthemus (modern Galatista ),; [ 11 ] another, from the unidentified land of Leuge (likely Pieria ), is also mentioned.

[ 13 ] Theopompus describes the Companions, probably of around the mid 4th century BC, as being made of "no more than 800 at this time" and mustered "some from Macedonia, some from Thessaly and still others from the rest of Greece".

[ 14 ] By 338 BC, Alexander is reported to have had around 2600 in his Companion Cavalry.

[ 15 ] As Alexander's force campaigned towards India, barbarians played an increasing role in the Companion Cavalry and the Macedonian mutiny at Opis may have been partially caused by this.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] At one point, there were four hipparchies made up of entirely oriental forces and one that was a mix of Macedonians and orientals.

[ 16 ] Tactics and use [ edit ] Macedonian Companion cavalry ile in wedge formation The Companions constituted one of the first shock cavalry in history, able to conduct charges against massed infantry. Many contemporary cavalry, even when heavily armored, would most usually be equipped with javelins and would avoid melee [ citation needed ] . In this respect, Companions were similar to the older Iranian heavy cavalry who were armed with lances and also engaged in melee combat.

In battle, it would form part of a hammer and anvil tactic: the Companion cavalry would be used as a hammer, in conjunction with the Macedonian phalanx -based infantry , which acted as their anvil. The phalanx would pin the enemy in place, while the Companion cavalry would attack the enemy on the flank or from behind.

In battle, Alexander the Great personally led the charge at the head of the royal squadron of the Companion cavalry, usually in a wedge formation . In a pitched battle, the Companions usually fought on the right wing of the Macedonian army, next to the shield-bearing guards, the hypaspists , who would guard the right flank of the phalanx. Other cavalry troops would protect the flanks of the Macedonian line during battle. Under Alexander's command, the Companions' role was decisive in most of his battles in Asia [ citation needed ] .

Legacy [ edit ] Hellenistic kingdoms [ edit ] The Companions of Alexander the Great The Companion cavalry of the Diadochoi (Alexandrian successor-states), were even more heavily equipped.

Seleucid Companions were noted to have worn lighter, but not otherwise dissimilar, equipment to the cataphracts at the Battle of Magnesia in 190 BC, which may have included partial horse armour and leg and arm protection.

Ptolemaic Companions and Antigonid Companions were also equipped with a large round aspis cavalry shield unlike the Companions of Phillip and Alexander.

'Companions' was a title not used by the Seleucids in its original sense. It was replaced with different and various grades of 'King's Friends'. However, the title 'Companions' was kept as a regimental one. There was only one regiment or unit that held the title of Companions in the entire Hellenistic world though; the Antigonids and Ptolemies had different names for their elite cavalry regiments.

Eastern Roman Empire [ edit ] Main article: Hetaireia The Hetaireia or Hetaeria was a corps of bodyguards during the Byzantine Empire . Its name means "the Company", echoing the ancient Macedonian Companion cavalry. The imperial Hetaireia was composed chiefly of foreigners. They acted as part of the Byzantine imperial guard alongside the tagmata in the 9th–12th centuries.

See also [ edit ] Hetair- , a Greek linguistic root Hetaireia Panegorus Pezhetairos Sarissophoroi Somatophylakes References [ edit ] ^ Hanson, Victor Davis (2007-12-18).

Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-42518-8 .

^ Winthrop Lindsay Adams.

Alexander the Great: legacy of a conqueror . p 8.

ISBN 0-321-08617-1 . (2004) ^ John V. A. Fine.

The ancient Greeks: a critical history.

p 612.

ISBN 0-674-03314-0 . (1983) ^ Lonsdale 40 ^ Fuller 49 ^ a b c Lansdale 41 ^ SÁNCHEZ, JUAN PABLO (2018-09-27).

"How suspicion and intrigue eroded Alexander's empire" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on December 14, 2019 . Retrieved 2020-08-28 .

^ Grote, George (1907).

A History of Greece: From the Earliest Period to the Close of the Generation Contemporary with Alexander the Great . John Murray.

^ Sage 185 ^ Arrian, Alexander's Anabasis, III.16 ^ a b Hammond 414 ^ a b Hammond 416 ^ Hammond 415 ^ Sage 173–174 ^ Sage 174 ^ a b Lansdale 56 ^ Arrian, Alexander's Anabasis VII.6 Works cited [ edit ] Fuller, John Fredrick Charles (2004).

The Generalship of Alexander the Great . Da Carpo Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-81330-6 .

can be found at Google Books in preview Hammond, Nicholas G. L. (1998). "Cavalry Recruited in Macedonia down to 322 BC".

Historia: Zeitschrift für Alte Geschichte .

47 (4): 404– 425.

JSTOR 4436520 .

Lonsdale, David J. (2007).

Alexander the Great:lessons in strategy . Routlidge.

ISBN 978-0-415-35847-7 .

can be found at Google Books in preview Sage, Michael M. (1996).

Warfare in ancient Greece . Routlidge.

ISBN 978-0-415-14355-4 .

can be found at Google Books in preview v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Companion_cavalry&oldid=1300650109 " Categories : Ancient Greek military terminology Military units and formations of the Hellenistic world Cavalry units and formations of Macedon Hetairoi Military units and formations of ancient Greece Philip II of Macedon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia introduction cleanup from January 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2024 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with Greek IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 16:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Companion cavalry 29 languages Add topic

