Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Details 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Holt McDougal 2 languages Bahasa Indonesia Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American publisher, mainly textbooks This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Holt McDougal" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Holt McDougal Logo of Holt, Rinehart and Winston, the ancestor created in 1960 and now a Holt McDougal imprint Parent company Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Founded March 1960 ; 65 years ago ( 1960-03 ) Country of origin United States Publication types Textbooks, children's books Holt McDougal is an American publishing company , a division of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt , that specializes in textbooks for use in high schools .

The Holt name is derived from that of U.S. publisher Henry Holt (1840–1926), co-founder of the earliest ancestor business, but Holt McDougal is distinct from contemporary Henry Holt and Company , which claims the history from 1866. The companies publish different kinds of books.

History [ edit ] Holt, Rinehart and Winston (HRW) was created in March 1960 by the merger of Henry Holt and Company of New York City (established 1866 as Leypoldt and Holt); Rinehart & Company of New York, descendant of Farrar & Rinehart (est. 1929); and the John C. Winston Company of Philadelphia (est. 1884).

The Wall Street Journal reported on March 1, 1960, that Holt stockholders had approved the merger, last of the three approvals. "Henry Holt is the surviving concern, but will be known as Holt, Rinehart, Winston, Inc." [ 1 ] In 1967, HRW was acquired by CBS .

In 1985 the retail publishing arm of HRW along with the Henry Holt name was acquired by the Georg von Holtzbrinck Publishing Group based in Stuttgart, Germany. Holtzbrinck acquired the Macmillan name in 2001 and Henry Holt is now an imprint or division of the global Macmillan Group (under Holtzbrinck; not to be confused with Macmillan US).

Also in 1985, the educational publishing arm along with the Holt, Rinehart and Winston name and logo (see image) was acquired by Harcourt . As Harcourt divested further, from 2001 HRW was a division of Harcourt Education owned by Reed Elsevier . Reed sold off parts of Harcourt Education including Holt, Rinehart, and Winston to Houghton Mifflin in 2007, part of a reorganization that created Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH). HRW was then combined with Houghton Mifflin Company's McDougal Littell subsidiary to form Holt McDougal.

Details [ edit ] Holt McDougal publishes textbooks on mathematics , language arts , social studies , science , health , and world language ( French , Spanish , and German ). It has published children's books for the Weekly Reader Book Club including Sweet Pickles , Fraggle Rock , and Snoopy . This American publishing company has offices in Austin, Texas and Evanston, Illinois and with its parent company, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts.

[ clarification needed ] See also [ edit ] Books in the United States References [ edit ] ^ "Henry Holt Merger".

The Wall Street Journal . March 1, 1960. p. 12.

External links [ edit ] Houghton Mifflin Harcourt: classroom Holt, Rinehart and Winston at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database (ISFDB) John C. Winston Company at ISFDB Rinehart & Company at ISFDB v t e Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Great Source Harcourt School Supply Heinemann (US) Holt McDougal NWEA Rigby (US) Saxon Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Learning Technology The Learning Company Broderbund Edmark v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Holt_McDougal&oldid=1303723707 " Categories : Book publishing companies of the United States Companies based in Austin, Texas Publishing companies established in 2007 Houghton Mifflin books Houghton Mifflin Harcourt American companies established in 2007 Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from June 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2016 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2015 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 18:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Holt McDougal 2 languages Add topic

