Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principle 2 Applications 3 Types 4 Manufacturers 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gyrotron 19 languages Alemannisch العربية Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français हिन्दी Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Русский தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the former Montreal amusement park ride, see La Ronde (amusement park) .

Vacuum tube which generates high-frequency radio waves High-power 140 GHz gyrotron for plasma heating in the Wendelstein 7-X fusion experiment, Germany.

A gyrotron is a class of high-power linear-beam vacuum tubes that generates millimeter-wave electromagnetic waves by the cyclotron resonance of electrons in a strong magnetic field . Output frequencies range from about 20 to 527 GHz , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] covering wavelengths from microwave to the edge of the terahertz gap . Typical output powers range from tens of kilowatts to 1–2 megawatts . Gyrotrons can be designed for pulsed or continuous operation. The gyrotron was invented by Soviet scientists [ 3 ] at NIRFI , based in Nizhny Novgorod , Russia .

Principle [ edit ] The gyrotron is a type of free-electron maser that generates high-frequency electromagnetic radiation by stimulated cyclotron resonance of electrons moving through a strong magnetic field.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] It can produce high power at millimeter wavelengths because, as a fast-wave device, its dimensions can be much larger than the wavelength of the radiation. This is unlike conventional microwave vacuum tubes such as klystrons and magnetrons , in which the wavelength is determined by a single-mode resonant cavity , a slow-wave structure. Thus, as operating frequencies increase, the resonant cavity structures must decrease in size, which limits their power-handling capability.

A gyrotron (right) in cross-section (left). The electron path is shown in blue, and the generated microwave radiation is in pink.

In the gyrotron, a hot filament in an electron gun (1) at one end of the tube emits an annular-shaped (hollow tubular) beam of electrons (6), which is accelerated by a high-voltage DC anode (10) and then travels through a large tubular resonant cavity structure (2) in a strong axial magnetic field , usually created by a superconducting magnet around the tube (8). The field causes the electrons to move helically in tight circles around the magnetic field lines as they travel lengthwise through the tube. At the position in the tube where the magnetic field reaches its maximum (2), the electrons radiate electromagnetic waves, parallel to the axis of the tube, at their cyclotron resonance frequency. The millimeter radiation forms standing waves in the tube, which acts as an open-ended resonant cavity , and is formed into a beam.  The beam is converted by a mode converter (9) and reflected by mirrors (4), which direct it through a window (5) in the side of the tube into a microwave waveguide (7). A collector electrode absorbs the spent electron beam at the end of the tube (3).

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] As in other linear-beam microwave tubes, the energy of the output electromagnetic waves comes from the kinetic energy of the electron beam, which is due to the accelerating anode voltage (10). In the region before the resonant cavity where the magnetic field strength is increasing, it compresses the electron beam, converting the longitudinal drift velocity to transverse orbital velocity, in a process similar to that occurring in a magnetic mirror used in plasma confinement .

[ 5 ] The orbital velocity of the electrons is 1.5 to 2 times their axial beam velocity. Due to the standing waves in the resonant cavity, the electrons become "bunched"; that is, their phase becomes coherent (synchronized), so they are all at the same point in their orbit at the same time. Therefore, they emit coherent radiation .

The electron speed in a gyrotron is slightly relativistic (on the order of but not close to the speed of light). This contrasts to the free-electron laser (and xaser ) that work on different principles and whose electrons are highly relativistic.

Applications [ edit ] Gyrotrons are used for many industrial and high-technology heating applications. For example, gyrotrons are used in nuclear fusion research experiments to heat plasmas and also in the manufacturing industry as a rapid heating tool in processing glass, composites, and ceramics, as well as for annealing (solar and semiconductors). Military applications include the Active Denial System .

Types [ edit ] The output window of the tube from which the microwave beam emerges can be in two locations. In the transverse-output gyrotron, the beam exits through a window on the side of the tube. This requires a 45° mirror at the end of the cavity to reflect the microwave beam, positioned at one side so the electron beam misses it. In the axial-output gyrotron, the beam exits through a window at the end of the tube at the far end of the cylindrical collector electrode which collects the electrons.

The original gyrotron developed in 1964 was an oscillator, but since that time gyrotron amplifiers have been developed. The helical gyrotron electron beam can amplify an applied microwave signal similarly to the way a straight electron beam amplifies in classical microwave tubes such as the klystron, so there is a series of gyrotrons that function analogously to these tubes. Their advantage is that they can operate at much higher frequencies.
The gyro-monotron (gyro-oscillator) is a single-cavity gyrotron that functions as an oscillator. A gyro-klystron is an amplifier that functions analogously to a klystron tube. Has two microwave cavities along the electron beam, an input cavity upstream to which the signal to be amplified is applied and an output cavity downstream from which the output is taken. A gyro-TWT is an amplifier that functions analogously to a travelling wave tube (TWT). It has a slow wave structure similar to a TWT paralleling the beam, with the input microwave signal applied to the upstream end and the amplified output signal taken from the downstream end. A gyro-BWO is an oscillator that functions analogously to a backward wave oscillator (BWO). It generates oscillations traveling in an opposite direction to the electron beam, which is output at the upstream end of the tube. A gyro-twystron is an amplifier that functions analogously to a twystron , a tube that combines a klystron and a TWT. Like a klystron, it has an input cavity at the upstream end followed by buncher cavities to bunch the electrons, which are followed by a TWT-type slow-wave structure that develops the amplified output signal. Like a TWT, it has a wide bandwidth.

Manufacturers [ edit ] The gyrotron was invented in the Soviet Union .

[ 7 ] Present makers include Communications & Power Industries (USA), Gycom (Russia), Thales Group (EU), Kyoto Fusioneering (Japan), Toshiba (Japan, now Canon, Inc.

, [ 8 ] also from Japan), and Bridge12 Technologies . System developers include Gyrotron Technology .

See also [ edit ] Electron cyclotron resonance Fusion power Terahertz radiation References [ edit ] ^ Richards, Mark A.; William A. Holm (2010).

"Power Sources and Amplifiers" .

Principles of Modern Radar: Basic Principles . SciTech Pub., 2010. p. 360.

ISBN 978-1891121524 .

^ Blank, M.; Borchard, P.; Cauffman, S.; Felch, K.; Rosay, M.; Tometich, L. (2013-06-01). "Experimental demonstration of a 527 GHZ gyrotron for dynamic nuclear polarization".

2013 Abstracts IEEE International Conference on Plasma Science (ICOPS) . p. 1.

doi : 10.1109/PLASMA.2013.6635226 .

ISBN 978-1-4673-5171-3 .

S2CID 31007942 .

^ High-Magnetic-Field Research and Facilities (1979). Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences. p. 51.

^ a b "What is a Gyrotron?" .

Bridge12 Technologies . Retrieved 12 November 2022 .

^ a b Borie, E. (c. 1990).

"Review of Gyrotron Theory" (PDF) .

EPJ Web of Conferences . KfK 4898.

149 : 04018.

Bibcode : 2017EPJWC.14904018N .

doi : 10.1051/epjconf/201714904018 . Retrieved July 9, 2014 .

^ "General features of a gyrotron" .

École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne . Retrieved 12 November 2022 .

^ National Research Council (U.S.). Panel on High Magnetic Field Research and Facilities (1979).

"Defense Technology - High Frequency Radiation" .

High-Magnetic-Field Research and Facilities . Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences. pp.

50– 51.

ISBN 9780309304351 .

OCLC 13876197 .

^ Thumm, Manfred (2020).

"State-of-the-Art of High-Power Gyro-Devices and Free Electron Masers" .

Journal of Infrared .

41 (1): 1.

Bibcode : 2020JIMTW..41....1T .

doi : 10.1007/s10762-019-00631-y .

S2CID 209747370 .

External links [ edit ] Gyrotron Kupiszewski, A. (1979).

"The Gyrotron: A High Frequency Microwave Amplifier" (PDF) .

The Deep Space Network Progress Report .

42 (52): 8– 12.

Bibcode : 1979dsn..nasa....8K . NASA Code 310-10-64-10.

v t e Electronic components Semiconductor devices MOS transistors Transistor NMOS PMOS BiCMOS BioFET Chemical field-effect transistor (ChemFET) Complementary MOS (CMOS) Depletion-load NMOS Fin field-effect transistor (FinFET) Floating-gate MOSFET (FGMOS) Insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) ISFET LDMOS MOS field-effect transistor (MOSFET) Multi-gate field-effect transistor (MuGFET) Power MOSFET Thin-film transistor (TFT) VMOS UMOS Other transistors Bipolar junction transistor (BJT) Darlington transistor Diffused junction transistor Field-effect transistor (FET) Junction Gate FET (JFET) Organic FET (OFET) Light-emitting transistor (LET) Organic LET (OLET) Pentode transistor Point-contact transistor Programmable unijunction transistor (PUT) Static induction transistor (SIT) Tetrode transistor Unijunction transistor (UJT) Diodes Avalanche diode Constant-current diode (CLD, CRD) Gunn diode Laser diode (LD) Light-emitting diode (LED) Organic light-emitting diode (OLED) Photodiode PIN diode Schottky diode Step recovery diode Zener diode Other devices Printed electronics Printed circuit board DIAC Heterostructure barrier varactor Integrated circuit (IC) Hybrid integrated circuit Light emitting capacitor (LEC) Memistor Memristor Memtransistor Memory cell Metal-oxide varistor (MOV) Mixed-signal integrated circuit MOS integrated circuit (MOS IC) Organic semiconductor Photodetector Quantum circuit RF CMOS Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR) Solaristor Static induction thyristor (SITh) Three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC) Thyristor Trancitor TRIAC Varicap Voltage regulators Linear regulator Low-dropout regulator Switching regulator Buck Boost Buck–boost Split-pi Ćuk SEPIC Charge pump Switched capacitor Vacuum tubes Acorn tube Audion Beam tetrode Barretter Compactron Diode Fleming valve Neutron tube Nonode Nuvistor Pentagrid (Hexode, Heptode, Octode) Pentode Photomultiplier Phototube Tetrode Triode Vacuum tubes ( RF ) Backward-wave oscillator (BWO) Cavity magnetron Crossed-field amplifier (CFA) Gyrotron Inductive output tube (IOT) Klystron Maser Sutton tube Traveling-wave tube (TWT) X-ray tube Cathode-ray tubes Beam deflection tube Charactron Iconoscope Magic eye tube Monoscope Selectron tube Storage tube Trochotron Video camera tube Williams tube Gas-filled tubes Cold cathode Crossatron Dekatron Ignitron Krytron Mercury-arc valve Neon lamp Nixie tube Thyratron Trigatron Voltage-regulator tube Adjustable Potentiometer digital Variable capacitor Varicap Passive Connector audio and video electrical power RF Electrolytic detector Ferrite Antifuse Fuse resettable eFUSE Resistor Switch Thermistor Transformer Varistor Wire Wollaston wire Reactive Capacitor types Ceramic resonator Crystal oscillator Inductor Parametron Relay reed relay mercury relay Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gyrotron&oldid=1289286874 " Categories : Microwave technology Terahertz technology Soviet inventions Vacuum tubes Particle accelerators Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 17:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gyrotron 19 languages Add topic

