Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Education 2 Sub-divisions Toggle Sub-divisions subsection 2.1 Professional/managerial middle class 2.2 Lower middle class 2.3 Working class majority 2.4 Weberian definition 3 Income Toggle Income subsection 3.1 Size of middle class by income level 3.2 Education and income 3.3 Household income controversy 4 Neighborhoods 5 Influence 6 Typical occupations 7 Academic models 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 10.1 News articles 11 External links Toggle the table of contents American middle class Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social class in the United States For the album by Angaleena Presley, see American Middle Class (album) .

Though the American middle class does not have a definitive definition, [ 1 ] contemporary social scientists have put forward several ostensibly congruent theories on it. Depending on the class model used, the middle class constitutes anywhere from 25% to 75% of households.

One of the first major studies of the middle class in America was White Collar: The American Middle Classes , published in 1951 by sociologist C. Wright Mills . Later sociologists such as Dennis Gilbert commonly divide the middle class into two sub-groups: the professional or upper middle class (~15-20% of all households) consisting of highly educated, salaried professionals and managers, and the lower middle class (~33% of all households) consisting mostly of semi-professionals, skilled craftsmen and lower-level management.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Middle-class persons commonly have a comfortable standard of living, significant economic security, considerable work autonomy and rely on their expertise to sustain themselves.

[ 4 ] Members of the middle class belong to diverse groups which overlap with each other. Overall, middle-class persons, especially upper-middle-class individuals, are characterized by conceptualizing, creating and consulting. Thus, college education is one of the main indicators of middle-class status. Largely attributed to the nature of middle-class occupations, middle class values tend to emphasize independence, adherence to intrinsic standards, valuing innovation and respecting non-conformity .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] The middle class is more politically active than other demographics.

[ 5 ] The middle classes are very influential as they encompass the majority of voters, writers, teachers, journalists and editors.

[ 6 ] Most societal trends in the U.S. originate within the middle classes.

[ 7 ] According to a 2021 Pew Research study that classifies adults as middle class if they belong to a household with income between 2/3 and 2x median household income ($52k-$156k for a household of three), the percentage of Americans in the middle class declined from 61% to 50% over the previous five decades (1971-2021) with 4% moving down into the lower class and 7% moving up into the upper class.

[ 8 ] In 2019, as defined by the Future of the Middle Class Initiative to be the middle 60 percent of the income distribution, and looking only at individuals 25-54: 59 percent were white, 18 percent Hispanic, 12 percent Black, and 10 percent “other.” [ 9 ] Definition [ edit ] Main article: Social class in American history Scholars have a variety of technical measures of who is  middle-class. By contrast public opinion has a variety of implicit measures. The definitions seem to stretch quite a great deal depending on the political cause that is being invoked or defended, as one commentator noted: Well, it depends on whom you ask. Everyone wants to believe they are middle class. For people on the bottom and the top of the wage scale the phrase connotes a certain Regular Joe cachet. But this eagerness to be part of the group has led the definition to be stretched like a bungee cord - used to defend/attack/describe everything from the Earned Income Tax Credit to the estate tax.

[ 10 ] Some scholars have emphasized factors such as education and culture. Those households more or less at the center of society may be referred to as being part of the American middle or "middle-middle class" in vernacular language use. In some academic models of social class, however, the middle class does not constitute a strong majority of the population. Those in the middle of the socio-economic strata—the proverbial " Average Joe "—are commonly in the area where the working and lower middle classes overlap.

[ 2 ] Education [ edit ] Tertiary education (or "higher education") is required for many middle-class professions, depending on how the term middle class is to be defined.

[ 7 ] Educational attainment is also directly linked to income.

[ 11 ] Although 90% of the population has graduated from high school, the average American does not have a college degree, but has likely attended college for some time. Overall, educational attainment serves as the perhaps most essential class feature of the middle class, being directly linked to income and occupation. Per the table below, as of 2018 less than half of American adults over the age of 25 had an Associate's degree or higher, and less than 40% had a Bachelor's degree or higher.

Educational attainment in the United States (2018) [ 12 ] Education Age 25 and over Age 25-30 High school diploma or GED 89.80% 92.95% Some college 61.28% 66.34% Associate degree 45.16% 46.72% Bachelor's degree 34.98% 36.98% Master's degree 13.04% 9.01% Professional degree 3.47% 2.02% Doctorate 2.03% 1.12% A 2021 Pew Research study that classifies adults as middle class if they belong to a household with income between 2/3 and 2x median household income ($52k-$156k for a household of three) found that 48% of adults with Bachelor's degrees were considered middle class (while 39% of adults with Bachelor's degrees were upper class).

[ 8 ] Sub-divisions [ edit ] The middle class by one definition consists of an upper middle class , made up of professionals distinguished by exceptionally high educational attainment as well as high economic security; and a lower middle class , consisting of semi-professionals. While the groups overlap, differences between those at the center of both groups are considerable.

The lower middle class has lower educational attainment, considerably less workplace autonomy , and lower incomes than the upper middle class. With the emergence of a two-tier labor market, the economic benefits and life chances of upper middle class professionals have grown considerably compared to those of the lower middle class.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] The lower middle class needs two income earners in order to sustain a comfortable standard of living, while many upper middle class households can maintain a similar standard of living with just one income earner.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Professional/managerial middle class [ edit ] Further information: Upper middle class in the United States The " professional–managerial class " consists mostly of highly educated white collar salaried professionals, whose work is largely self-directed.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 15 ] Class members typically hold graduate degrees, with educational attainment serving as the main distinguishing feature of this class.

[ 2 ] [ 16 ] These professionals typically conceptualize, create, consult, and supervise. As a result, upper middle class employees enjoy great autonomy in the work place and are more satisfied with their careers than non-professional middle class individuals. In terms of financial wealth income, the professional middle class fits in the top third , but seldom reach the top 5% of American society.

[ 17 ] According to sociologists such as Dennis Gilbert, James M. Henslin, Joseph Hickey, and William Thompson, the upper middle class constitutes 15% of the population.

[ 2 ] The upper middle class has grown... and its composition has changed. Increasingly salaried managers and professionals have replaced individual business owners and independent professionals. The key to the success of the upper-middle-class is the growing importance of educational certification... its lifestyles and opinions are becoming increasingly normative for the whole society. It is in fact a porous class, open to people... who earn the right credentials.

— Dennis Gilbert, The American Class Structure , 1998.

[ 18 ] Values and mannerisms are difficult to pinpoint for a group encompassing millions of persons. Naturally, any large group of people will feature social diversity to some extent. However, some generalizations can be made using education and income as class defining criteria. William Thompson and Joseph Hickey noted that upper middle class individuals have a more direct and confident manner of speech.

[ 2 ] In her 1989 publication Effects of Social Class and Interactive Setting on Maternal Speech , Erica Hoff-Ginsberg found that among her surveyed subjects, "upper-middle class mothers talked more per unit of time and sustained longer interactions with children". She also found that the speech of upper middle-class mothers differs "in its functional, discourse, and lexico-syntactic properties", from those in the working class.

[ 19 ] Upper middle-class manners tend to require individuals to engage in conversational discourse with rather distant associates and to abstain from sharing excessive personal information. This contradicts working-class speech patterns, which often include frequent mentions of one's personal life.

[ 20 ] Further research also suggests that working-class parents emphasize conformity, traditional gender roles , and the adherence to external standards in their children, such as being neat and clean and "[believing] in strict leadership".

[ 21 ] This contrasted with professional-class households, where gender roles were more egalitarian and loosely defined. Upper middle class children were largely taught to adhere to internal standards, with curiosity , individuality , self-direction , and openness to new ideas being emphasized.

[ 18 ] Lower middle class [ edit ] US educational attainment from 1940 to 2015.

The lower middle class is the second most populous according to both Gilbert's as well as Thompson & Hickey's models, constituting roughly one third of the population, the same percentage as the working class. However, according to Henslin, who also divides the middle class into two sub-groups, the lower middle class is the most populous, constituting 34% of the population.

[ 3 ] In all three class models the lower middle class is said to consist of "semi-professionals" and lower level white collar employees. An adaptation by sociologists Brian K. William, Stacy C. Sawyer, and Carl M. Wahlstrom of Dennis Gilbert's class model gave the following description of the lower middle class: [ 3 ] The lower middle class... these are people in technical and lower-level management positions who work for those in the upper middle class as lower managers, craftspeople, and the like. They enjoy a reasonably comfortable standard of living, although it is constantly threatened by taxes and inflation. Generally, they have a Bachelor's and sometimes Master's college degree.

— Brian K. William, Stacy C. Sawyer and Carl M. Wahlstrom, Marriages, Families & Intimate Relationships , 2006 (Adapted from Dennis Gilbert 1997; and Joseph Kahl 1993) [ 3 ] Taking into account the percentages provided in the six-class model by Gilbert, as well as the model of Thompson and Hickey, one can apply U.S. Census Bureau statistics regarding income . According to these class models the lower middle class is located roughly between the 52nd and 84th percentile of society. In terms of personal income distribution in 2005, that would mean gross annual personal incomes from about $32,500 to $60,000.

[ 22 ] As 42% of all households, and the majority of those in the top 40%, had two income earners , household income figures would be significantly higher, ranging from roughly $50,000 to $100,000 in 2005.

[ 17 ] In terms of educational attainment , 27% of persons had a Bachelor's degree or higher.

Working class majority [ edit ] Seen from a sociological perspective based on class-cleavages, the majority of Americans can be described as members of the working class.

[ 23 ] The use of the term "working class" is applicable if the position of individuals, households and families in relation to the production of goods and services is the main determinant of social class. Class distinctions are seen in the distribution of individuals within society whose influence and importance differ. The nature of a person's work and the associated degrees of influence, responsibility, and complexity determine a person's social class. The higher the degree of influence and responsibility a person has or the more complex the work, the higher his or her status in society.

[ 24 ] As qualified personnel become scarce for relatively important, responsible, and complex occupations income increases, following the economic theory of scarcity resulting in value. According to this approach, occupation becomes more essential in determining class than income.

[ 24 ] Whereas professionals tend to create, conceptualize, consult and instruct, most Americans do not enjoy a high degree of independence in their work, as they merely follow set instructions.

[ 7 ] [ 23 ] Definitions of the working class are confusing. Defined in terms of income, they may be split into middle-middle or statistical middle class in order to speak to issues of class structure. Class models such as Dennis Gilbert or Thompson and Hickey estimate that roughly 53% of Americans are members of the working or lower classes.

[ 2 ] [ 18 ] Factors such as nature of work and lack of influence within their jobs leads some theorists to the conclusion that most Americans are working class. They have data that shows the majority of workers are not paid to share their ideas, are closely supervised, and do not enjoy independence in their jobs.

Weberian definition [ edit ] Some modern theories of political economy consider a large middle class to be a beneficial and stabilizing influence on society because it has neither the possibly explosive revolutionary tendencies of the lower class , nor the absolutist tendencies of an entrenched upper class. Most sociological definitions of middle class follow Max Weber . Here, the middle class is defined as consisting of professionals or business owners who share a culture of domesticity and sub-urbanity and a level of relative security against social crisis in the form of socially desired skill or wealth. Thus, the theory on the middle class by Weber can be cited as one that supports the notion of the middle class being composed of a quasi-elite of professionals and managers, who are largely immune to economic downturns and trends such as out-sourcing which affect the statistical middle class.

[ 14 ] Income [ edit ] See also: Income in the US , Household income in the United States , and Personal income in the United States Sociologists contend that middle class persons usually have above median incomes. As social classes lack clear boundaries and overlap there are no definite income thresholds as for what is considered middle class. In 2004, sociologist Leonard Beeghley identifies a male making $57,000 and a female making $40,000 with a combined households income of $97,000 as a typical American middle-class family.

[ 25 ] In 2005, sociologists William Thompson and Joseph Hickey estimate an income range of roughly $35,000 to $75,000 for the lower middle class and $100,000 or more for the upper middle class.

Size of middle class by income level [ edit ] According to a 2021 Pew Research study that classifies adults as middle class if they belong to a household with income between 2/3 and 2x median household income ($52k-$156k for a household of three), the percentage of Americans in the middle class declined from 61% to 50% over the previous five decades (1971-2021) with 4% moving down into the lower class and 7% moving up into the upper class.

[ 8 ] In 1996, one possible explanation for the increase in the higher earnings categories is that more households now have two wage earners.

[ 26 ] Education and income [ edit ] Educational attainment is one of the most prominent determinants of class status. Expertise  is a necessary component of the capitalist market system, and is seen as  one of the factors of production.

[ 15 ] Those with higher educational attainment tend to be positioned in occupations with greater autonomy , influence over the organizational process, and higher financial compensation .

[ 15 ] [ 7 ] [ 27 ] The following chart further explains the  correlation between educational attainment and personal as well as household income.

[ 16 ] Criteria TOTAL Less than 9th grade 9th to 12th grade (no diploma) High School Graduate (includes equivalency) Some College, No Degree Associate Degree Bachelor's Degree or More Bachelor's Degree Master's Degree Professional Degree Doctorate Degree Median individual income Male, age 25+ $46,680 $22,678 $23,649 $36,476 $42,379 $50,034 $74,161 $65,981 $85,600 $120,030 $100,658 Female, age 25+ $30,137 $12,735 $14,176 $21,133 $26,498 $30,957 $50,385 $43,951 $56,545 $77,868 $77,412 Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2018 [ 28 ] Household income controversy [ edit ] Percentage distribution of 2+ income households among the quintiles Household income is one of a household's attributes most commonly used to determine its class status but income may not always accurately reflect a household's position within society or the economy.

[ 24 ] Unlike personal income, household income does not reflect occupational achievement as much as it measures the number of income earners. Sociologist Dennis Gilbert acknowledges that a working-class household with two income earners may out-earn a single-income upper-middle-class household. Furthermore, household income fails to recognize household size. For example, a single attorney, earning $95,000, may have a higher standard of living than a family of four with an income of $120,000. Yet household income is still a commonly used class indicator.

[ 18 ] The parade [of income earners with height representing income] suggest that [the] relationship between the distribution of income and the class structure is... blurred in the middle...we saw dual-income working class marchers looking down on single-income upper-middle-class marchers. In sum, the class structures as we have defined it...does not exactly match the distribution of household income.

— Dennis Gilbert, The American Class Structure , 1998 Neighborhoods [ edit ] A study by Brookings Institution in June 2006 revealed that Middle-income neighborhoods as a proportion of all metropolitan neighborhoods declined from 58 percent in 1970 to 41 percent in 2000. As housing costs increase, the middle class is squeezed and forced to live in less desirable areas making upward mobility more difficult. Safety, school systems, and even jobs are all linked to neighborhood types.

[ 29 ] Influence [ edit ] The influence of the middle class depends on which theory one utilizes. If the middle class is defined as a modern bourgeoisie , the "middle class" has great influence. If middle class is used in a manner that includes all persons who are at neither extreme of the social strata , it might still be influential, as such definition may include the "professional middle class", which is then commonly referred to as the "upper middle class". Despite the fact that the professional (upper) middle class is a privileged minority, it is the perhaps the most influential class in the United States.

[ 7 ] Most ideas that find their way into the cultural mainstream... are crafted by a relative elite: people who are well educated, reasonably well-paid, and who overlap, socially and through family ties, with at least the middling levels of the business community—in short, the professional middle class.

— Barbara Ehrenreich Several reasons can be cited as to why the professional middle class is so influential. One is that journalists, commentators, writers, professors, economists, and political scientists , who are essential in shaping public opinion, are almost exclusively members of the professional middle class. Considering the overwhelming presence of professional middle-class persons in post secondary education , another essential instrument in regards to shaping public opinion , it should come as no surprise that the lifestyle exclusive to this quasi-elite has become indicative of the American mainstream itself. In addition to setting trends, the professional middle class also holds occupations which include managerial duties, meaning that middle-class professionals spend much of their work-life directing others and conceptualizing the workday for the average worker.

[ 7 ] Yet another reason is the economic clout generated by this class. In 2005 according to U.S. Census statistics, the top third of society, excluding the top 5% , controlled the largest share of income in the United States.

[ 17 ] Although some in the statistical middle class (for example, police officers and fire fighters in the more affluent suburbs in the San Francisco Bay Area) may have lifestyles as comfortable as those found among the ranks of the professional middle class, only few have the same degree of autonomy and influence over society as those in the professional middle class.

[ 7 ] Other white-collar members of the statistical middle class may not only be unable to afford the middle-class lifestyle [ 13 ] but also lack the influence found in the professional middle class.

[ 30 ] Typical occupations [ edit ] Due to the many different ways of sub-dividing the middle class, some occupations indicative of the professional middle class might be categorized as upper-middle or lower-middle. Typical occupations for members of the middle class are those identified as being part of "the professions" and often include managerial duties as well, with all being white collar : accountants , tenured professors, psychologists , physicians, engineers, lawyers, commissioned military officers , architects, journalists, mid-level corporate managers, writers , economists, political scientists , urban planners , financial managers , registered nurses (RNs), pharmacists, and analysts .

[ 7 ] [ 31 ] Autonomy is often seen as one of the greatest measurements of a person's class status. Even though some working class employees might also enjoy largely self-directed work, large degrees of autonomy in the work place, as well as influence over the organizational process, which are commonly the results of obtained expertise, these can still be seen as hallmarks of upper-middle-class or professional-middle-class professions.

[ 15 ] As for the lower middle class, other less prestigious occupations, many sales positions, entry-level management, secretaries, etc., would be included.

[ 32 ] In addition to professionals whose work is largely self-directed and includes managerial duties, many other less privileged members of the statistical middle class would find themselves in semi-independent to independent white collar positions. Many of those in the statistical middle class might work in what are called the professional support fields. These fields include occupations such as dental hygienists, and other professional and sales support.

Academic models [ edit ] Note that these models are from the 2000s, and are not adjusted for inflation.

Academic class models Dennis Gilbert , 2002 William Thompson & Joseph Hickey, 2005 Leonard Beeghley , 2004 Class Typical characteristics Class Typical characteristics Class Typical characteristics Capitalist class (1%) Top-level executives, high-rung politicians, heirs. Ivy League education common.

Upper class (1%) Top-level executives, celebrities, heirs; income of $500,000+ common. Ivy League education common.

The super-rich (0.9%) Multi-millionaires whose incomes commonly exceed $3.5 million or more; includes celebrities and powerful executives/politicians. Ivy League education common.

Upper middle class [1] (15%) Highly-educated (often with graduate degrees), most commonly salaried, professionals and middle management with large work autonomy.

Upper middle class [1] (15%) Highly-educated (often with graduate degrees) professionals & managers with household incomes varying from the high 5-figure range to commonly above $100,000.

The rich (5%) Households with net worth of $1 million or more; largely in the form of home equity. Generally have college degrees.

Middle class (plurality/ majority?; ca. 46%) College-educated workers with considerably higher-than-average incomes and compensation; a man making $57,000 and a woman making $40,000 may be typical.

Lower middle class (30%) Semi-professionals and craftsmen with a roughly average standard of living. Most have some college education and are white-collar.

Lower middle class (32%) Semi-professionals and craftsmen with some work autonomy; household incomes commonly range from $35,000 to $75,000. Typically, some college education.

Working class (30%) Clerical and most blue-collar workers whose work is highly routinized. Standard of living varies depending on number of income earners, but is commonly just adequate. High school education.

Working class (32%) Clerical, pink- and blue-collar workers with often low job security; common household incomes range from $16,000 to $30,000. High school education.

Working class (ca. 40–45%) Blue-collar workers and those whose jobs are highly routinized with low economic security; a man making $40,000 and a woman making $26,000 may be typical. High school education.

Working poor (13%) Service, low-rung clerical and some blue-collar workers. High economic insecurity and risk of poverty. Some high school education.

Lower class (ca. 14–20%) Those who occupy poorly-paid positions or rely on government transfers. Some high school education.

Underclass (12%) Those with limited or no participation in the labor force. Reliant on government transfers. Some high school education.

The poor (ca. 12%) Those living below the poverty line with limited to no participation in the labor force; a household income of $18,000 may be typical. Some high school education.

References:  Gilbert, D. (2002) The American Class Structure: In An Age of Growing Inequality . Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, ISBN 0534541100 . (see also Gilbert Model ); Thompson, W. & Hickey, J. (2005).

Society in Focus . Boston, MA: Pearson, Allyn & Bacon; Beeghley, L. (2004).

The Structure of Social Stratification in the United States . Boston, MA: Pearson, Allyn & Bacon.

1 The upper middle class may also be referred to as "Professional class" Ehrenreich, B. (1989).

The Inner Life of the Middle Class . NY, NY: Harper-Collins.

See also [ edit ] African-American middle class American Dream Income inequality in the United States Middle-class squeeze Plain Folk of the Old South Upper middle class in the United States Class: A Guide Through the American Status System Mexican-American middle class References [ edit ] ^ Dante Chinni (May 10, 2005).

"One more social security quibble: Who is Middle Class?" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved September 11, 2006 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Thompson, William; Joseph Hickey (2005).

Society in Focus . Boston, MA: Pearson.

ISBN 0-205-41365-X .

^ a b c d Williams, Brian; Stacey C. Sawyer; Carl M. Wahlstrom (2005).

Marriages, Families & Intimate Relationships . Boston, MA: Pearson.

ISBN 0-205-36674-0 .

^ a b c d Gilbert, Dennis (1998).

The American Class Structure . New York: Wadsworth Publishing.

ISBN 0-534-50520-1 .

^ John B. Judis (July 11, 2003).

"The trouble with Howard Dean" .

Salon.com . Archived from the original on July 13, 2007 . Retrieved July 19, 2007 .

^ John Steele Gordon Archived April 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine "10 Moments That Made American Business", American Heritage , February/March 2007.

^ a b c d e f g h Ehrenreich, Barbara (1989).

Fear of Falling, The Inner Life of the Middle Class . New York, NY: Harper Collins.

ISBN 0-06-097333-1 .

^ a b c Kochhar, Rakesh; Sechopoulos, Stella (April 20, 2022).

"How the American middle class has changed in the past five decades" .

Pew Research Center .

The share of adults who live in middle-class households fell from 61% in 1971 to 50% in 2021, according to a new Pew Research Center analysis of government data. The shrinking of the middle class has been accompanied by an increase in the share of adults in the upper-income tier – from 14% in 1971 to 21% in 2021 – as well as an increase in the share who are in the lower-income tier, from 25% to 29%. These changes have occurred gradually, as the share of adults in the middle class decreased in each decade from 1971 to 2011, but then held steady through 2021.

^ Pulliam, Christoper; Reeves, Richard; Shiro, Ariel (October 30, 2020).

"The middle class is already racially diverse" .

^ Dante Chinni, "One more Social Security quibble: Who is middle class?" Christian Science Monitor MAY 10, 2005 ^ "United States Census Bureau report on educational attainment in the United States, 2003" (PDF) . Retrieved January 12, 2006 .

^ Note that these add up to more than 100% because they are cumulative; e.g. it is assumed that all people with doctorates also have undergraduate and high school degrees, and are thus counted twice in the "lower" categories. Age 25 is used rather than age 18 because there are few people aged 18 or over with advanced degrees.

"Educational Attainment in the United States: 2018" . U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved June 23, 2018 .

Percentages are calculated based on census data by counting people that had attained that level or higher.

^ a b Beth Potier (October 30, 2003).

"Middle income can't buy Middle class lifestyle" . Harvard Gazette. Archived from the original on June 23, 2006 . Retrieved July 25, 2006 .

^ a b Griff Witte (September 20, 2004).

"As Income Gap Widens, Uncertainty Spreads" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 27, 2005 . Retrieved July 25, 2006 .

^ a b c d Eichar, Douglas (1989).

Occupation and Class Consciousness in America . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.

ISBN 0-313-26111-3 .

^ a b "US Census Bureau, personal income by education" . Archived from the original on October 9, 2006 . Retrieved October 17, 2006 .

^ a b c "U.S. Census 2005 Economic Survey, income data" . Archived from the original on June 30, 2006 . Retrieved June 29, 2006 .

^ a b c d Gilbert, Dennis (1997).

American Class Structure in an Age of Growing Inequality . Wadsworth.

ISBN 978-0-534-50520-2 .

^ "Education resource information center, Effects of Social Class and Interactive Setting on Maternal Speech" . Retrieved January 27, 2007 .

^ Zweig, Michael (2004).

What's Class Got To Do With It, American Society in the Twenty-First Century . New York, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0-8014-8899-0 .

^ Gilbert, 1998.

^ "U.S. Census Bureau, distribution of personal income, 2006" . Archived from the original on December 14, 2006 . Retrieved December 9, 2006 .

^ a b Vanneman, Reeve; Lynn Weber Cannon (1988).

The American Perception of Class . New York, NY: Temple University Press.

ISBN 0-87722-593-1 .

^ a b c Levine, Rhonda (1998).

Social Class and Stratification . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 0-8476-8543-8 .

^ Beeghley, Leonard (2004).

The Structure of Social Stratification in the United States . New York, NY: Pearson.

ISBN 0-205-37558-8 .

^ Bernstein, Aaron (February 26, 1996). "Is America Becoming More of a Class Society?".

BusinessWeek .

^ "Household income according to the educational attainment of householder" . Archived from the original on July 10, 2009 . Retrieved September 16, 2006 .

^ "Historical Income Tables: People" .

^ "Where Did They Go? the Decline of Middle-Income Neighborhoods in Metropolitan America" . Archived from the original on November 21, 2007 . Retrieved November 24, 2007 .

^ Fussel, Paul (1983).

Class, A Guide through the American status system . New York, NY: Touchstone.

ISBN 0-671-79225-3 .

^ "Professional Occupations according to the US Department of Labor" .

Archived from the original on July 21, 2006 . Retrieved July 26, 2006 .

^ "The New York Times, guidelines for determining class in America" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 28, 2006 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Baritz, Loren.

The Good Life: The Meaning of Success for the American Middle Class (1989) Beckert, Sven, and Julia B. Rosenbaum, eds.

The American Bourgeoisie: Distinction and Identity in the Nineteenth Century (Palgrave Macmillan; 2011) 284 pages; Scholarly studies on the habits, manners, networks, institutions, and public roles of the American middle class with a focus on cities in the North.

Blau, Peter & Duncan Otis D.; The American Occupational Structure (1967) classic study of structure and mobility Curwood, Anastasia C. ed.

Stormy Weather: Middle-Class African American Marriages Between the Two World Wars (University of North Carolina Press; 2011) 240 pages; explores the public and private views of upwardly mobile African-Americans between 1918 and 1942.

Fussell, Paul ; Class (a painfully accurate guide through the American status system) , (1983) ( ISBN 0-345-31816-1 ) Grusky, David B. ed.; Social Stratification: Class, Race, and Gender in Sociological Perspective (2001) scholarly articles Hart, Emma, "Work, Family, and the Eighteenth-Century History of a Middle Class in the American South," Journal of Southern History, 78 (2012), 551–78.

Hazelrigg, Lawrence E. & Lopreato, Joseph; Class , Conflict, and Mobility: Theories and Studies of Class Structure (1972).

Hoberek, Andrew.

The Twilight of the Middle Class: Post-World War II American Fiction and White-Collar Work (2005) Huffington, Arianna.

Third World America: How our politicians are abandoning the middle class and betraying the American dream (Broadway Books, 2011).

Hyman, Louis.

Borrow: The American way of debt (Vintage, 2012); argues that personal credit created the American Middle Class and almost bankrupted the nation.

Hymowitz, Kay; Marriage and Caste in America: Separate and Unequal Families in a Post-Marital Age (2006) ISBN 1-56663-709-0 Jackson, Brenda K.

Domesticating the West: The Re-creation of the Nineteenth-century American Middle Class (U of Nebraska Press, 2005).

Lamont, Michèle.

Money, morals, and manners: The culture of the French and the American upper-middle class (U of Chicago Press, 1992).

McComb, Mary C.

Great Depression and the Middle Class: Experts, Collegiate Youth and Business Ideology, 1929-1941 (Routledge, 2013).

Mills, C. Wright.

White Collar: the American Middle Classes , (Oxford University Press, 1956).

Newman, Katherine S.

Falling from grace: The experience of downward mobility in the American middle class (Free Press, 1988).

Pearson, Joseph W.

The Whigs' America: Middle-Class Political Thought in the Age of Jackson and Clay (University Press of Kentucky, 2020).

Quart, Alissa (2018).

Squeezed: Why Our Families Can't Afford America .

Ecco Press .

ISBN 978-0062412256 .

Reeves, Richard V.

Dream hoarders: How the American upper middle class is leaving everyone else in the dust, why that is a problem, and what to do about it (Brookings Institution Press, 2018) online .

Temin, Peter (2017).

The Vanishing Middle Class: Prejudice and Power in a Dual Economy .

MIT Press .

ISBN 9780262036160 .

Ware, Leland, and Theodore J. Davis, "Ordinary People in an Extraordinary Time: The Black Middle-Class in the Age of Obama," Howard Law Journal , 55 (Winter 2012), 533–74.

Webb, Sheila. "The Consumer-Citizen: 'Life' Magazine's Construction of a Middle-Class Lifestyle Through Consumption Scenarios." Studies in Popular Culture 34.2 (2012): 23-47.

online Whitaker, Jan.

Service and style: How the American department store fashioned the middle class (Macmillan, 2006).

Whyte, William H.

The Organization Man (1956), a famous classic Zussman, Robert.

Mechanics of the middle class (U of California Press, 2020).

News articles [ edit ] The American Middle Class Is No Longer the World's Richest .

The New York Times .

April 22, 2014.

Middle Class Shrinks Further as More Fall Out Instead of Climbing Up .

The New York Times.

January 25, 2015.

Middle-Class Betrayal? Why Working Hard Is No Longer Enough in America .

NBC News .

Why the U.S. Could Soon Be the World's First Former Middle Class Society .

Joseph Stiglitz for The Huffington Post.

December 9, 2015.

Is shrinking the middle class a good thing?

Al Jazeera America.

Are you in the American middle class? Find out with our income calculator May 11, 2016 Are You Middle Class?

No more middle ground: Politics have been getting more extreme as the middle class shrinks .

Vice .

August 25, 2017 Families Go Deep in Debt to Stay in the Middle Class .

The Wall Street Journal . August 1, 2019 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to American middle class .

What's (Not) the Matter With the Middle Class?

, The American Prospect Lou Dobbs discusses "The War on the Middle Class" [ usurped ] on October 17, 2006 A SUPERPOWER IN DECLINE: America's Middle Class Has Become Globalization's Loser by Gabor Steingart (spiegel online) October 24, 2006 American Middle Class is losing ground (Pew Research Center) December 9, 2015 v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category v t e Demographics of the United States Demographic history Socioeconomic status Affluence Gender inequality Educational attainment Emigration Home-ownership Household income Housing segregation Immigration Income inequality Language LGBT Middle classes Personal income Poverty Racial inequality Race and health Racial achievement gap Racial wage gap Social class Standard of living Unemployment by state Wealth Ethnocultural politics Religions Baha'is Buddhists Christians Catholics Coptics Mormons Protestants Hindus Jains Jews Muslims Ahmadiyyas Five Percenters Moorish Scientists Nation of Islam Value Creators Native American Neopagans Non-religious Rastafaris Scientologists Sikhs Zoroastrians v t e Ancestry and ethnicity in the United States General/miscellaneous ethno-racial classifications General groups African Americans Asian Americans Native Americans Alaska Natives Pacific Islanders Native Hawaiians White / European Americans Non-Hispanic Whites Appalachians Hispanic/Latino Asian Latino Punjabi Mexicans Black Latino Blaxican Mestizo Puerto Ricans Stateside Puerto Ricans White Latino Multiracial Afro-Asian Amerasian Black Indians Blaxican Cajuns Creoles Hapa Melungeon Mestizo Mulatto Punjabi Mexicans Aboriginal/Indigenous/Native Americans Alaskan Aleutians Alutiiq Athabaskans Gwichʼin Haida Iñupiat Tsimshian Tlingit Yupik Californian Cahuilla Chemehuevi Chumash Cupeño Diegueño Esselen Juaneño Kitanemuk Luiseño Miwok Patwin Pomo Salinan Serrano Suisunes Ohlone Awaswas Chalon Chochenyo Karkin Tamyen Tataviam Tongva Wappo Wintun Yokuts Iroquois Cayuga Mohawk Oneida Onondaga Seneca Tuscarora Miscellaneous Abenaki Apache Blackfeet Cherokee Cheyenne Chickasaw Choctaw Colville Comanche Cree Crow Houma Kiowa Lenape Menominee Mohave Muscogee Navajo Ojibwe Osage Odawa Paiute Pawnee Pima Potawatomi Puebloans Zia Zuni Quechan Salish Seminole Shawnee Shoshone Sioux Tohono Oʼodham Ute Yakama Yaqui The Americas (by region and country) Caribbean Anglo-Caribbean Antiguan Bahamian Barbadian Bermudian Dominican (Commonwealth) Grenadian Jamaican Kittian St. Lucian Trinidadian Vincentian Virgin Islanders Dutch Caribbean Indo-Caribbean Latin Caribbean Cuban Dominican Republic Haitian Puerto Ricans North America Belizean Canadian French-Canadian Greenlandic Latin North/Central American Costa Rican Guatemalan Honduran Garifuna Mexican Indigenous Mexican Nicaraguan Panamanian Salvadoran South America Guyanese Latin South American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Ecuadorian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Surinamese Sub-Saharan Africa General/misc.

Black African diaspora African Americans Afro-Caribbeans Afro-Latinos Recent African immigrants Central Africa Cameroonian Congolese Equatoguinean Gabonese East Africa Eritrean Ethiopian Kenyan Somali South Sudanese Tanzanian Ugandan Southern Africa Angolan Malawian South African Afrikaners Zimbabwean West Africa Beninese Bissau-Guinean Cape Verdean Fula Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Liberian Malian Mauritanian Nigerian Igbo Yoruba Senegalese Sierra Leonean Togolese Asia General/misc.

Asian Americans Asian Latinos Central Asia Afghan Balochi Pashtun Kazakh Kyrgyz Tajik Turkmen Uzbek East Asia Chinese Fuzhounese Hakka Hoklo Hong Kong Taiwanese Tibetan Uyghur Japanese Ryukyuan Korean Mongolian South Asia Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Indian Bengali Gujarati Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indo-Caribbean Maldivian Nepalese Pakistani Balochi Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Sri Lankan Tamil Southeast Asia Burmese Karen Cambodian Filipino Hmong–Mien Hmong Iu Mien Indonesian Laotian Malaysian Singaporean Thai Vietnamese Europe General/misc.

White / European Americans Non-Hispanic Whites White Hispanic/Latino Jewish Romani Bashalde British Isles British Cornish English Manx Scottish Welsh Irish Scotch-Irish Central Europe Austrian Czech German Frisian Sorbian Liechtensteiner Hungarian Polish Kashubian Silesian Rusyn Slovak Swiss Eastern Europe Baltic Estonian Latvian Lithuanian Belarusian Russian Chechen Circassian Cossack Kalmyk Ukrainian Cossack Northern Europe Danish Faroese Greenlandic Finnish Icelandic Norwegian Sámi Swedish Southern Europe Iberian Portuguese Spanish Asturian Basque Canarian Catalan Galician Italian Sicilian Maltese Sammarinese Southeast Europe Albanian Armenian Azerbaijani Bulgarian Cypriot Georgian Greek Moldovan Romanian Turkish Yugoslav Bosnian Croatian Macedonian Montenegrin Serbian Slovenian Western Europe Belgian Flemish Dutch Afrikaners French Basque Breton Corsican French-Canadian Luxembourgish Middle East and North Africa Multinational Arab Assyrian Berber Circassian Jewish Kurdish North Africa Algerian Egyptian Coptic Libyan Moroccan Sudanese Tunisian West Asia Armenian Azerbaijani Bahraini Cypriot Emirati Georgian Iranian Balochi Iraqi Israeli Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Omani Palestinian Qatari Saudi Syrian Syrian-Jewish Turkish Yemeni Oceania ( Pacific Islands ) Australasia Australian New Zealander Maori Melanesia Fijian Papuan Micronesia Chamorro Marshallese Micronesian (Federation) Palauan Polynesia French Polynesian Hawaiian Maori Samoan Tongan Related subjects People of the United States / Americans American ancestry Native American ancestry Maps of American ancestries 2010 census Race and ethnicity in the census Race and ethnicity in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Racism v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hq25j
Cached time: 20250818031122
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.870 seconds
Real time usage: 1.066 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4801/1000000
Revision size: 42566/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 434735/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4837/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 164627/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.476/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22775989/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  801.115      1 -total
 30.85%  247.137      3 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 28.51%  228.426     13 Template:Navbox
 24.19%  193.766      1 Template:Social_class
 23.53%  188.531      1 Template:Reflist
 12.47%   99.938      1 Template:Lang
  8.53%   68.344      1 Template:United_States_topics
  8.15%   65.314      1 Template:Short_description
  8.02%   64.238     13 Template:Cite_book
  7.87%   63.083     14 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6137171:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818031122 and revision id 1306139433. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_middle_class&oldid=1306139433 " Categories : American middle class Social class in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2023 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 04:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American middle class Add languages Add topic

