Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Origin of the project 1.2 Aims and leadership 1.3 Applications 1.4 Other related projects 2 Experiments on Americans Toggle Experiments on Americans subsection 2.1 LSD 2.2 Other drugs 2.3 Hypnosis 3 Experiments on Canadians Toggle Experiments on Canadians subsection 3.1 Motivation and assessments 4 Secret detention camps 5 Revelation Toggle Revelation subsection 5.1 1994 U.S. General Accounting Office report 5.2 CIA vs Sims 6 Death of Frank Olson 7 Legal issues involving informed consent 8 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 8.1 Documented experimenters 8.2 Documented subjects 9 In popular culture Toggle In popular culture subsection 9.1 Television 9.2 Film 9.3 Music 9.4 Literature 9.5 Video games 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents MKUltra 44 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from MKULTRA ) CIA program involving illegal experimentation on human test subjects (1953–1973) "MKULTRA" redirects here. For other uses, see MKULTRA (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Edgewood Arsenal human experiments .

Declassified MKUltra documents MKUltra [ a ] was an illegal human experimentation program designed and undertaken by the U.S.

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to develop procedures and identify drugs that could be used during interrogations to weaken individuals and force confessions through brainwashing and psychological torture .

[ 1 ] The term MKUltra is a CIA cryptonym : "MK" is an arbitrary prefix standing for the Office of Technical Service and "Ultra" is an arbitrary word out of a dictionary used to name this project. The program has been widely condemned as a violation of individual rights and an example of the CIA's abuse of power , with critics highlighting its disregard for consent and its corrosive impact on democratic principles .

[ 2 ] Project MKUltra began in 1953 and was halted in 1973. MKUltra used numerous methods to manipulate its subjects' mental states and brain functions, such as the covert administration of high doses of psychoactive drugs (especially LSD ) and other chemicals without the subjects' consent. Additionally, other methods beyond chemical compounds were used, including electroshocks , [ 3 ] hypnosis , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] sensory deprivation , isolation, verbal and sexual abuse , and other forms of torture .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Project MKUltra was preceded by Project Artichoke .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] It was organized through the CIA's Office of Scientific Intelligence and coordinated with the United States Army Biological Warfare Laboratories .

[ 10 ] The program engaged in illegal activities, [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] including the use of U.S. and Canadian citizens as unwitting test subjects.

[ 11 ] : 74 [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] MKUltra's scope was broad, with activities carried out under the guise of research at more than 80 institutions aside from the military, including colleges and universities, hospitals, prisons, and pharmaceutical companies.

[ 17 ] The CIA operated using front organizations , although some top officials at these institutions were aware of the CIA's involvement.

[ 11 ] Project MKUltra was revealed to the public in 1975 by the Church Committee (named after Senator Frank Church ) of the United States Congress and Gerald Ford 's United States President's Commission on CIA Activities within the United States (the Rockefeller Commission). Investigative efforts were hampered by CIA Director Richard Helms 's order that all MKUltra files be destroyed in 1973; the Church Committee and Rockefeller Commission investigations relied on the sworn testimony of direct participants and on the small number of documents that survived Helms's order.

[ 18 ] In 1977, a Freedom of Information Act request uncovered a cache of 20,000 documents relating to MKUltra, which led to Senate hearings.

[ 11 ] [ 19 ] Some surviving information about MKUltra was declassified in 2001.

Background [ edit ] Origin of the project [ edit ] During the early 1940s, Nazi scientists working in the concentration camps of Auschwitz and Dachau during World War II conducted interrogation experiments on human subjects . Substances such as barbiturates , morphine derivatives, and hallucinogens such as mescaline were employed in experiments conducted on Polish, Russian, Ukrainian, and other nationalities' prisoners of war .

[ 20 ] The aim of these experiments was to develop a truth serum which would, in the words of one laboratory assistant to Dachau scientist Kurt Plötner , "eliminate the will of the person examined".

[ 20 ] American historian Stephen Kinzer said that the CIA project was a continuation of these earlier Nazi experiments, as evidenced by MKUltra's use of mescaline on unwitting subjects, replicating previous Nazi experiments conducted at Dachau.

[ 21 ] American interest in drug-related interrogation experiments began in 1943, when the Office of Strategic Services began developing a "truth drug" that would produce "uninhibited truthfulness" in an interrogated person.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] In 1947, the United States Navy initiated Project CHATTER , an interrogation program which saw the first testing of LSD on human subjects.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] In 1950, the Central Intelligence Agency under the direction of General Walter Bedell Smith initiated a series of interrogation projects involving human subjects, beginning with the launch of Project Bluebird, officially renamed Project Artichoke on August 20, 1951.

[ 26 ] Directed and overseen by Brigadier General Paul F. Gaynor , the objective of Artichoke was to determine whether an individual could be made to involuntarily perform an act of attempted assassination.

[ 27 ] Morphine , mescaline and LSD were all administered on unknowing CIA agents in an attempt to produce amnesia in the subjects. In addition, Project Artichoke aimed to employ certain viruses such as dengue fever as potential incapacitating agents .

[ 28 ] [ better source needed ] Aims and leadership [ edit ] Sidney Gottlieb approved of an MKUltra sub-project on LSD in this June 9, 1953, letter.

The project was headed by Sidney Gottlieb but began on the order of CIA director Allen Dulles on April 13, 1953.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Its aim was to develop mind-controlling drugs for use against the Soviet bloc in response to alleged Soviet , Chinese , and North Korean use of mind control techniques on U.S. prisoners of war during the Korean War .

[ 31 ] The CIA wanted to use similar methods on their own captives, and was interested in manipulating foreign leaders with such techniques, [ 32 ] devising several schemes to drug Fidel Castro . It often conducted experiments without the subjects' knowledge or consent.

[ 33 ] In some cases, academic researchers were funded through grants from CIA front organizations but were unaware that the CIA was using their work for these purposes.

The project attempted to produce a perfect truth serum for interrogating suspected Soviet spies during the Cold War and to explore other possibilities of mind control. Subproject 54 was the Navy's top-secret "Perfect Concussion" program, which was supposed to use sub-aural frequency blasts to erase memory; the program was never carried out.

[ 34 ] Most MKUltra records were destroyed in 1973 by order of CIA director Richard Helms , so it has been difficult for investigators to gain a complete understanding of the more than 150 funded research subprojects sponsored by MKUltra and related CIA programs.

[ 35 ] The project began during a period of what English journalist Rupert Cornwell described as "paranoia" at the CIA, when the U.S. had lost its nuclear monopoly and fear of communism was at its height.

[ 36 ] CIA counter-intelligence chief James Jesus Angleton believed that a mole had penetrated the organization at the highest levels.

[ 36 ] The agency poured millions of dollars into studies examining ways to influence and control the mind and enhance its ability to extract information from resistant subjects during interrogation.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Some historians assert that one goal of MKUltra and related CIA projects was to create a Manchurian Candidate –style subject.

[ 39 ] American historian Alfred W. McCoy has claimed that the CIA attempted to focus media attention on these sorts of "ridiculous" programs so that the public would not look at the research's primary goal, which was effective methods of interrogation.

[ 37 ] Applications [ edit ] The 1976 Church Committee report found that, in the MKDELTA program, "Drugs were used primarily as an aid to interrogations, but MKULTRA/MKDELTA materials were also used for harassment, discrediting or disabling purposes." [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Other related projects [ edit ] In 1964, MKSEARCH was the name given to the continuation of the MKULTRA program. The MKSEARCH program was divided into two projects dubbed MKOFTEN and MKCHICKWIT . Funding for MKSEARCH commenced in 1965, and ended in 1971.

[ 43 ] The project was a joint project between the U.S. Army Chemical Corps and the CIA's Office of Research and Development to find new offensive-use agents, with a focus on incapacitating agents . Its purpose was to develop, test, and evaluate capabilities in the covert use of biological, chemical, and radioactive material systems and techniques of producing predictable human behavioral and/or physiological changes in support of highly sensitive operational requirements.

[ 43 ] By March 1971, over 26,000 potential agents had been acquired for future screening.

[ 44 ] The CIA was interested in bird migration patterns for chemical and biological warfare (CBW) research; subproject 139 designated "Bird Disease Studies" at Pennsylvania State University .

[ 45 ] MKOFTEN was to deal with testing and toxicological transmissivity and behavioral effects of drugs in animals and, ultimately, humans.

[ 43 ] MKCHICKWIT was concerned with acquiring information on new drug developments in Europe and Asia, and with acquiring samples.

[ 43 ] In January 1957, the CIA started a subproject of MKUltra in effort to broaden their scientific research. " Subproject 68 ", conducted at the Allan Memorial Institute in Montreal under the direction of psychiatrist Dr. Donald Ewen Cameron , represents one of the most infamous and ethically controversial endeavors within the MKUltra program.

[ 46 ] This subproject aimed to explore innovative techniques for manipulating and controlling human behavior, particularly through the methods of " psychic driving " and "depatterning". Psychic driving involved subjecting patients to continuous playback of recorded messages, often with themes of self-improvement or identity reinforcement, while they were under the influence of powerful psychoactive substances such as LSD or barbiturates .

[ 47 ] Experiments on Americans [ edit ] CIA documents suggest that they investigated "chemical, biological, and radiological" methods of mind control as part of MKUltra.

[ 48 ] They spent an estimated $10 million or more, roughly $87.5 million adjusted for inflation.

[ 49 ] During a hearing by the Senate Health Subcommittee , a testimony by the deputy director of the CIA stated that over 30 institutions and universities were involved in the experimentation program of testing drugs on unknowing citizens "at all social levels, high and low, native Americans and foreign." Several of these tests involved the issuing of LSD to unaware subjects in social situations.

[ 1 ] The Army was subject to the testing of LSD which occurred in three phases. The first phase included over 1,000 American soldiers who willingly volunteered for testing of chemical warfare experiments. Phase two had 96 volunteers who were dosed with LSD in evaluation of the possibility of intelligence uses of the drug. The third phase included Projects THIRD CHANCE and DERBY HAT which conducted experiments on 16 unwitting nonvolunteer subjects that after receiving LSD were interrogated as a part of operation field tests.

[ 1 ] After retiring in 1972, Gottlieb dismissed his entire effort for the CIA's MKUltra program as useless.

[ 36 ] [ 50 ] Files discovered in 1977 containing 700 pages of new information showed that experiments had continued until Gottlieb ordered the program halted on July 10, 1972.

[ 51 ] LSD [ edit ] In 1938, LSD was isolated by Albert Hofmann at the Sandoz Laboratories in Basel, Switzerland. The early directors of MKUltra became aware of the existence of LSD and sought to use it for "mind-control". In the early 1950s, MKUltra director Sidney Gottlieb arranged for the CIA to buy the entire supply of LSD for $240,000, which in 2024, would be $4,227,079.

[ 52 ] This LSD supply gave Gottlieb the ability to fulfill his experiment by spreading LSD to prisons, hospitals, institutions, clinics, and foundations in order to see how citizens would react to the drug without knowing exactly what was happening to them.

Early CIA efforts focused on LSD-25 , which later came to dominate many of MKUltra's programs.

[ 53 ] The CIA wanted to know if they could make Soviet spies defect against their will and whether the Soviets could do the same to the CIA's own operatives.

[ 54 ] Documents obtained from the CIA by John D. Marks under Freedom of Information in 1976 showed that, in 1953, the CIA considered purchasing 10 kilograms of LSD, enough for 100 million doses. The proposed purchase aimed to stop other countries from controlling the supply. The documents showed that the CIA purchased some quantities of LSD from Sandoz Laboratories in Switzerland.

[ 55 ] Once Project MKUltra started, in April 1953, experiments included administering LSD to mental patients, prisoners, drug addicts, and prostitutes – "people who could not fight back", as one agency officer put it.

[ 56 ] In one case, they administered LSD to a mental patient in Kentucky for 174 days.

[ 56 ] They also administered LSD to CIA employees, military personnel, doctors, other government agents, and members of the general public to study their reactions. The aim was to find drugs that would bring out deep confessions or wipe a subject's mind clean and program them as "a robot agent".

[ 57 ] Military personnel who received the mind-altering drugs were also threatened with courts-martial if they told anyone about the experiments.

[ 58 ] LSD and other drugs were often administered without the subject's knowledge or informed consent , a violation of the Nuremberg Code the U.S. had agreed to follow after World War II. Many veterans who were subjected to experimentation later sought legal and monetary reparations.

[ 58 ] In Operation Midnight Climax , the CIA set up several brothels within agency safehouses in San Francisco to obtain a selection of men who would be too embarrassed to talk about the events. The men were dosed with LSD, the brothels were equipped with one-way mirrors , and the sessions were filmed for later viewing and study.

[ 59 ] In other experiments where people were given LSD without their knowledge, they were interrogated under bright lights with doctors in the background taking notes. They told subjects they would extend their "trips" if they refused to reveal their secrets. The people under this interrogation were CIA employees, U.S. military personnel, and agents suspected of working for the other side in the Cold War. Long-term debilitation and several deaths resulted from this.

[ 57 ] Heroin addicts were bribed into taking LSD with offers of more heroin.

[ 11 ] [ 60 ] At the invitation of Stanford psychology graduate student Vik Lovell, an acquaintance of Allen Ginsberg , Ken Kesey volunteered to take part in what turned out to be a CIA -financed study under the aegis of MKUltra, [ 61 ] at the Menlo Park Veterans' Hospital [ 62 ] [ 63 ] where he worked as a night aide.

[ 64 ] The project studied the effects of psychoactive drugs , particularly LSD , psilocybin , mescaline , cocaine , AMT and DMT on people.

[ 65 ] The Office of Security used LSD in interrogations, but Sidney Gottlieb , the chemist who directed MKUltra, had other ideas: he thought it could be used in covert operations. Since its effects were temporary, he believed it could be given to high-ranking officials and in this way affect the course of important meetings, speeches, etc. Since he realized there was a difference in testing the drug in a laboratory and using it in clandestine operations, he initiated a series of experiments where LSD was given to people in "normal" settings without warning. At first, everyone in Technical Services tried it; a typical experiment involved two people in a room where they observed each other for hours and took notes. As the experimentation progressed, a point arrived where outsiders were drugged with no explanation whatsoever and surprise acid trips became something of an occupational hazard among CIA operatives. Adverse reactions often occurred, such as an operative who received the drug in his morning coffee, became psychotic and ran across Washington, D.C., seeing a monster in every car passing him. The experiments continued even after Frank Olson , an army chemist who had never taken LSD, was covertly dosed by his CIA supervisor and nine days later plunged to his death from the window of a 13th-story New York City hotel room, supposedly as a result of deep depression induced by the drug.

[ 66 ] According to Stephen Kinzer , Olson had approached his superiors some time earlier, doubting the morality of the project, and asked to resign from the CIA.

[ 67 ] Some subjects' participation was consensual, and in these cases they appeared to be singled out for even more extreme experiments. In one case, seven drug-addicted African-American participants at the National Institute of Mental Health Addiction Research Center in Kentucky were given LSD for 77 consecutive days.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] MKUltra's researchers later dismissed LSD as too unpredictable in its results.

[ 70 ] They gave up on the notion that LSD was "the secret that was going to unlock the universe", but it still had a place in the cloak-and-dagger arsenal. However, by 1962, the CIA and the army developed a series of super-hallucinogens such as the highly touted BZ , which was thought to hold greater promise as a mind control weapon. This resulted in the withdrawal of support by many academics and private researchers, and LSD research became less of a priority altogether.

[ 66 ] Other drugs [ edit ] Another technique investigated was the intravenous administration of a barbiturate into one arm and an amphetamine into the other.

[ 71 ] The barbiturates were released into the person first, and as soon as the person began to fall asleep, the amphetamines were released.
Other experiments involved heroin , morphine , temazepam (used under code name MKSEARCH), mescaline , psilocybin , scopolamine , alcohol and sodium pentothal .

[ 72 ] Hypnosis [ edit ] Declassified MKUltra documents indicate they studied hypnosis in the early 1950s. Experimental goals included creating "hypnotically induced anxieties", "hypnotically increasing ability to learn and recall complex written matter", studying hypnosis and polygraph examinations, "hypnotically increasing ability to observe and recall complex arrangements of physical objects", and studying "relationship of personality to susceptibility to hypnosis".

[ 73 ] They conducted experiments with drug-induced hypnosis and with anterograde and retrograde amnesia while under the influence of such drugs.

Experiments on Canadians [ edit ] Donald Ewen Cameron, c.

1967 The CIA exported experiments to Canada when they recruited Scottish psychiatrist Donald Ewen Cameron , creator of the " psychic driving " concept, which the CIA found interesting. Cameron had been hoping to correct schizophrenia by erasing existing memories and reprogramming the psyche. He commuted from Albany, New York to Montreal every week to work at the Allan Memorial Institute of McGill University , and was paid $69,000 from 1957 to 1964 (US$766,936 in 2024, adjusted for inflation) to carry out MKUltra experiments there. The Montreal experiments research funds were sent to Cameron by a CIA front organization, the Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology, and as shown in internal CIA documents, Cameron did not know the money came from the CIA.

[ 74 ] : 141–142 In addition to LSD, Cameron also experimented with various paralytic drugs as well as electroconvulsive therapy at thirty to forty times the normal power. His "driving" experiments consisted of putting subjects into drug-induced comas for weeks at a time (up to three months in one case) while playing tape loops of noise or simple repetitive statements. His experiments were often carried out on patients who entered the institute for common problems such as anxiety disorders and postpartum depression , many of whom suffered permanent effects from his actions.

[ 74 ] : 140–150 His treatments resulted in victims' urinary incontinence , amnesia , forgetting how to talk, forgetting their parents and thinking their interrogators were their parents.

[ 75 ] During this era, Cameron became known worldwide as the first chairman of the World Psychiatric Association as well as president of both the American Psychiatric Association and the Canadian Psychiatric Association . Cameron was also a member of the Nuremberg medical tribunal in 1946–1947.

[ 74 ] : 141 Motivation and assessments [ edit ] His work was inspired and paralleled by the British psychiatrist William Sargant at St Thomas' Hospital , London, and Belmont Hospital, Sutton , who experimented on his patients without their consent, causing similar long-term damage.

[ 76 ] Although Sargant acted as a consultant for MI5 , no evidence has emerged that his work with deep sleep treatment at St Thomas' hospital had any links with intelligence services.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] In the 1980s, several of Cameron's former patients sued the CIA for damages, which the Canadian news program The Fifth Estate documented.

[ 80 ] Their experiences and lawsuit were adapted in the 1998 television miniseries The Sleep Room .

[ 81 ] Naomi Klein argues in her book The Shock Doctrine that Cameron's research and his contribution to the MKUltra project was not about mind control and brainwashing, but about designing "a scientifically based system for extracting information from 'resistant sources'. In other words, torture." [ 82 ] Alfred W. McCoy writes, "Stripped of its bizarre excesses, Dr. Cameron's experiments, building upon Donald O. Hebb 's earlier breakthrough, laid the scientific foundation for the CIA's two-stage psychological torture method", [ 83 ] referring to first creating a state of disorientation in the subject, and then creating a situation of "self-inflicted" discomfort in which the disoriented subject can alleviate pain by capitulating.

[ 83 ] Secret detention camps [ edit ] In areas under American control in the early 1950s in Europe and East Asia, mostly Japan , West Germany and the Philippines , the CIA created secret detention centers ( black sites ) so that the U.S. could avoid criminal prosecution. The CIA captured people suspected of being enemy agents and other people it deemed "expendable" to undertake various types of torture and human experimentation on them. The prisoners were interrogated while being administered psychoactive drugs, electroshocked and subjected to extremes of temperature, sensory isolation and the like to develop a better understanding of how to destroy and to control human minds.

[ 3 ] Revelation [ edit ] In 1973, amid a government-wide panic caused by the Watergate scandal , CIA Director Richard Helms ordered all MKUltra files destroyed.

[ 84 ] Pursuant to this order, most CIA documents regarding the project were destroyed, making a full investigation of MKUltra impossible. A cache of some 20,000 documents survived Helms's purge, as they had been incorrectly stored in a financial records building and were discovered following a FOIA request in 1977. These documents were fully investigated during the Senate Hearings of 1977.

[ 11 ] Frank Church headed the Church Committee, an investigation into the practices of the U.S. intelligence agencies.

In December 1974, The New York Times alleged that the CIA had conducted illegal domestic activities, including experiments on U.S. citizens, during the 1960s.

[ 85 ] That report prompted investigations by the United States Congress , in the form of the Church Committee , and by a commission known as the Rockefeller Commission that looked into the illegal domestic activities of the CIA, the FBI and intelligence-related agencies of the military.

In the summer of 1975, congressional Church Committee reports and the presidential Rockefeller Commission report revealed to the public for the first time that the CIA and the Department of Defense had conducted experiments on both unwitting and cognizant human subjects as part of an extensive program to find out how to influence and control human behavior through the use of psychoactive drugs such as LSD and mescaline and other chemical, biological, and psychological means. They also revealed that at least one subject, Frank Olson , had died after administration of LSD. Much of what the Church Committee and the Rockefeller Commission learned about MKUltra was contained in a report, prepared by the Inspector General's office in 1963, that had survived the destruction of records ordered in 1973.

[ 86 ] However, it contained little detail.

Sidney Gottlieb , who had retired from the CIA two years previously and had headed MKUltra, was interviewed by the committee but claimed to have very little recollection of the activities of MKUltra.

[ 17 ] The congressional committee investigating the CIA research, chaired by Senator Frank Church , concluded that "prior consent was obviously not obtained from any of the subjects." The committee noted that the "experiments sponsored by these researchers [...] call into question the decision by the agencies not to fix guidelines for experiments." Following the recommendations of the Church Committee, President Gerald Ford in 1976 issued the first Executive Order on Intelligence Activities which, among other things, prohibited "experimentation with drugs on human subjects, except with the informed consent, in writing and witnessed by a disinterested party, of each such human subject" and in accordance with the guidelines issued by the National Commission. Subsequent orders by Presidents Carter and Reagan expanded the directive to apply to any human experimentation.

1977 United States Senate report on MKUltra In 1977, during a hearing held by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence , to look further into MKUltra, Admiral Stansfield Turner , then Director of Central Intelligence, revealed that the CIA had found a set of records, consisting of about 20,000 pages, [ 87 ] that had survived the 1973 destruction orders because they had been incorrectly stored at a records center not usually used for such documents.

[ 86 ] These files dealt with the financing of MKUltra projects and contained few project details, but much more was learned from them than from the Inspector General's 1963 report.

On the Senate floor in 1977, Senator Ted Kennedy said: The Deputy Director of the CIA revealed that over thirty universities and institutions were involved in an "extensive testing and experimentation" program which included covert drug tests on unwitting citizens "at all social levels, high and low, native Americans and foreign." Several of these tests involved the administration of LSD to "unwitting subjects in social situations." [ 88 ] At least one death, the result of the alleged defenestration of Frank Olson , was attributed to Olson's being subjected, without his knowledge, to such experimentation nine days before his death.

[ citation needed ] The CIA itself subsequently acknowledged that these tests had little scientific rationale. The officers conducting the monitoring were not qualified scientific observers.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] In Canada, the issue took much longer to surface, becoming widely known in 1984 on a CBC news show, The Fifth Estate . It was learned that not only had the CIA funded Cameron's efforts, but also that the Canadian government was aware of this, and had later provided another $500,000 in funding to continue the experiments. This revelation largely derailed efforts by the victims to sue the CIA as their U.S. counterparts had, and the Canadian government eventually settled out of court for $100,000 to each of the 127 victims. Cameron died on September 8, 1967, after suffering a heart attack while he and his son were mountain climbing. None of Cameron's personal records of his involvement with MKUltra survived because his family destroyed them after his death.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] A 1986 report found that Canadian government officials were not fully aware of Cameron's experiments.

[ 93 ] 1994 U.S. General Accounting Office report [ edit ] The U.S.

General Accounting Office issued a report on September 28, 1994, which stated that between 1940 and 1974, the Department of Defense and other national security agencies studied thousands of human subjects in tests and experiments involving hazardous substances.

The quote from the study: [ 94 ] Working with the CIA, the Department of Defense gave hallucinogenic drugs to thousands of "volunteer" soldiers in the 1950s and 1960s. In addition to LSD, the Army also tested quinuclidinyl benzilate , a hallucinogen code-named BZ . (Note 37) Many of these tests were conducted under the so-called MKULTRA program, established to counter perceived Soviet and Chinese advances in brainwashing techniques. Between 1953 and 1964, the program consisted of 149 projects involving drug testing and other studies on unwitting human subjects CIA vs Sims [ edit ] Main article: Mosaic effect § Legal challenges In CIA v. Sims (1985), the U.S. Supreme Court endorsed the mosaic effect to justify broad judicial deference under FOIA Exemption 3 , allowing the CIA to withhold seemingly innocuous details about Project MKUltra on grounds that aggregated disclosures could expose intelligence sources, a rationale that has since granted the agency near-total immunity from FOIA and been broadly applied by lower courts.

[ 95 ] Death of Frank Olson [ edit ] Frank Olson in 1953 Several known deaths have been associated with Project MKUltra, most notably that of Frank Olson . By 1951, Olson was a United States Army biochemist and biological weapons researcher.

[ 96 ] In 1951 academic sources attributed the 1951 Pont-Saint-Esprit mass poisoning incident to ergot poisoning through a local bakery (which appeared to be plausible because ergot naturally contains lysergic acid , the chemical precursor to LSD ).

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] In 1953, a few days before his death, Frank Olson quit his position as acting chief of the Special Operations Division at Detrick, Maryland (later Fort Detrick) because of a severe moral crisis concerning the nature of his biological weapons research.

Among Olson's concerns were: the development of assassination materials used by the CIA the CIA's use of biological warfare materials in covert operations experimentation with biological weapons in populated areas collaboration with former Nazi scientists under Operation Paperclip LSD mind control research the use of psychoactive drugs during "terminal" interrogations under a program code-named Project Artichoke [ 100 ] In November 1953, Olson was given LSD without his knowledge or consent as part of a CIA experiment, and died after falling from a 13th-story window a week later. A CIA doctor assigned to monitor Olson claimed to have been asleep in another bed in a New York City hotel room when Olson fell to his death. In 1953, Olson's death was described as a suicide that had occurred during a severe psychotic episode. The CIA's own internal investigation concluded that the head of MKUltra, CIA chemist Sidney Gottlieb , had conducted the LSD experiment with Olson's prior knowledge, although neither Olson nor the other men taking part in the experiment were informed as to the exact nature of the drug until some 20 minutes after its ingestion. The report further suggested that Gottlieb was nonetheless due a reprimand, as he had failed to take into account Olson's already-diagnosed suicidal tendencies, which might have been exacerbated by the LSD.

[ 96 ] In 1975, Olson's family received a $750,000 settlement from the U.S. government and formal apologies from President Gerald Ford and CIA Director William Colby , though their apologies were limited to informed consent issues concerning Olson's ingestion of LSD.

[ 101 ] In 1977, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and Committee on Human Resources wrote: Given the CIA's purposeful destruction of most records, its failure to follow informed consent protocols with thousands of participants, the uncontrolled nature of the experiments, and the lack of follow-up data, the full impact of MKUltra experiments, including deaths, may never be known.

[ 35 ] [ 102 ] [ 94 ] [ 101 ] In 1994, Olson's body was exhumed and cranial injuries indicated that Olson had been knocked unconscious before he exited the window. This means the forensic evidence conflicted with the former official version of events by the CIA.

[ 96 ] The medical examiner termed Olson's death a "homicide".

[ 103 ] Since 2001 (or earlier), the Olson family disputes the official version of events. They maintain that Frank Olson was murdered because, especially in the aftermath of his LSD experience, he had become a security risk who might divulge state secrets associated with highly classified CIA programs, about many of which he had direct personal knowledge.

[ 104 ] A 2010 book alleged: that the 1951 Pont-Saint-Esprit mass poisoning was part of MKDELTA that Olson was involved in that event that he was eventually murdered by the CIA [ 105 ] [ 106 ] On November 28, 2012, the Olson family filed suit against the U.S. federal government for the wrongful death of Frank Olson.

[ 107 ] In 2013 (July) the case was dismissed, due in part to the 1976 settlement between the family and government.

[ 108 ] In the decision dismissing the suit, U.S. District Judge James Boasberg wrote, While the court must limit its analysis to the four corners of the complaint, the skeptical reader may wish to know that the public record supports many of the allegations [in the family's suit], farfetched as they may sound.

[ 109 ] Legal issues involving informed consent [ edit ] The revelations about the CIA and the Army prompted a number of subjects or their survivors to file lawsuits against the federal government for conducting experiments without informed consent. Although the government aggressively, and sometimes successfully, sought to avoid legal liability, several plaintiffs did receive compensation through court order, out-of-court settlement, or acts of Congress. Frank Olson's family received $750,000 by a special act of Congress, and both President Ford and CIA director William Colby met with Olson's family to apologize publicly.

Previously, the CIA and the Army had actively and successfully sought to withhold incriminating information, even as they secretly provided compensation to the families. One subject of army drug experimentation, James Stanley, an army sergeant, brought an important, albeit unsuccessful, suit. The government argued that Stanley was barred from suing under the Feres doctrine .

In 1987, the Supreme Court affirmed this defense in a 5–4 decision that dismissed Stanley's case: United States v. Stanley .

[ 110 ] The majority argued that "a test for liability that depends on the extent to which particular suits would call into question military discipline and decision making would itself require judicial inquiry into, and hence intrusion upon, military matters." In dissent, Justice William Brennan argued that the need to preserve military discipline should not protect the government from liability and punishment for serious violations of constitutional rights : The medical trials at Nuremberg in 1947 deeply impressed upon the world that experimentation with unknowing human subjects is morally and legally unacceptable. The United States Military Tribunal established the Nuremberg Code as a standard against which to judge German scientists who experimented with human subjects... [I]n defiance of this principle, military intelligence officials [...] began surreptitiously testing chemical and biological materials, including LSD.

Justice Sandra Day O'Connor , writing a separate dissent, stated: No judicially crafted rule should insulate from liability the involuntary and unknowing human experimentation alleged to have occurred in this case. Indeed, as Justice Brennan observes, the United States played an instrumental role in the criminal prosecution of Nazi officials who experimented with human subjects during the Second World War, and the standards that the Nuremberg Military Tribunals developed to judge the behavior of the defendants stated that the 'voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential [...] to satisfy moral, ethical, and legal concepts.' If this principle is violated, the very least that society can do is to see that the victims are compensated, as best they can be, by the perpetrators.

In another lawsuit, Wayne Ritchie, a former United States Marshal , after hearing about the project's existence in 1990, alleged the CIA laced his food or drink with LSD at a 1957 Christmas party, which resulted in his attempting to commit a robbery at a bar and his subsequent arrest.

[ 111 ] While the government admitted it was, at that time, drugging people without their consent and that Ritchie's behavior was typical of someone on LSD, U.S. District Judge Marilyn Hall Patel found Ritchie could not prove he was one of MKUltra's victims or that LSD caused his robbery attempt, and dismissed the case in 2005.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 111 ] Notable people [ edit ] Documented experimenters [ edit ] Confirmed experimenters: Harold Alexander Abramson Donald Ewen Cameron Sidney Gottlieb Harris Isbell [ 19 ] Martin Theodore Orne Louis Jolyon West George Hunter White [ 114 ] Alleged experimenters: Jim Jones [ 115 ] Charlie Siragusa [ 116 ] Documented subjects [ edit ] Confirmed subjects: Allen Ginsberg first took LSD in an experiment on Stanford University 's campus where he could listen to records of his choice (he chose a Gertrude Stein reading, a Tibetan mandala , and Richard Wagner ). He said the experience resulted in "a slight paranoia that hung on all my acid experiences through the mid-1960s until I learned from meditation how to disperse that." [ 117 ] He became an outspoken advocate for psychedelics in the 1960s and, after hearing suspicions that the experiment was CIA-funded, wrote, "Am I, Allen Ginsberg, the product of one of the CIA's lamentable, ill-advised, or triumphantly successful experiments in mind control?" [ 118 ] Ken Kesey , author of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest , is said to have volunteered for MKUltra experiments involving LSD and other psychedelic drugs at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Menlo Park while he was a student at nearby Stanford University. Kesey's experiences while under the influence of LSD inspired him to promote the drug outside the context of the MKUltra experiments, which influenced the early development of hippie culture.

[ 65 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Harold Blauer was an American tennis player who died from injections of 3,4-Methylenedioxyamphetamine in the New York State Psychiatric Institute , which he had voluntarily checked into due to his depression following a divorce .

Robert Hunter was an American lyricist, singer-songwriter, translator, and poet, best known for his association with Jerry Garcia and the Grateful Dead . Along with Ken Kesey, Hunter was said to be an early volunteer MKUltra test subject at Stanford University. Stanford test subjects were paid to take LSD , psilocybin , and mescaline , then report on their experiences. These experiences were creatively formative for Hunter: Sit back picture yourself swooping up a shell of purple with foam crests of crystal drops soft nigh they fall unto the sea of morning creep-very-softly mist [...] and then sort of cascade tinkley-bell-like (must I take you by the hand, ever so slowly type) and then conglomerate suddenly into a peal of silver vibrant uncomprehendingly, blood singingly, joyously resounding bells [...] By my faith if this be insanity, then for the love of God permit me to remain insane.

[ 121 ] Alleged subjects: James "Whitey" Bulger , an organized crime boss, alleged he had been subjected to weekly injections of LSD and subsequent testing while in prison in Atlanta in 1957.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Ted Kaczynski , an American domestic terrorist known as the Unabomber, was said to be a subject of a voluntary psychological study alleged by some sources to have been a part of MKUltra.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] As a sophomore at Harvard , Kaczynski participated in a study described by author Alston Chase as a "purposely brutalizing psychological experiment", led by Harvard psychologist Henry Murray .

[ 128 ] In total, Kaczynski spent 200 hours as part of the study.

[ 129 ] Sirhan Sirhan 's attorney, Lawrence Teeter, believed that Sirhan was "operating under MKUltra mind control techniques" when he assassinated Robert F. Kennedy .

[ 130 ] Charles Manson has been tied to MKUltra by author Tom O'Neil, beginning with his time in prison, when Manson took part in drug-induced psychological experiments run by the federal government.

[ 131 ] [ failed verification ] Such experiments hypothetically could have been continued through his ongoing connection to the Haight Ashbury Free Clinic in San Francisco once out of prison in 1967.

[ citation needed ] In popular culture [ edit ] MKUltra plays a part in many conspiracy theories due to its nature and the destruction of most records. This has also led to the idea that the human experiments performed by the CIA are ongoing into the present .

[ 132 ] Television [ edit ] The 1998 CBC miniseries The Sleep Room dramatizes brainwashing experiments funded by MKUltra that were performed on Canadian mental patients in the 1950s and 60s, and their subsequent efforts to sue the CIA.

[ 81 ] In season 2, episode 5 of Fringe , "Dream Logic", Walter Bishop mentions his participation in MKUltra experiments, using LSD and suggestion.

In season 2, episode 19 of Bones , " Spaceman in a Crater ", Jack Hodgins mentions that Frank Olson was an unwitting participant and committed suicide, but that an exhumation 45 years later proved he was murdered.

[ 133 ] Wormwood is a 2017 American six-part docudrama miniseries directed by Errol Morris and released on Netflix . The series is based on the life of the scientist Frank Olson and his involvement in Project MKUltra.

[ 134 ] The Netflix series Stranger Things is largely based on the MKUltra experiments and the subsequent US government cover-ups. The main character, Eleven , is a child of an MKUltra test subject and is the last child to survive the massacre of the facility in 1979. While MKUltra did in fact experiment on children [ citation needed ] , the project was officially halted in 1973.

[ 135 ] The ABC series "The Rookie" has Abigail (John Nolan's almost daughter-in-law) find forgotten documents pertaining to MKUltra. This continues the show's trend of having a show inside a show by having Abigail try to find out more. Not much else is mentioned other than the name and a CIA emblem in the manila folder she finds in the abandoned Westview Psychiatric. - S7 Ep. 15, "A Deadly Secret." Film [ edit ] The 2009 film The Killing Room is a thriller based on the real life MKUltra top secret government psychological program in which various volunteer test subjects are put in a tense situation.

[ 136 ] In the 2013 Lovecraftian horror film Banshee Chapter , MKUltra experiments on humans with DMT, which in this movie is not a hallucinogen, but a catalyst that opens the user to paranormal activity.

Music [ edit ] English band Muse 's 2009 album The Resistance features a song titled "MK Ultra", which references brainwashing techniques utilized by the CIA in the eponymous project.

Will Wood 's 2020 album The Normal Album features a song titled "BlackBoxWarrior - OKULTRA", which describes the experience of an MKUltra victim among other themes.

The Glasgow-based band Mickey 9s have a song called "MK Ultra" in their 2021 album Modern Kunst .

Periphery 's 2015 album Juggernaut: Alpha has a song titled "MK Ultra".

The title of Machine Girl 's 2024 album, MG Ultra , is a reference to MKUltra. Along with this, the album has themes of conspiracy theory and government masking issues throughout.

The accompanying video for the song Toxygene by The Orb from the album Orblivion was inspired by the MKUltra project.

Literature [ edit ] The sixth and final volume of John Burdett 's Bangkok detective novel series, The Bangkok Asset , features MKUltra as a major theme.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] The novel expands the impacts of the program to ultimately include the creation of super soldier-spies with "transhuman abilities".

Video games [ edit ] The 2013 video game Outlast makes explicit references to MK-Ultra, with the game's antagonists being mental patients driven insane by mind-control-experiments.

The main protagonist of the 2020 video game Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War , "Bell", is a victim of MKUltra and has been brainwashed into believing he served in the Vietnam War.

The video game Visage from 2020 is heavily inspired by the project MKUltra, as its main character Dwayne Anderson is a scientist who worked on spiking the drinking-water with psychedelic drugs. The game also features the views of the project's victims, displaying hallucinations through paranormal events.

See also [ edit ] United States portal United States CIA activities in the United States Unethical human experimentation in the United States International Allegations of CIA drug trafficking Human radiation experiments Human rights violations by the CIA Poison laboratory of the Soviet secret services Unit 731 (Japan) Operations Category:Central Intelligence Agency operations MKCHICKWIT MKOFTEN Other Brainwashing Montauk Project References [ edit ] ^ Alternatively spelled in many different ways, such as MKULTRA , MK-Ultra , MK Ultra , Project MKUltra , and more.

^ a b c United States Congress Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (1921).

Project MKUProject MKULTRA, the CIA's Program of Research in Behavioral Modification . U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 70.

Some MKUltra activities raise questions of legality implicit in the original charter.

^ Boissoneault, Lorraine.

"The True Story of Brainwashing and How It Shaped America" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved December 22, 2024 .

^ a b National Public Radio (NPR), 9 Sept. 2019, "The CIA's Secret Quest For Mind Control: Torture, LSD And A 'Poisoner In Chief ' " (On-air interview with journalist Stephen Kinzer ) ^ "Dialogue Sought With Professor In CIA Probe" . August 27, 1977 . Retrieved December 27, 2017 .

^ "Statement of Director of Central Intelligence Before Subcommittee On Health And Scientific Research Senate Committee on Human Resources" (PDF) . September 21, 1977. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 23, 2017 . Retrieved December 27, 2017 .

^ Otterman, Michael (2007).

American Torture: From the Cold War to Abu Ghraib and Beyond . Melbourne University Publishing. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-522-85333-9 .

^ McCoy, Alfred (2007).

A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation, from the Cold War to the War on Terror . Macmillan. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-4299-0068-3 .

^ "FOIA | CIA FOIA (foia.cia.gov)" .

www.cia.gov . Archived from the original on August 21, 2019.

^ "PROJECT BLUEBIRD | CIA FOIA (foia.cia.gov)" .

www.cia.gov . Archived from the original on January 24, 2017.

^ "Advisory on Human Radiation Experiments, July 5, 1994, National Security Archives, retrieved January 16, 2014" . Archived from the original on July 13, 2013.

^ a b c d e f "Project MKUltra, the Central Intelligence Agency's Program of Research into Behavioral Modification. Joint Hearing before the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research of the Committee on Human Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-Fifth Congress, First Session" (PDF) . U.S. Government Printing Office. August 8, 1977.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 31, 2010 . Retrieved April 18, 2010 – via The New York Times.

^ "Chapter 3: Supreme Court Dissents Invoke the Nuremberg Code: CIA and DOD Human Subjects Research Scandals" . Archived from the original on March 31, 2013 . Retrieved November 8, 2012 .

^ "U.S. Senate Report on CIA MKULTRA Behavioral Modification Program 1977" .

publicintelligence.net – Public Intelligence . July 27, 2012.

^ Richelson, JT, ed. (September 10, 2001).

"Science, Technology and the CIA: A National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book" .

George Washington University . Retrieved June 12, 2009 .

^ "Chapter 3, part 4: Supreme Court Dissents Invoke the Nuremberg Code: CIA and DOD Human Subjects Research Scandals" .

Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments Final Report . Archived from the original on April 30, 2007 . Retrieved August 24, 2005 .

^ "The Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, Foreign and Military Intelligence" .

Church Committee report, no. 94-755, 94th Cong., 2d Sess .

Washington, D.C.

: United States Congress . 1976. p. 392.

^ a b Horrock, Nicholas M. (August 4, 1977).

"80 Institutions Used in CIA Mind Studies: Admiral Turner Tells Senators of Behavior Control Research Bars Drug Testing Now" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 30, 2021.

^ "An Interview with Richard Helms" .

Central Intelligence Agency . May 8, 2007. Archived from the original on April 27, 2010 . Retrieved March 16, 2008 .

^ a b "Private Institutions Used In C.I.A Effort To Control Behavior. 25-Year, $25 Million Program. New Information About Funding and Operations Disclosed by Documents and Interviews Private Institutions Used in C.I.A. Plan" .

The New York Times . August 2, 1977 . Retrieved July 30, 2014 .

Several prominent medical research institutions and Government hospitals in the United States and Canada were involved in a secret, 25-year, $25-million effort by the Central Intelligence Agency to learn how to control the human mind.

[...] Dr.

Harris Isbell , who conducted the research between 1952 and 1963, kept up a secret correspondence with the C.I.A.

^ a b Flores, D. (2019).

"Mind Control: From Nazis to DARPA" (PDF) .

S2CID 235366267 .

^ Gross, Terry (September 9, 2019).

"Stephen Kinzer NPR interview" .

NPR .

^ HGP 36 :1945 - "K" Tablet & T.D , December 21, 2014 , retrieved September 28, 2023 ^ "Files Show Tests For Truth Drug Began in O.S.S." The New York Times . September 5, 1977.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved September 28, 2023 .

^ Navy Project CHATTER .

^ Lee, Martin A.; Shlain, Bruce (1992).

Acid Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD : the CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond . Grove Weidenfeld.

ISBN 978-0-8021-3062-4 .

^ "Science, Technology and the CIA" .

nsarchive2.gwu.edu . Retrieved September 28, 2023 .

^ Jones, Nate (April 23, 2010).

"Document Friday: Project ARTICHOKE, or the CIA Attempt to Create an Unwitting Assassin Through Hypnosis" .

UNREDACTED . Retrieved September 28, 2023 .

^ Martell, Zoe (July 21, 2010).

"Florida Dengue Fever Outbreak Leads Back to CIA and Army Experiments" .

Truthout . Retrieved September 28, 2023 .

^ Marks, John (1991).

The Search for the "Manchurian Candidate": The CIA and Mind Control . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 61.

ISBN 978-0-393-30794-8 .

^ Church Committee; p. 390 "MKUltra was approved by the DCI [Director of Central Intelligence] on April 13, 1953" ^ "Chapter 3, part 4: Supreme Court Dissents Invoke the Nuremberg Code: CIA and DOD Human Subjects Research Scandals" .

Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments Final Report . Archived from the original on November 9, 2004 . Retrieved August 24, 2005 .

"MKUltra, began in 1950 and was motivated largely in response to alleged Soviet, Chinese, and North Korean uses of mind-control techniques on U.S. prisoners of war in Korea." ^ Church Committee; p. 391 "A special procedure, designated MKDELTA, was established to govern the use of MKUltra materials abroad. Such materials were used on a number of occasions." ^ Church Committee; "The congressional committee investigating the CIA research, chaired by Senator Frank Church , concluded that '[p]rior consent was obviously not obtained from any of the subjects.

' " ^ "Retrieved 25 April 2008" . Druglibrary.org. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010 . Retrieved March 26, 2010 .

^ a b "Chapter 3, part 4: Supreme Court Dissents Invoke the Nuremberg Code: CIA and DOD Human Subjects Research Scandals" .

Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments Final Report . Archived from the original on March 31, 2013 . Retrieved April 16, 2013 .

(identical sentence) "Because most of the MK-ULTRA records were deliberately destroyed in 1973 ... MK-ULTRA and the related CIA programs." ^ a b c Rupert Cornwell (March 16, 1999).

"Obituary: Sidney Gottlieb" .

The Independent (London) . Retrieved June 25, 2012 .

^ a b McCoy, Alfred (2006).

A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation from the Cold War to the War on Terror . New York: Metropolitan Books. pp. 8, 22, 30.

ISBN 0-8050-8041-4 .

^ Klein, Naomi (2007).

The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism . New York: Picador. pp.

47 –49.

ISBN 978-0-312-42799-3 .

^ Ranelagh, John (March 1988).

The Agency: The Rise and Decline of the CIA . Sceptre. pp.

208– 210.

ISBN 0-340-41230-5 .

^ Book 1: Final report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate: together with additional, supplemental, and separate views . United States Government Printing Office. April 26, 1976. p. 391.

^ Scheflin, Alan W. Jr.; Opton, Edward M. (1978).

The mind manipulators: a non-fiction account . New York: Paddington Press. p. 158.

ISBN 978-0-448-22977-5 .

^ Thomas, Gordon (1989).

Journey into madness: the true story of secret CIA mind control and medical abuse . New York: Bantam Books. p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-553-05357-9 .

^ a b c d 1977 Senate MKULTRA Hearing: Appendix C – Documents Referring to subprojects ^ Martin A. Lee; Bruce Shlain (2007).

Acid Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD: The CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond . Grove/Atlantic. pp. 373–.

ISBN 978-0-8021-9606-4 .

^ Richards, Bill (June 17, 1977).

"Data shows 50s projects: Germ Testing by the CIA" (PDF) .

The Washington Post . p. A1.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved January 20, 2014 .

^ Anderson, Jack (October 27, 1985).

"Subproject 68: The Case Continues" (PDF) .

Washington Post .

^ Shenon, Philip (October 6, 1988).

"C.I.A. Near Settlement of Lawsuit By Subjects of Mind-Control Tests" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .

^ "Declassified" . Michael-robinett.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2002 . Retrieved March 26, 2010 .

^ Brandt, Daniel (January 3, 1996).

"Mind Control and the Secret State" .

NameBase NewsLine . Archived from the original on August 4, 2012 . Retrieved March 26, 2010 .

^ "Sidney Gottlieb".

The Times (London) . March 12, 1999.

^ "CIA Mind Control Tests Lasted Into '72", The Los Angeles Times , September 2, 1977, p. I-2 ^ Gross, Terry (November 20, 2020).

"The CIA's Secret Quest For Mind Control: Torture, LSD And A 'Poisoner In Chief' " .

NPR .

^ "Hss.doe.gov" . Archived from the original on March 31, 2013 . Retrieved November 8, 2012 .

^ Marks, John.

"The Search for the Manchurian Candidate – Chapter 4" .

www.druglibrary.org .

^ "C.I.A. Considered Big LSD Purchase" .

The New York Times . August 5, 1976 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ a b Tim Weiner (March 10, 1999).

"Sidney Gottlieb, 80, Dies; Took LSD to C.I.A." The New York Times . Retrieved June 25, 2012 .

^ a b Rappoport, J. (1995). "CIA Experiments With Mind Control on Children".

Perceptions Magazine , p. 56.

^ a b ABC7. "U.S. vets say there were human guinea pigs | ABC7 San Francisco | abc7news.com".

ABC7 San Francisco . Retrieved October 27, 2022.

^ Marks, John (1979).

The Search for the Manchurian Candidate . New York: Times Books. pp.

106–107 .

ISBN 0-8129-0773-6 .

^ Marks, John (1991).

The Search for the "Manchurian Candidate": The CIA and Mind Control . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-393-30794-8 .

^ Szalavitz, Maia (March 23, 2012).

"The Legacy of the CIA's Secret LSD Experiments on America" .

Time – via healthland.time.com.

^ VA Palo Alto Health Care System.

"Menlo Park Division" .

va.gov . Retrieved December 14, 2014 .

^ "Cloak and Dropper – The Twisted History of the CIA and LSD" . The Fix. September 18, 2015.

^ Reilly, Edward C. "Ken Kesey." Critical Survey of Long Fiction, Second Revised Edition (2000): EBSCO. Web. Nov 10. 2010.

^ a b Baker, Jeff (November 11, 2001). "All times a great artist, Ken Kesey is dead at age 66".

The Oregonian . pp. A1.

^ a b Lee, M. A., Shlain, B. (1985).

Acid Dreams, the Complete Social History of LSD: the CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond . Grove Press.

^ יוקד, צח (December 9, 2019).

"המדען היהודי שהיה "הדבר הכי קרוב למנגלה בהיסטוריה של ארה"ב" " .

הארץ (in Hebrew) . Retrieved December 11, 2019 .

^ NPR Fresh Air. June 28, 2007 and Tim Weiner, The Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA .

^ University of Oregon. Mark Unno, The Story of the Drug BZ .

^ "Declassified" . Michael-robinett.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2002 . Retrieved March 26, 2010 .

^ Marks, John (1979).

The Search for the Manchurian Candidate . New York: Times Books. pp.

40–42 .

ISBN 0-8129-0773-6 .

^ Marks, John (1979).

The Search for the Manchurian Candidate . New York: Times Books. chapters 3 and 7.

ISBN 0-8129-0773-6 .

^ "Declassified" . Michael-robinett.com. Archived from the original on April 28, 2002 . Retrieved March 26, 2010 .

^ a b c Marks, John (1979).

The Search for the Manchurian Candidate . New York: Times Books. pp.

140– 150.

ISBN 0-8129-0773-6 .

^ Turbide, Diane (April 21, 1997).

"Dr. Cameron's casualties" .

ect.org . Archived from the original on September 2, 2021 . Retrieved September 9, 2007 .

^ Collins, Anne (1998) [1988].

In the Sleep Room: The story of CIA brainwashing experiments in Canada . Toronto: Key Porter Books. pp. 39, 42– 43, 133.

ISBN 1-55013-932-0 .

^ Streatfeild 2006, 254 ^ "Interview with MI6 Psychiatrist" . 13 September 2004. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011.

^ "Interview with Nightingale Nurse #1" . 13 September 2004. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011.

^ "MK Ultra episodes" .

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) . 40 years of The Fifth Estate .

^ a b "The Sleep Room" .

IMDb . March 31, 1998.

^ Klein, N.

(2007).

The Shock Doctrine . Metropolitan Books. pp.

39–41 .

ISBN 978-0-676-97801-8 – via Google Books.

^ a b McCoy, Alfred (2006).

"Cruel science: CIA torture and U.S. foreign policy" .

Sticks and Stones : 172– 174.

ISBN 1-55849-535-5 – via Google Books.

^ Elizabeth Nickson (October 16, 1994). "Mind Control: My Mother, the CIA and LSD".

The Observer .

^ Hersh, Seymour M. (December 22, 1974).

"Huge C.I.A. Operation Reported in U.S. Against Antiwar Forces, Other Dissidents in Nixon Years" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 12, 2018 .

^ a b Prepared Statement of Admiral Stansfield Turner, Director of Central Intelligence Archived 2006-05-26 at the Wayback Machine . ParaScope.

^ Tourek, Mary (August 2, 2013).

"CIA Director Admits Documents on Secret Drug Experiments Destroyed" .

Today in Civil Liberties History . Retrieved December 13, 2019 .

^ PROJECT MKULTRA, THE CIA's PROGRAM OF RESEARCH IN BEHAVIORAL MODIFICATION (PDF) .

Joint Hearing Before The Select Committee On Intelligence And The Subcommittee On Health And Scientific Research of The Committee On Human Resources, United States Senate (Report). U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. August 3, 1977.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

^ "Opening Remarks by Senator Ted Kennedy" .

U.S. Senate Select Committee On Intelligence, and Subcommittee On Health And Scientific Research of the Committee On Human Resources . August 3, 1977.

^ Ignatieff, Michael (April 1, 2001).

"What did the C.I.A. do to Eric Olson's father?" .

The New York Times Magazine . Retrieved January 13, 2017 .

^ "Podcast 98 – MKUltra" . HistoryOnAir.com. June 16, 2005. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015 . Retrieved March 4, 2013 .

^ Stunning tale of brainwashing, the CIA and an unsuspecting Scots researcher , The Scotsman , January 5, 2006. Retrieved 13 January 2017.

^ Thompson, Elizabeth (October 26, 2017).

"Federal government quietly compensates daughter of brainwashing experiments victim" .

CBC .

^ a b Quote from "Is Military Research Hazardous to Veterans Health? Lessons Spanning Half A Century", part F. Hallucinogens .

Archived 2006-08-13 at the Wayback Machine . 103rd Congress, second Session-S. Prt. 103-97; Staff Report prepared for the committee on veterans' affairs December 8, 1994 John D. Rockefeller IV, West Virginia, Chairman. Online copy provided by gulfweb.org, which describes itself as "Serving the Gulf War Veteran Community Worldwide Since 1994". (The same document is available from many other (unofficial) sites , which may or may not be independent.) ^ Pozen, David E.

(December 2005).

"The Mosaic Theory, National Security, and the Freedom of Information Act" (PDF) .

Yale Law Journal .

115 (3): 628– 679. Archived from the original on April 29, 2023 . Retrieved June 16, 2025 .

^ a b c Marks 1979, chapter 5.

^ Gabbai; Lisbonne; Pourquier (September 15, 1951).

"Ergot Poisoning at Pont St. Esprit" .

British Medical Journal .

2 (4732): 650– 51.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.2.4732.650 .

PMC 2069953 .

PMID 14869677 .

^ Finger, Stanley (2001).

Origins of Neuroscience: A History of Explorations Into Brain Function . Oxford University Press. pp. 221ff.

ISBN 978-0-19-514694-3 . Retrieved February 24, 2013 .

^ Pommerville, Jeffrey C.; Alcamo, I. Edward (2012).

Alcamo's Fundamentals of Microbiology: Body Systems Edition . Jones & Bartlett Publishers. pp. 734ff.

ISBN 978-1-4496-0594-0 . Retrieved February 24, 2013 .

^ Olson, E. (August 22, 2002).

"Family Statement on the Murder of Frank Olson" . Archived from the original on February 11, 2003 . Retrieved October 16, 2008 .

^ a b Albarelli, H. P. (2009).

A Terrible Mistake: The Murder of Frank Olson and the CIA's Secret Cold War Experiments . Trine Day. pp.

350–358, 490, 581– 583, 686–692 .

ISBN 978-0-9777953-7-6 .

^ "Senate MKUltra Hearing: Appendix C – Documents Referring to Subprojects" (PDF) . Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and Committee on Human Resources. August 3, 1977. p. 167. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 28, 2007 . Retrieved August 22, 2007 .

^ Ronson, Jon (2004).

The Men Who Stare at Goats . New York: Picador .

ISBN 0-330-37548-2 .

^ "The Olson File" . Frankolsonproject.org. Archived from the original on August 4, 2001 . Retrieved December 24, 2012 .

^ Thomson, Mike (August 23, 2010).

"Pont-Saint-Esprit poisoning: Did the CIA spread LSD?" .

BBC News .

^ Schpolianksy, Christophe (March 23, 2010).

"Did CIA Experiment LSD on French Town?" .

ABC News .

^ Frommer, Frederic J. (November 29, 2012).

"Family sues CIA, decades after scientist's mysterious death" .

NBC News . Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 6, 2023.

^ Gaines, Danielle (July 18, 2013).

"Lawsuit by family of drugged Detrick employee dismissed" .

Frederick News-Post . Retrieved October 20, 2013 .

^ Schoenberg, Tom (July 17, 2013).

"CIA Cover-Up Suit Over Scientist's Fatal Fall Dismissed" .

Bloomberg . Retrieved February 22, 2014 .

^ United States v. Stanley , 483 U.S.

669 (1987) ^ a b Ritchie v. US , vol. 451, May 18, 2006, p. 1019 , retrieved January 20, 2023 ^ "Findings of Fact and Conclusion of Law Re: Motion for Judgment on Partial Findings".

Ritchie v. United States of America (PDF) (Court case). United States District Court, Northern District of California. No. C 00-3940 MHP.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2021 .

^ Egelko, Bob (April 13, 2005).

"Bid to sue over LSD rejected" .

SFGate . Retrieved September 28, 2019 .

^ Ornes, Stephen (August 4, 2008).

"Whatever Happened to... Mind Control?" .

Discover . Retrieved October 23, 2019 .

^ Meiers, Michael (1988).

Was Jonestown A CIA Medical Experiment? A Review of the Evidence . New York: Mellen House.

ISBN 0-88946-013-2 .

^ Crewdson, John M.; Thomas, Jo (September 20, 1977).

"Abuses in Testing Of Drugs by C.I.A. To Be Panel Focus" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved July 11, 2024 .

^ Marks, John (1991).

The search for the "Manchurian candidate" . New York: Norton. pp.

129– 130.

ISBN 0-393-30794-8 .

OCLC 23973516 .

^ Lee, Martin A.; Shlain, Bruce (1992).

Acid Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD: The CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond . USA: Grove Press. pp. xix.

ISBN 0-8021-3062-3 .

^ Lehmann-Haupt, Christopher (November 1, 2001).

"Ken Kesey, Author of 'Cuckoo's Nest,' Who Defined the Psychedelic Era, Dies at 66" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2021 . Retrieved September 8, 2010 .

^ Woo, Elaine (November 11, 2001).

"Ken Kesey, Novelist and '60s Icon, Dies" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on December 18, 2023 . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ McNally, DA (2002).

A Long Strange Trip: The Inside History of the Grateful Dead .

Broadway Books . pp.

42–3 .

ISBN 0-7679-1186-5 .

^ Weeks, Kevin (2007).

Brutal: The Untold Story Of My Life Inside Whitey Bulger's Irish Mob . Harper Collins. pp.

83– 84.

ISBN 978-0-06-114806-4 .

^ Bulger, James "Whitey" (May 9, 2017).

"I'm Whitey Bulger. Here's How the CIA Used Me for Drug Experiments" . Archived from the original on May 19, 2018 . Retrieved June 11, 2017 .

^ Terry Gross (September 9, 2019).

"The CIA's Secret Quest For Mind Control: Torture, LSD And A 'Poisoner In Chief' " . National Public Radio.

^ Moreno, Jonathan (2012).

Mind Wars: Brain Science and the Military in the 21st Century . Bellevue Literary Press, NYU School of Medicine.

ISBN 978-1-934137-43-7 .

^ "MKUltra: Inside the CIA's Cold War mind control experiments" .

The Week . July 20, 2017. Archived from the original on November 22, 2017 . Retrieved December 23, 2017 .

^ Chase, Alston (June 2000).

"Harvard and the Making of the Unabomber" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on August 21, 2014 . Retrieved December 23, 2017 .

^ Moreno, Jonathan D (May 25, 2012).

"Harvard's Experiment on the Unabomber, Class of '62" .

Psychology Today .

^ Gitlin, Todd (March 2, 2003).

"A Dangerous Mind" .

The Washington Post .

^ Hunt, H.E. (November 19, 2008).

"The 30 greatest conspiracy theories" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2022 . Retrieved February 22, 2018 .

^ Conrad, Peter (July 7, 2019).

"Chaos: Charles Manson, the CIA and the Secret History of the Sixties by Tom O'Neill with Dan Piepenbring" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on January 19, 2024 . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ Knight, P (2003).

Conspiracy theories in American history: an encyclopedia, Volume 2 .

ABC-CLIO . pp.

490 .

ISBN 1-57607-812-4 .

^ "Bones / 2x20transcript" .

bonestv.pbworks.com .

^ Tallerico, Brian (December 19, 2017).

"7 Key Questions to Help You Understand Wormwood" .

Vulture . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ Hedash, Kara (June 18, 2020).

"Stranger Things True Story: The CIA's Real Project MKUltra Explained" .

ScreenRant . Retrieved February 6, 2024 .

^ Billingtonwi, Alex (January 18, 2009).

"Sundance 2009 Review: Jonathan Liebesman's The Killing Room" .

Firstshowing .

^ Burdett, John (2015).

The Bangkok Asset . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-385-35320-5 .

^ Williamson, Hilary. " Review of The Bangkok Asset by John Burdett ".

Book Loons . Retrieved 3 October 2024.

Further reading [ edit ] External videos Presentation by Stephen Kinzer on Poisoner in Chief , October 3, 2019 , C-SPAN Poisoner in Chief: Sidney Gottlieb and the CIA Search for Mind Control , Henry Holt and Co., by Stephen Kinzer , 2019, ISBN 978-1250140432 The Secret History of Fort Detrick, the CIA's Base for Mind Control Experiments , by Stephen Kinzer, Politico, 2019.

Potash, John L. (2015).

Drugs as Weapons Against Us . Trine Day LLC.

ISBN 978-1-937584-92-4 .

"U.S. Congress: The Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, Foreign and Military Intelligence (Church Committee report), report no. 94-755, 94th Cong., 2d Sess. (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1976), 394" .

"U.S. Senate: Joint Hearing before The Select Committee on Intelligence and The Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research of the Committee on Human Resources, 95th Cong., 1st Sess. August 3, 1977" .

"The Search for the "Manchurian Candidate": The CIA and Mind Control: The Secret History of the Behavioral Sciences" .

Acid: The Secret History of LSD , by David Black, London: Vision, 1998, ISBN 1901250113 . Later edition exists.

Acid Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD: The CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond by Martin Lee and Bruce Shlain, New York: Grove Press, 1985, ISBN 0802130623 The Agency: The Rise and Decline of the CIA , by John Ranelagh, pp. 208–10.

80 Greatest Conspiracies of All Time , by Jonathan Vankin and John Whalin, chapter 1, "CIAcid Drop".

In the Sleep Room: The Story of CIA Brainwashing Experiments in Canada , Anne Collins, Lester & Orpen Dennys (Toronto), 1988.

Journey into Madness: The True Story of Secret CIA Mind Control and Medical Abuse , by Gordon Thomas, NY: Bantam, 1989, ISBN 0553284134 Operation Mind Control: Our Secret Government's War Against Its Own People , by W H Bowart, New York: Dell, 1978, ISBN 0440167558 The Men Who Stare at Goats , by Jon Ronson, Picador, 2004, ISBN 0330375482 The Search for the Manchurian Candidate , by John Marks, W.W. Norton & Company Ltd, 1999, ISBN 0393307948 Storming Heaven: LSD and The American Dream , by Jay Stevens, New York: Grove Press, 1987, ISBN 0802135870 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Project MKUltra .

Entire Four CD-ROM set of CIA / MKUltra Declassified documents released by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), image format , The Black Vault MKUltra Declassified documents (PDF) U.S. Supreme Court, CIA v. Sims , 471 U.S. 159 (1985) 471 U.S. 159 , FindLaw U.S. Supreme Court, United States v. Stanley , 483 U.S. 669 (1987) 483 U.S. 669 , FindLaw Mind Control and MKULTRA by Richard G. Gall Results of the 1973 Church Committee Hearings, on CIA misdeeds, and the 1984 Iran/Contra Hearings XXVII. Testing and Use of Chemical and Biological Agents by the Intelligence Community [ usurped ] List of MKULTRA Unclassified Documents including subprojects v t e United States chemical weapons program Units, formations, centers and institutes 2nd Chemical Battalion U.S. Army Chemical Corps U.S. Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Chemical Defense (USAMRICD) U.S. Army Chemical Materials Activity Program Executive Office, Assembled Chemical Weapons Alternatives Chemical mortar battalion Industrial facilities Anniston Army Depot Anniston Chemical Activity Blue Grass Army Depot Deseret Chemical Depot Edgewood Chemical Activity Hawthorne Army Depot Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System Newport Chemical Depot Pine Bluff Chemical Activity Pueblo Chemical Depot Tooele Chemical Agent Disposal Facility Umatilla Chemical Depot Operations and projects Research Edgewood Arsenal human experiments Operation Top Hat Project 112 Project SHAD Operation LAC Operational Operation Ranch Hand Disposal Operation CHASE Operation Davy Jones' Locker Operation Geranium Operation Steel Box Operation Red Hat Agents 3-Quinuclidinyl benzilate (BZ) Chlorine Methylphosphonyl difluoride (DF) Phosgene QL Sarin (GB) Mustard gas (HD) VX Munitions BLU-80/B Bigeye bomb M1 chemical mine M104 155 mm projectile M110 155 mm projectile M121 155 mm projectile M125 bomblet M134 bomblet M138 bomblet M139 bomblet M2 mortar M23 chemical mine M34 cluster bomb M360 105 mm projectile M426 8-inch shell M43 BZ cluster bomb M44 generator cluster M55 rocket M60 105 mm projectile M687 155 mm projectile XM736 8-inch projectile MC-1 bomb M47 bomb Weteye bomb Protective equipment CAIS M93 Fox MOPP People sniffer M1135 NBCRV Related topics CB military symbol Dugway sheep incident Unethical human experimentation in the United States MKULTRA v t e Central Intelligence Agency United States Intelligence Community (CIA Headquarters: George Bush Center for Intelligence , Langley, Virginia ) Organization History Directorate of Analysis Directorate of Science & Technology Directorate of Operations ( Special Activities Center , National Resources Division ) Directorate of Support Operations Support Branch CIA Library Geographic activities Americas Russia and Europe Africa Asia Transnational activities Alleged drug trafficking ( Involvement in Contra cocaine trafficking ) Arms control, WMD, and proliferation Black sites Controversies Counterterrorism Crime and illicit drug trade Health and economy Human rights violations Influence on public opinion Directors of Central Intelligence and Directors of the Central Intelligence Agency William J. Donovan ( OSS ) Sidney Souers Hoyt Vandenberg Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter Walter Bedell Smith Allen Dulles John A. McCone William Raborn Richard Helms James R. Schlesinger William Colby George H. W. Bush Stansfield Turner William J. Casey William H. Webster Robert Gates R. James Woolsey Jr.

John M. Deutch George Tenet Porter Goss Michael Hayden Leon Panetta David Petraeus John Brennan Mike Pompeo Gina Haspel William J. Burns John Ratcliffe Major international operations Operation Ajax Operation PBSuccess Secret War 1960 U-2 incident Congo Crisis Bay of Pigs Invasion Operation Mongoose Phoenix Program Operation Rubicon United States intervention in Chile Operation Cyclone Iran–Contra affair Drone strikes in Pakistan Operation Neptune Spear Timber Sycamore Notable works The Invisible Government (1964) All the Shah's Men (2003) Ghost Wars (2004) Overthrow (2006) Legacy of Ashes (2007) The Unexpected Spy (2019) CIA activities by country Afghanistan Angola Australia Brazil Cambodia Canada Chad Chile China Colombia Cuba DRC France Germany Guatemala Honduras Hungary India Indonesia Iran Iraq Italy Japan Laos Libya Myanmar Nicaragua North Korea Pakistan Peru Philippines Somalia Soviet Union Sudan Syria Turkey United Kingdom USA Vietnam Yemen Official reports by the U.S. Government on the CIA Project MKUltra Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8jc65
Cached time: 20250811234956
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.288 seconds
Real time usage: 1.466 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10123/1000000
Revision size: 96637/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 292040/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9977/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 488922/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.793/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8292574/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1253.960      1 -total
 57.53%  721.429      2 Template:Reflist
 19.47%  244.121     55 Template:Cite_web
 17.81%  223.319     33 Template:Cite_book
  9.90%  124.147     26 Template:Cite_news
  5.87%   73.631      1 Template:U.S._chemical_weapons
  5.80%   72.720      2 Template:Military_navigation
  4.98%   62.477      6 Template:Fix
  4.96%   62.234      1 Template:Short_description
  3.66%   45.906      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42043:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811234956 and revision id 1305187013. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MKUltra&oldid=1305187013 " Categories : Project MKUltra 1953 establishments in the United States 1973 disestablishments in the United States 20th-century military history of the United States Academic scandals in the United States American medical research American secret government programs Central Intelligence Agency operations CIA cryptonyms Clandestine operations Code names Cover-ups Mind control Devices to alter consciousness History of the government of the United States Human subject research in the United States Investigations and hearings of the United States Congress Lysergic acid diethylamide Medical experimentation on prisoners Medical scandals in the United States Military psychiatry Psychoactive drugs and the military Psychedelic drug research Torture in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 15:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents MKUltra 44 languages Add topic

