Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beneficiaries 2 Recognition 3 Interaction between the right to clothing and other human rights Toggle Interaction between the right to clothing and other human rights subsection 3.1 Right to life 3.2 Right to freedom of expression 3.3 Right to freedom from discrimination 3.4 Right to freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Right to clothing 17 languages العربية Català Dansk Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Русский Српски / srpski Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human right Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e The right to adequate clothing , or the right to clothing , is recognized as a human right in various international human rights instruments ; this, together with the right to food and the right to housing , are parts of the right to an adequate standard of living as recognized under Article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). The right to clothing is similarly recognized under Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).

[ 1 ] Beneficiaries [ edit ] The right to clothing forms an aspect of the right to an adequate standard of living, and as such, is regarded as something that needs to be ensured so as to prevent people from living below the poverty line.

[ 2 ] Indeed, being ill-clothed is emblematic of acute poverty: We see it in the shivering or sweltering discomfort of 'beggars,' the homeless, the drug dependent and the 'derelict,' the elderly, the invalided, the 'street kid' or the just plain poor. Their plight has provoked condemnation, blame, disgust and derision, but religious, moral and secular creeds have in contrast exhorted us to respond with love, charity, mercy, with empathy and in a spirit of justice.

[ 3 ] — Dr Stephen James, A Forgotten Right? The Right to Clothing in International Law To illustrate how far-reaching the right to clothing potentially is, Dr Stephen James has provided a non-exhaustive list of beneficiaries of the right to minimum clothing. Included on this list are those sections of society that suffer the greatest from a lack of clothing, such as: [ 4 ] The homeless are a section of society that suffer greatly from a lack of adequate clothing.

Street children also suffer greatly.

The less-fortunate, including the unemployed , under-employed and working poor ; Pensioners and others dependent on social security ; The homeless and others in inadequate shelter; Those in emergency accommodation (for example, women's refuges ), whether of a state or private character (including charitable accommodation); The elderly, whether in privately owned or rented accommodation, or state, commercial or charitable nursing homes, hospitals and hospices; Persons suffering from serious mental illness or from intellectual or physical disabilities (whether the live at home independently, with family members or others, or in Community Residential Units, half-way houses, public or private hospitals and other institutions); Children and adolescents, especially orphans and juvenile offenders in foster care, state institutions or detention centres; The ill and injured in hospitals (or rehabilitation centres), including those being treated for alcoholism and other drug-related dependencies ; Prisoners, on remand or otherwise; Workers in hazardous industries (for instance, chemical manufacturing and mining industries), or working under generally oppressive conditions (for example, sweatshops ), whose lives or health depend on protective clothing (including child workers); Indigenous persons living in impoverished conditions; Refugees , asylum-seekers , and migrant workers (especially those working in the black market illegally); and, The victims of natural disasters, civil unrest, civil and international war (including prisoners of war ), genocidal persecutions and other traumatic dislocations.

Recognition [ edit ] The lack of discussion about the right to clothing has led to uncertainty as to the ambit of the right and how much clothing is required. Matthew Craven notes that a minimum level of clothing is what is required to be provided; it is of "paramount importance not least because at minimum levels it represents a question of survival." [ 5 ] This requirement of a "minimum" or "adequate" standard is mirrored in reports from the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) [ 6 ] and a report from the Consortium For Street Children, [ 7 ] as well as a number of General Comments from the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) as regards the elderly, [ 8 ] disabled, [ 9 ] and workers.

[ 10 ] There is, however, no indication as to what such a "minimum" or "adequate" standard entails: indeed, only rarely has the CESCR questioned a party state of the ICESCR on its performance with respect to the right to clothing.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] There has been limited academic commentary on the ambit of the right to clothing with regards to refugees. James Hathaway has argued that refugees should have access to clothing that suitable for the climate and is sufficient for any work or other roles they may wish to undertake. Furthermore, they should not be compelled to wear any sort of clothing that would lead to social stigma or discrimination as foreigners.

[ 13 ] On the other hand, however, should refugees choose to wear clothing that is representative of their culture, country of origin or society, they are protected under Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to do so.

[ 14 ] The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has tended towards applying context-specific interpretations on what is an adequate standard of clothing; so far, the right in its general sense has not yet been considered in a general comment.

[ 15 ] The right to clothing has been recognised domestically for millennia  – at least partially  – but has received very little recognition on the international scene.

[ 3 ] It is not clear why there is a lack of recognition; one author has suggested that the lack of elaboration is due to the variations in cultural needs and wants.

[ 2 ] However, this explanation has been regarded as "not plausible": Dr James notes that "Cultural, environmental and economic variations in 'needs and wants' are surely as marked with regard to housing, health as they are in relation to clothing, but this has not prevented detailed elaboration of those rights in international law." [ 11 ] Matthew Craven concluded in 1995 that: The right to clothing, although specifically included in the Covenant, has had little attention either from the Committee [CESCR] or independent commentators. As far as the Committee is concerned, no reference to clothing is to be found in reporting guidelines, and only the occasional question has been asked of States by individual members. The impression given is that clothing is not a matter in which the State may exercise a great deal of control, nor one that the Committee feels is of great importance.

[ 12 ] — Matthew Craven, The international covenant on economic, social, and cultural rights : a perspective on its development However, Dr James has remarked: "...none of us can be complacent that we will not find ourselves [...] in need of adequate clothing. The right is of great practical importance. It is an essential subsistence right, not an embellishment or a legal absurdity".

[ 11 ] He also called for further discussion and academic commentary, arguing: We must remember the right to adequate clothing when examining the right to an adequate standard of living in international law. The health, dignity and very lives of a range of vulnerable people [...] can be at risk when they are not adequately clothed. [...] [I]t will be useful to explore the possibilities that lie in reasoning by analogy from CESCR jurisprudence on other rights within Article 11 of the ICESCR. After all, the CESCR has begun to develop criteria, in some cases quite detailed, regarding required standards in relation to 'adequate' housing, health, food, water and so on. There is no reason why a similar approach might not be undertaken in relation to the right to adequate clothing.

[ 16 ] — Dr Stephen James, A Forgotten Right? The Right to Clothing in International Law Interaction between the right to clothing and other human rights [ edit ] As the right to clothing concerns such a fundamental aspect of humanity, it naturally interacts with other human rights that are contained within various human rights instruments.

[ 17 ] Right to life [ edit ] Main article: Right to Life Everyone has the essential right to life, as confirmed under Article 3 of the UDHR. However, if people are not adequately clothed, they are far more exposed to the elements. Without warm clothing, a person may well die from hypothermia during a cold winter; clothing that is inappropriately warm, on the other hand, could contribute to heat stroke , dehydration and exhaustion during summer or in tropical climates. Furthermore, inadequate clothing could increase exposure to ultraviolet rays ; aggravate allergies and skin conditions; and worsen pre-existing medical conditions.

[ 18 ] Additionally, access to medical care – similarly confirmed under Article 25 of the UDHR as well as Article 12 of the ICESCR  – can be impeded by inadequate access to clothing, particularly if the access to therapeutic clothing or orthopedic footwear is unavailable or prohibitively expensive.

[ 18 ] Right to freedom of expression [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of speech Wearing clothes – or more accurately, choosing which clothes to wear – is, for many people, an important part of expression as confirmed under Article 19 of the UDHR. Persons with serious disabilities may be dress inappropriately, denying their desired expression. Furthermore, being forced to wear dirty, ripped, ill-fitting and even extremely outdated clothing may invite ridicule and contempt and inflict shame.

[ 19 ] This can be particularly true with school children  – parents may be reluctant to consider sending a child to school as a result of ridicule and shame brought through the clothing the child wears.

[ 20 ] A distinction should be drawn, however, between those who are forced to wear ripped, ill-fitting or extremely outdated clothing and those who consciously choose to wear such clothes as a 'fashion statement'.

[ 19 ] Right to freedom from discrimination [ edit ] Main article: Freedom from discrimination The clothes that people choose to wear can identify a great number of things about a person: religious affiliations, ethnicity, national or political identity, culture, or race. Arguably, the clothes that an impoverished person wears can indicate their poverty. This sign of poverty or poorer economic status can be a cause of discrimination and of vilification. Additionally, clothing which is culturally distinctive or denotes religious affiliation could provoke discrimination and lead to a denial of social, economic, or political opportunities.

[ 21 ] Right to freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment [ edit ] Main articles: Torture and Cruel and unusual punishment There is a large potential for "abuses of trust, for humiliations and various physical abuses in medical and institutional settings, especially in relation to women and children, the disabled and elderly." [ 21 ] If a person is denied access to adequate clothing  – especially essential clothes, such as undergarments  – it is possible that they may be rendered vulnerable to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment under the ambit of Article 5 of the UDHR. Such denial would include forcibly taking clothes, and is of particular importance in the context of detention and prisons: "[o]ne can literally be left naked in the midst of power, a tragic condition [...] seen too often in prisons, in war and in concentration camps." [ 21 ] Examples of such abuses in Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq and Guantanamo Bay have found to have caused serious mental illnesses, including post-traumatic stress disorder , resulting from forcing prisoners to strip naked and parade in front of female guards, as well as male detainees being forced to wear female underwear.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Human rights International law International human rights instruments Economic, social and cultural rights International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to food Right to housing Right to education Right to work Welfare rights References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ James 2008 , p. 1.

^ a b IHRC 2014 .

^ a b James 2008 , pp. 1–2.

^ James 2008 , p. 3.

^ Craven 1995 , p. 287.

^ CRC 2005 .

^ CSC 2009 .

^ CESCR 1996 .

^ CESCR 1995 .

^ CESCR 2000 .

^ a b c James 2008 , p. 4.

^ a b Craven 1995 , pp. 349, 413.

^ Hathaway 2005 , p. 503.

^ Hathaway 2005 , p. 504.

^ Hathaway 2005 , p. 504, footnote 1047.

^ James 2008 , pp. 23–24.

^ James 2008 , pp. 13–17.

^ a b James 2008 , p. 12.

^ a b James 2008 , p. 13.

^ Kornbluh 2007 , pp. 39–41.

^ a b c James 2008 , p. 14.

^ Hess 2008 .

Sources [ edit ] James, Stephen (June 26–28, 2008).

"A Forgotten Right? The Right to Clothing in International Law" (PDF) .

Australian and New Zealand Society of International Law . New Zealand Society of International Law. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 27, 2014 . Retrieved July 15, 2014 .

IHRC. Icelandic Human Rights Centre.

"The Right to an Adequate Standard of Living" .

Icelandic Human Rights Centre . Archived from the original on July 18, 2014 . Retrieved July 15, 2014 .

Craven, Matthew C. R. (1995).

The international covenant on economic, social, and cultural rights : a perspective on its development . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 413.

ISBN 0198258747 .

LCCN 94046610 .

CRC. UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (September 21, 2005).

"UN Committee on the Rights of the Child: Concluding Observations: Philippines" . Retrieved July 18, 2014 .

CSC. Consortium for Street Children (December 2009).

"NGO Shadow Report for the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child 54th Session: Nigeria" (DOC) . Retrieved July 18, 2014 .

CESCR. NU Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1996).

"General Comment No. 6 (1995): The economic, social and cultural rights of older persons" (PDF) .

Report on the twelfth and thirteenth sessions . New York; Geneva: United Nations. pp.

97– 107 . Retrieved July 18, 2014 .

[Versions in French , Spanish , Arabic , Russian and Chinese ] CESCR. NU Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1995).

"General Comment No. 5 (1994) Persons with disabilities" (PDF) .

Report on the tenth and eleventh sessions . New York; Geneva: United Nations. pp.

99– 109 . Retrieved July 18, 2014 .

[Versions in French , Spanish , Arabic , Russian and Chinese ] CESCR. NU Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2000). United Nations (ed.).

"General Comment No. 14 (2000) : The right to the highest attainable standard of health (article 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights)" (PDF) . Geneva . Retrieved 18 July 2014 .

[Versions in French , Spanish , Arabic , Russian and Chinese ] Hathaway, James C. (2005).

The Rights of Refugees Under International Law . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521834945 .

LCCN 2005284456 .

OL7745587M .

IA rightsrefugeesun00hath .

LT 1578864 .

GR 2149066 .

Kornbluh, Felecia (2007).

The Battle for Welfare Rights: Politics and Poverty in Modern America . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0812220254 .

OCLC 76836275 .

LT 3789451 .

GR 3260490 .

Hess, Pamela (June 18, 2008).

"Abuses left detainees mentally ill, study finds" (WEB) .

The Age . Faifax Media . Retrieved 2014-07-19 .

External links [ edit ] Icelandic Human Rights Centre, The Right to an Adequate Standard of Living v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e International human rights instruments Declarations, manifestos, and resolutions Brazilian Resolution Declaration of the Basic Duties of ASEAN Peoples and Governments Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam Declaration of Montreal Declaration of the Rights of the Child Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (DEDAW) Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (DEVAW) Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) Declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man Paris Principles Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (VDPA) Yogyakarta Principles Declaration on the Rights of Peasants (UNDROP) International law United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Convention against Torture Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination Convention on the Political Rights of Women Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Convention on the Rights of the Child Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Regional law African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol) European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) Convention for the Prevention of Torture Convention on Nationality Convention for the Protection of National Minorities Social Charter Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention) American Convention on Human Rights Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women (Belém do Pará Convention) International humanitarian law Genocide Convention Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness Geneva Conventions Hague Conventions Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court v t e Clothing History Industry Technology Terminology Timeline Headwear List of hat styles List of headgear List of fur headgear Beret Cap baseball flat knit Crown Hat boater bowler fedora homburg top Helmet Hood Kerchief Mask Turban Veil Neckwear Bands Choker Collar Clerical Lavallière Neckerchief Neck gaiter Necktie ascot bolo bow kipper school stock Scarf Tippet Underwear and lingerie Top Bra List of bra designs Camisole Undershirt Bottom Diaper Training pants Leggings Panties Plastic pants Slip Thong Underpants boxer briefs boxer shorts briefs Full Bodysuit, adult Bodysuit, infant Long underwear See-through Teddy Tops Blouse cache-cœur crop top halterneck tube top Cycling Kurta Mantle Shirt dress Henley polo sleeveless T crew neck Sweater cardigan guernsey hoodie jersey polo neck shrug sweater vest twinset Waistcoat Bottoms Trousers Bell-bottoms Bondage Capri Cargo Chaps Formal Go-to-hell High water Lowrise Jeans Jodhpurs Overalls Palazzo Parachute Pedal pushers Phat Shorts Bermuda cycling dolphin gym hotpants running Slim-fit Sweatpants Windpants Yoga pants Skirts A-line Ballerina Denim Men's Miniskirt Pencil Prairie Rah-rah Sarong Skort Tutu Wrap Full-Body Wear Suits and uniforms Ceremonial dress academic court diplomatic Folk Jodhpuri Jumpsuit Military full mess service sailor combat Miner Pantsuit Political Religious cassock clerical vestment School Prison Workwear boilersuit cleanroom hazmat space scrubs Dresses and gowns Formal, semi- formal, informal Backless Bouffant gown Coatdress Cocktail little black Evening ball gown debutante Plain Prairie Princess line Strapless Wedding Wrap Casual House Jumper Romper suit Sheath Shirtdress Slip Sundress Coats and outerwear Overcoats Car Chesterfield Covert Duffel Duster Greatcoat British Warm Guards Coat Greca Over-frock Riding shadbelly Trench Ulster Cloak opera Paletot Pea Polo Raincoat Mackintosh Suit coats Frock coat bekishe rekel Mess jacket Suit jacket Blazer smoking sports Teba Tailcoat dress morning Other Apron pinafore Blouson Cagoule Cape ferraiolo Inverness Mantle monastic royal mozzetta pellegrina Coatee Cut-off Gilet Jacket down flight goggle Harrington leather mackinaw Norfolk safari Jerkin Lab coat Parka Poncho Robe bathrobe dressing gown Shawl Ski suit Sleeved blanket Windbreaker Nightwear Babydoll Babygrow Blanket sleeper Negligee Nightgown Nightshirt Pajamas Swimwear Bikini Burkini Boardshorts Dry suit Monokini One-piece Rash guard Sling Square leg suit Swim briefs Swim diaper Trunks Wetsuit Legwear Sock Hold-ups Garter Pantyhose Stocking Tights Footwear List of shoe styles List of boots Boot Dress boot Flip-flops Sandal Shoe Dress shoe Court shoe Sneaker Slipper Accessories Adornments Armband Belt Boutonnière Coin purse Cufflink Cummerbund Gaiters Glasses Sunglasses Gloves Headband Handbag Inro Jewellery Livery Muff Pocket protector Pocket watch Sash Spats Suspenders Wallet Watch Non-worn items Hand fan Umbrella Walking stick Dress codes Western Formal morning dress white tie Semi-formal black lounge suit black tie Informal Business casual Smart casual Casual Related Clothing fetish Clothing swap Costume creature suit Halloween costume Cross-dressing Environmental impact Fashion haute couture made-to-measure ready-to-wear Fur clothing types Fursuit Global trade of secondhand clothing Laundry Laws List of individual dresses Reconstructed clothing Right to clothing Vintage clothing Clothing portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐s6z5g
Cached time: 20250817150221
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.523 seconds
Real time usage: 0.655 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4073/1000000
Revision size: 22764/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 191496/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6617/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85325/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.294/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7520251/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  482.561      1 -total
 21.97%  105.999      7 Template:Cite_web
 16.64%   80.319     31 Template:Sfn
 16.46%   79.433     12 Template:Navbox
 14.11%   68.077      1 Template:Rights
 13.77%   66.447      1 Template:Sidebar
 11.34%   54.718      1 Template:Short_description
  8.07%   38.952      1 Template:Human_rights
  6.61%   31.873      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.34%   30.588      3 Template:Quote Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:35684112:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817150221 and revision id 1262440486. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_clothing&oldid=1262440486 " Categories : Human rights Human rights by issue Clothing Protective gear Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 December 2024, at 12:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to clothing 17 languages Add topic

