Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In ancient Greece and Rome 2 In Asia 3 In Europe 4 As a substitute for honor killings 5 References Toggle the table of contents Forced suicide 10 languages العربية Čeština Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Português ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Execution method in which the victim is forced or incentivised to kill themselves Suicide Social aspects ACEs Altruistic Bullying List of suicides attributed to bullying Copycat Dysfunctional family Emotional isolation Epidemic Identity performance Legislation Loneliness Philosophy Religious views Right to die School bullying Shame Social alienation Social defeat Social exclusion Social invisibility Social isolation Social rejection Social media and suicide Social support Toxic workplace Voluntary euthanasia Workplace bullying Crisis Assessment of risk Beck Hopelessness Scale Crisis hotline ( list ) IS PATH WARM?

SAD PERSONS scale Intervention Prevention Suicide attempt Suicide watch Types and methods Assisted Bullying and suicide ( list ) Cop Copycat Euthanasia device Familicide Forced Hanging Honor Jauhar Jumping Mass Murder–suicide Pact Internet Pilot Prayopavesa Prisoner suicide Rail Sallekhana Sati Self-sacrifice Senicide Seppuku Sokushinbutsu Suicide attack Suicide bag Vatakkiruttal Vehicle collision Epidemiology Gender differences LGBTQ people Mormon Methods Rate by country Seasonal effects Suicidal person Youth mental health crisis Youth suicide History List of suicides LGBTQ suicides Suicide in antiquity List of suicides in the 21st century In warfare Banzai charge Kamikaze Suicide mission Related phenomena Anguish Alcoholism Anhedonia Animal loss Anxiety disorder Asperger syndrome Autism spectrum Conditions comorbid to autism Biology of depression Epigenetics of depression Causes of mental disorders Chronic condition Chronic pain Coping Coping planning Depression (mood) Diseases of despair Diseases of poverty Echo chamber Existential crisis Financial crisis Grief suicide bereavement Ideation Interpersonal relationships Locations Major depressive disorder Mental disorder Mental health first aid Neurodevelopmental disorder Non-suicidal self-injury Perfectionism Personal finance Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Poverty Psychological first aid Psychological stress Psychological trauma Schizophrenia Self-harm Self-hatred Substance abuse Suffering Suicidal ambivalence Suicide and the Internet Suicide and trauma Suicide awareness Suicide in colleges in the United States Suicide in music subcultures Suicide note Suicide survivor Suicide terminology Suicide tourism Suicidology Warning signs of suicide By country Rate by country Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Cameroon Canada China France Greenland India Iran Ireland Japan Lesotho Lithuania Nepal Pakistan Romania Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom United States Organizations Compassion & Choices Death with Dignity National Center Dignitas Exit International Final Exit Network Hemlock Society v t e Forced suicide is a method of execution where the victim is coerced into committing suicide to avoid facing an alternative option they perceive as much worse, such as being tortured to death , suffering public humiliation , or having friends or family members imprisoned, tortured or killed .

In ancient Greece and Rome [ edit ] The Death of Socrates by Jacques-Louis David (1787) Forced suicide was a common means of execution in ancient Greece and Rome . As a mark of respect it was generally reserved for aristocrats sentenced to death; the victims would either drink hemlock or fall on their swords. Economic motivations prompted some suicides in ancient Rome. A person who was condemned to death would forfeit property to the government. People could evade that provision and let the property pass to their heirs by committing suicide prior to arrest.

One of the most well-known forced suicides is that of the philosopher Socrates , who drank hemlock after his trial for allegedly corrupting the youth of Athens . The Stoic philosopher Seneca also killed himself in response to an order by his pupil, the Roman Emperor Nero , who himself was forced to commit suicide at a later date. Other famous forced suicides include those of Brutus , Mark Antony , Emperor Otho , and the Roman generals Varus and Corbulo .

In Asia [ edit ] The Hindu practice of sati , in which a recently widowed woman would immolate herself on her husband's funeral pyre, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] is not generally considered a type of honor killing .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] However, the extent up to which Sati was a purely voluntary act or one that was coerced is actively debated. There have been some incidents in recent times, such as the Roop Kanwar case, in which forced sati was suspected.

[ 6 ] Additional cases are under investigation, [ 7 ] though no evidence of forced suicide has yet been found.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Some instances of Japanese seppuku fall into this category. The culture practiced by the samurai expected them to ritually kill themselves if found disloyal, sparing a daimyō or shōgun the indignity of executing a follower. This was especially the case in the Edo period , [ citation needed ] and Asano Naganori was a clear example.

In Europe [ edit ] Erwin Rommel , a German military leader during World War II , was implicated in a plot to assassinate Adolf Hitler in 1944.  On Hitler's orders, two generals went to Rommel's home and offered him a choice of either going through a public trial (which would inevitably lead to his execution and the punishment of his family) or taking his own life by swallowing cyanide (in which case he would receive a hero's funeral and his family would be spared imprisonment).  Rommel opted for suicide on 14 October 1944; details of his fate were confirmed by his widow and son after the end of the war.

[ 11 ] As a substitute for honor killings [ edit ] A forced suicide may be a substitute for an honor killing when a woman violates the namus in some conservative Islamic sects. In 2006, the United Nations investigated reports of forced suicides of women in southeastern Turkey .

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ Hawley, John C. (1994).

Sati, the blessing and the curse: the burning of wives in India . Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. pp.

102 , 166.

ISBN 0-19-507774-1 .

^ Smith, Bonnie G. (2004).

Women's history in global perspective . Urbana: University of Illinois Press. p. 103.

ISBN 0-252-02997-6 .

^ Jörg Fisch (2005).

Immolating Women: A Global History from Ancient Times to the Present . Orient Longman. p. 320.

ISBN 81-7824-134-X .

^ Rajeswari Sunder Rajan, Real and Imagined Women , Routledge , 1993.

^ Lata Mani: Contentious Traditions: The Debate on Sati in Colonial India . Berkeley & Los Angeles, 1998 ^ Douglas James Davies and Lewis H. Mates (eds.), Encyclopedia of Cremation , p371, Ashgate Publishing, 2005.

^ Mani, Lata (2003). Kim, Seung-Kyung; McCann, Carole R. (eds.).

"Multiple Mediations" in Feminist theory reader: local and global perspectives . New York: Routledge. pp.

373–4 .

ISBN 0-415-93152-5 .

^ "Woman commits Sati in Uttar Pradesh" .

rediff.com . Retrieved 2008-02-08 .

^ "Woman dies after jumping into husband's funeral pyre" .

rediff.com . Retrieved 2006-08-22 .

^ "Visitors flock to 'sati' village" . bbc.co.uk. 2006-08-23 . Retrieved 2008-02-08 .

^ Marshall, Charles F. (1998).

A Ramble Through My War: Anzio and Other Joys (1st ed.). Louisiana State University Press. pp.

230– 232.

ISBN 9780807122822 .

^ " UN probes Turkey 'forced suicide ", BBC News , 2006-05-24.

v t e Capital punishment Current judicial methods Hanging Shooting firing squad Lethal injection Nitrogen hypoxia Electrocution Gas chamber Beheading Stoning Ancient and post-classical methods Damnatio ad bestias Blood eagle Blowing from a gun Brazen bull Boiling Breaking wheel Burial Burning Crucifixion Crushing Decimation Disembowelment Dismemberment Drowning Republican marriage Elephant Falling Flaying Garrote Gibbeting Guillotine Hanged, drawn and quartered Immurement Impalement Ishikozume Mazzatello Sawing Scaphism Seppuku Slow slicing Stoning Suffocation in ash Upright jerker Waist chop Related topics Enforcement or use by country Most recent executions by country Crime Death row Executioner list Scharfrichter Final statement Last meal Penology List of methods Nine familial exterminations Religion and capital punishment Wrongful execution Botched execution Resolutions concerning death penalty at the United Nations Capital punishment for drug trafficking Capital punishment for homosexuality Trial by ordeal v t e Suicide Suicide crisis Assessment of suicide risk Crisis hotline list Suicidal ideation Suicide intervention Suicidology Suicide prevention Suicide watch Warning signs Social aspects Advocacy Altruistic Awareness Interpersonal theory Legislation Philosophy of suicide Religious views Euthanasia Right to die Social media and suicide Suicide survivor bereavement Literature Terminology Suicide and the Internet Suicide types Assisted suicide list Bullying and suicide list Charcoal-burning Copycat Epidemic Familicide Forced Gunshot Hanging Honor Immolation Jumping from height locations Mass Murder–suicide Vatakkiruttal Seppuku Sokushinbutsu Sallekhana Sati Prayopavesa By train London Underground Self-sacrifice Banzai charge Kamikaze Senicide Suicide attack By cop By pilot Pact Suicide pill Vehicular Epidemiology Sex differences List of countries by suicide rate Antidepressants and suicide risk History Suicide in antiquity List of suicides heads of state and government in the 21st century Related Animal suicide Caring letters Consensual homicide Last words Self-harm Suicide methods Suicide note Suicide attempt Suicide prevention contract Tourism By demographic Autistic people Doctors LGBTQ people list Mormon Military Music subcultures Prisoners Youth By country Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Belarus Bhutan Cameroon Canada China France Denmark Greenland Greece Guyana Hong Kong student India youth farmers Iran Ireland Japan Kazakhstan Lesotho Lithuania Mexico Mozambique Nepal Nigeria Pakistan Romania Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea LGBT youth Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Assisted suicide United States Assisted suicide college farmers military veteran Native American teenage Uruguay Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forced_suicide&oldid=1300280159 " Categories : Execution methods Forced suicides Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 11:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forced suicide 10 languages Add topic

