Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Mining engineer Toggle Mining engineer subsection 2.1 Bewick, Moreing 2.2 Sole proprietor 3 Marriage and family 4 World War I and aftermath Toggle World War I and aftermath subsection 4.1 Relief in Europe 4.2 U.S. Food Administration 4.3 Post-war relief in Europe 4.4 1920 election 5 Secretary of Commerce (1921–1928) Toggle Secretary of Commerce (1921–1928) subsection 5.1 Regulation of radio and transportation 5.2 Hoover's image building 5.3 Mississippi flood 5.4 Other initiatives 5.5 Presidential election of 1928 6 Presidency (1929–1933) Toggle Presidency (1929–1933) subsection 6.1 Great Depression 6.1.1 Early policies 6.1.2 Later policies 6.2 Budget policy 6.3 Civil rights and Mexican Repatriation 6.4 Prohibition 6.5 Foreign relations 6.6 Bonus Army 6.7 1932 re-election campaign 7 Post-presidency (1933–1964) Toggle Post-presidency (1933–1964) subsection 7.1 Roosevelt administration 7.1.1 Opposition to the New Deal 7.1.2 World War II 7.2 Post-World War II 7.3 Death 8 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 8.1 Historical reputation 8.2 Views of race 8.3 Memorials 8.4 Other honors 9 See also 10 Explanatory notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Citations 11.2 Works cited 12 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 12.1 Biographical 12.2 Scholarly studies 12.3 Primary sources 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Herbert Hoover 128 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bislama Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1929 to 1933 This article is about the president of the United States. For other uses, see Herbert Hoover (disambiguation) .

"President Hoover" redirects here. For the ship, see SS President Hoover .

Herbert Hoover Portrait, 1928 31st President of the United States In office March 4, 1929 – March 4, 1933 Vice President Charles Curtis Preceded by Calvin Coolidge Succeeded by Franklin D. Roosevelt 3rd United States Secretary of Commerce In office March 5, 1921 – August 21, 1928 President Warren G. Harding Calvin Coolidge Preceded by Joshua W. Alexander Succeeded by William F. Whiting Director of the United States Food Administration In office August 21, 1917 – November 16, 1918 President Woodrow Wilson Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Position abolished Chairman of the Commission for Relief in Belgium In office October 22, 1914 – April 14, 1917 Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Position abolished Personal details Born Herbert Clark Hoover ( 1874-08-10 ) August 10, 1874 West Branch, Iowa , U.S.

Died October 20, 1964 (1964-10-20) (aged 90) New York City, U.S.

Resting place Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum Political party Republican (from 1920) Other political affiliations Independent (before 1920) Spouse Lou Henry ​ ​ ( m.

1899 ; died 1944 ) ​ Children Herbert Jr.

Allan Education Stanford University ( BS ) Signature Hoover's voice Announcing his 1931 economic stimulus plan Recorded October 1931 Herbert Clark Hoover (August 10, 1874 – October 20, 1964) was the 31st president of the United States , serving from 1929 to 1933. A wealthy mining engineer before his presidency, Hoover led the wartime Commission for Relief in Belgium and was the director of the U.S. Food Administration , followed by post-war relief of Europe. As a member of the Republican Party , he served as the third United States secretary of commerce from 1921 to 1928 before being elected president in 1928 . His presidency was dominated by the Great Depression , and his policies and methods to combat it were seen as lackluster. Amid his unpopularity, he decisively lost reelection to Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932 .

Born to a Quaker family in West Branch, Iowa , Hoover grew up in Oregon . He was one of the first graduates of the new Stanford University in 1895. Hoover took a position with a London-based mining company working in Australia and China. He rapidly became a wealthy mining engineer. In 1914, the outbreak of World War I , he organized and headed the Commission for Relief in Belgium, an international relief organization that provided food to occupied Belgium . When the U.S. entered the war in 1917, President Woodrow Wilson appointed Hoover to lead the Food Administration. He became famous as his country's "food dictator". After the war, Hoover led the American Relief Administration , which provided food to the starving millions in Central and Eastern Europe, especially Russia. Hoover's wartime service made him a favorite of many progressives , and he unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomination in the 1920 U.S. presidential election .

Hoover served as Secretary of Commerce under presidents Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge . Hoover was an unusually active and visible Cabinet member, becoming known as "Secretary of Commerce and Under-Secretary of all other departments." He was influential in the development of air travel and radio. Hoover led the federal response to the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 . He won the Republican nomination in the 1928 presidential election and defeated Democratic candidate Al Smith in a landslide. In 1929, Hoover assumed the presidency. However, during his first year in office, the stock market crashed , signaling the onset of the Great Depression, which dominated Hoover's presidency until its end.  He supported the Mexican Repatriation and his response to the Great Depression was widely seen as lackluster.

In the midst of the Great Depression, he was decisively defeated by Democratic nominee Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election . Hoover's retirement was over 31 years long, one of the longest presidential retirements. He authored numerous works and became increasingly conservative in retirement. He strongly criticized Roosevelt's foreign policy and the New Deal . In the 1940s and 1950s, public opinion of Hoover improved, largely due to his service in various assignments for presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower , including chairing the influential Hoover Commission . Critical assessments of his presidency by historians and political scientists generally rank him as a significantly below-average president, although Hoover has received praise for his actions as a humanitarian and public official.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Early life and education Hoover's birthplace cottage in West Branch, Iowa Herbert Clark Hoover was born on August 10, 1874, in West Branch, Iowa .

[ a ] His father, Jesse Hoover, was a blacksmith and farm implement store owner of German, Swiss, and English ancestry.

[ 4 ] Hoover's mother, Hulda Randall Minthorn, was raised in Norwich, Ontario , Canada, before moving to Iowa in 1859. Like most other citizens of West Branch, Jesse and Hulda were Quakers .

[ 5 ] Around age two "Bertie", as he was called during that time, contracted a serious bout of croup , and was momentarily thought to have died until resuscitated by his uncle, John Minthorn.

[ 6 ] As a young child he was often referred to by his father as "my little stick in the mud" when he repeatedly got trapped in the mud crossing the unpaved street.

[ 7 ] Herbert's family figured prominently in the town's public prayer life, due almost entirely to mother Hulda's role in the church.

[ 8 ] As a child, Hoover consistently attended schools, but he did little reading on his own aside from the Bible.

[ 9 ] Hoover's father, noted by the local paper for his "pleasant, sunshiny disposition", died in 1880 at the age of 34 of a sudden heart attack.

[ 10 ] Hoover's mother died in 1884 of typhoid , leaving Hoover, his older brother, Theodore, and his younger sister, May, as orphans.

[ 11 ] Hoover lived the next 18 months with his uncle Allen Hoover at a nearby farm.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Hoover in 1877 In November 1885, Hoover was sent to Newberg, Oregon , to live with his uncle John Minthorn, a Quaker physician and businessman whose own son had died the year before.

[ 14 ] The Minthorn household was considered cultured and educational, and imparted a strong work ethic.

[ 15 ] Much like West Branch, Newberg was a frontier town settled largely by Midwestern Quakers.

[ 16 ] Minthorn ensured that Hoover received an education, but Hoover disliked the many chores assigned to him and often resented Minthorn. One observer described Hoover as "an orphan [who] seemed to be neglected in many ways".

[ 17 ] Hoover attended Friends Pacific Academy (now George Fox University ), but dropped out at the age of thirteen to become an office assistant for his uncle's real estate office (Oregon Land Company) [ 18 ] in Salem, Oregon . Though he did not attend high school, Hoover learned bookkeeping, typing, and mathematics at a night school.

[ 19 ] Hoover was a member of the inaugural "Pioneer Class" of Stanford University , entering in 1891 despite failing all the entrance exams except mathematics.

[ 20 ] [ b ] During his freshman year, he switched his major from mechanical engineering to geology after working for John Casper Branner , the chairman of Stanford's geology department. During his sophomore year, Sam Collins proposed founding, Romero Hall Boarding Club , the first student cooperative boarding house at Romero Hall, for "sociability and economy", which Hoover and William Foster Hidden co-founded.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Hoover was a mediocre student, and he spent much of his time working in various part-time jobs or participating in campus activities.

[ 26 ] Though he was initially shy among fellow students, Hoover won election as student treasurer and became known for his distaste for fraternities and sororities .

[ 27 ] He served as student manager of both the baseball and football teams , and helped organize the inaugural Big Game versus the University of California .

[ 28 ] During the summers before and after his senior year, Hoover interned under economic geologist Waldemar Lindgren of the United States Geological Survey ; these experiences convinced Hoover to pursue a career as a mining geologist.

[ 29 ] Mining engineer See also: Causes of the Great Depression § Trying to return to the Gold Standard Bewick, Moreing Hoover, aged 23; taken in Perth , Western Australia, in 1898 When Hoover graduated from Stanford in 1895, the country was in the midst of the Panic of 1893 and he initially struggled to find a job.

[ 27 ] He worked in various low-level mining jobs in the Sierra Nevada Mountains until persuading prominent mining engineer Louis Janin to hire him.

[ 30 ] After working as a mine scout for a year, Hoover was hired by Bewick, Moreing & Co. ("Bewick"), a London-based company that operated gold mines in Western Australia .

[ 31 ] He first went to Coolgardie , then the center of the Eastern Goldfields , which was actually in Western Australia , receiving a $5,000 salary (equivalent to $188,980 in 2024). Conditions were harsh in the goldfields; Hoover described the Coolgardie and Murchison rangelands on the edge of the Great Victoria Desert as a land of "black flies, red dust and white heat".

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Hoover traveled constantly across the Outback to evaluate and manage the company's mines.

[ 34 ] He convinced Bewick to purchase the Sons of Gwalia gold mine, which proved to be one of the most successful mines in the region.

[ 35 ] Partly due to Hoover's efforts, the company eventually controlled approximately 50 percent of gold production in Western Australia .

[ 36 ] Hoover brought in many Italian immigrants to cut costs and counter the labour movement of the Australian miners.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] During his time with the mining company, Hoover became opposed to measures such as a minimum wage and workers' compensation , feeling that they were unfair to owners. Hoover's work impressed his employers, and in 1898 he was promoted to junior partner.

[ 39 ] An open feud developed between Hoover and his boss, Ernest Williams, but Bewick's leaders defused the situation by offering Hoover a compelling position in China .

[ 40 ] Upon arriving in China, Hoover developed gold mines near Tianjin on behalf of Bewick and the Chinese-owned Chinese Engineering and Mining Company .

[ 41 ] He became deeply interested in Chinese history , but gave up on learning the language to a fluent level . He publicly warned that Chinese workers were inefficient and racially inferior.

[ 42 ] He made recommendations to improve the lot of the Chinese worker, seeking to end the practice of imposing long-term servitude contracts and to institute reforms for workers based on merit.

[ 43 ] The Boxer Rebellion broke out shortly after the Hoovers arrived in China, trapping them and numerous other foreign nationals until a multi-national military force defeated Boxer forces in the Battle of Tientsin . Fearing the imminent collapse of the Chinese government, the director of the Chinese Engineering and Mining Company agreed to establish a new Sino-British venture with Bewick. After they established effective control over the new Chinese mining company, Hoover became the operating partner in late 1901.

[ 44 ] In this role, Hoover continually traveled the world on behalf of Bewick, visiting mines operated by the company on different continents. Beginning in December 1902, the company faced mounting legal and financial issues after one of the partners admitted to having fraudulently sold stock in a mine. More issues arose in 1904 after the British government formed two separate royal commissions to investigate Bewick's labor practices and financial dealings in Western Australia. After the company lost a lawsuit Hoover began looking for a way to get out of the partnership, and he sold his shares in mid-1908.

[ 45 ] Sole proprietor Hoover in 1917 while a mining engineer After leaving Bewick, Moreing, Hoover worked as a London-based independent mining consultant and financier. Though he had risen to prominence as a geologist and mine operator, Hoover focused much of his attention on raising money, restructuring corporate organizations, and financing new ventures.

[ 46 ] He specialized in rejuvenating troubled mining operations, taking a share of the profits in exchange for his technical and financial expertise.

[ 47 ] Hoover thought of himself and his associates as "engineering doctors to sick concerns", and he earned a reputation as a "doctor of sick mines".

[ 48 ] He made investments on every continent and had offices in San Francisco; London; New York City; Paris; Petrograd; and Mandalay , British Burma .

[ 49 ] By 1914, Hoover was a very wealthy man, with an estimated personal fortune of $4 million (equivalent to $125.57 million in 2024).

[ 50 ] Hoover co-founded the Zinc Corporation to extract zinc near the Australian city of Broken Hill , New South Wales .

[ 51 ] The Zinc Corporation developed the froth flotation process to extract zinc from lead-silver ore [ 52 ] and operated the world's first selective ore differential flotation plant.

[ 53 ] Hoover worked with the Burma Corporation, a British firm that produced silver, lead, and zinc in large quantities at the Namtu Bawdwin Mine .

[ 54 ] : 90–96, 101–102 [ 55 ] He also helped increase copper production in Kyshtym , Russia , through the use of pyritic smelting. He also agreed to manage a separate mine in the Altai Mountains that, according to Hoover, "developed probably the greatest and richest single body of ore known in the world".

[ 54 ] : 102–108 [ 56 ] In his spare time, Hoover wrote. His lectures at Columbia and Stanford universities were published in 1909 as Principles of Mining , which became a standard textbook. The book reflects his move towards progressive ideals, as Hoover came to endorse eight-hour workdays and organized labor .

[ 57 ] Hoover became deeply interested in the history of science , and he was especially drawn to the De re metallica , an influential 16th century work on mining and metallurgy by Georgius Agricola . In 1912, Hoover and his wife published the first English translation of De re metallica .

[ 58 ] Hoover also joined the board of trustees at Stanford, and led a successful campaign to appoint John Branner as the university's president.

[ 59 ] Marriage and family The Lou Henry Hoover House in Stanford, California , the couple's first and only permanent residence During his senior year at Stanford, Hoover became smitten with a classmate named Lou Henry , though his financial situation precluded marriage at that time.

[ 27 ] The daughter of a banker from Monterey, California , Lou Henry decided to study geology at Stanford after attending a lecture delivered by John C. Branner .

[ 60 ] Immediately after earning a promotion in 1898, Hoover cabled Lou Henry, asking her to marry him. After she cabled back her acceptance of the proposal, Hoover briefly returned to the United States for their wedding.

[ 39 ] They would remain married until Lou Henry Hoover's death in 1944.

[ 61 ] Though his Quaker upbringing strongly influenced his career, Hoover rarely attended Quaker meetings during his adult life.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Hoover and his wife had two children: Herbert Hoover Jr.

(born in 1903) and Allan Henry Hoover (born in 1907).

[ 39 ] The Hoover family began living in London in 1902, though they frequently traveled as part of Hoover's career.

[ 64 ] After 1916, the Hoovers began living in the United States, maintaining homes in Stanford, California , and Washington, D.C.

[ 65 ] Hoover's great-granddaughter (through Allan) is conservative political commentator, strategist, media personality and author Margaret Hoover .

[ 66 ] Hoover's elder brother Theodore also studied mining engineering at Stanford, and returned there to become dean of the engineering school. In retirement, Theodore bought a large property on the remote north coast of Santa Cruz County. The Theodore J. Hoover Natural Preserve is now part of Big Basin State Park .

World War I and aftermath Relief in Europe Further information: Presidency of Woodrow Wilson Main article: Commission for Relief in Belgium World War I broke out in August 1914, pitting Germany and its allies against France and its allies. The German Schlieffen plan was to achieve a quick victory by marching through neutral Belgium to envelop the French Army east of Paris. The maneuver failed to reach Paris, however the Germans were successful in taking nearly all of Belgium and would occupy the majority of nation for the remainder of the war. Hoover and other London-based American businessmen established a committee to organize the return of the roughly 100,000 Americans stranded in Europe. Hoover was appointed as the committee's chairman and, with the assent of Congress and the Wilson administration , took charge of the distribution of relief to Americans in Europe.

[ 67 ] Hoover later stated, "I did not realize it at the moment, but on August 3, 1914, my career was over forever. I was on the slippery road of public life." [ 68 ] By early October 1914, Hoover's organization had distributed relief to at least 40,000 Americans.

[ 69 ] The German invasion of Belgium in August 1914 set a food crisis into motion in Belgium, a nation which relied heavily on food imports. The Germans refused to take responsibility for feeding Belgian citizens in captured territory, and the British refused to lift their blockade of German-occupied Belgium unless the U.S. government supervised Belgian food imports as a neutral party in the war.

[ 70 ] With the cooperation of the Wilson administration and the CNSA , a Belgian relief organization, Hoover established the Commission for Relief in Belgium (CRB).

[ 71 ] The CRB obtained and imported millions of tons of foodstuffs for the CNSA to distribute, and helped ensure that the German army did not appropriate the food. Private donations and government grants supplied the majority of its $11-million-a-month budget, and the CRB became a veritable independent republic of relief, with its own flag, navy, factories, mills, and railroads.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ failed verification ] Hoover worked 14-hour days from London, administering the distribution of over two million tons of food to nine million war victims. In an early form of shuttle diplomacy , he crossed the North Sea forty times to meet with German authorities and persuade them to allow food shipments.

[ 74 ] He also convinced British Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George to allow individuals to send money to the people of Belgium, thereby lessening workload of the CRB.

[ 75 ] At the request of the French government, the CRB began delivering supplies to the people of German-occupied Northern France in 1915.

[ 76 ] In 1926, American diplomat Walter Page described Hoover as "probably the only man living who has privately (i.e., without holding office) negotiated understandings with the British, French, German, Dutch, and Belgian governments".

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] U.S. Food Administration Main article: United States Food Administration U.S. Food Administration poster War upon Germany was declared in April 1917, and American food was essential to Allied victory. With the U.S. mobilizing for war, President Wilson appointed Hoover to head the U.S. Food Administration , which was charged with ensuring the nation's food needs during the war.

[ 79 ] Hoover had hoped to join the administration in some capacity since at least 1916, and he obtained the position after lobbying several members of Congress and Wilson's confidant, Edward M. House .

[ 80 ] Earning the appellation of "food czar", Hoover recruited a volunteer force of hundreds of thousands of women and deployed propaganda in movie theaters, schools, and churches.

[ 81 ] He carefully selected men to assist in the agency leadership— Alonzo E. Taylor (technical abilities), Robert Taft (political associations), Gifford Pinchot (agricultural influence), and Julius Barnes (business acumen).

[ 82 ] World War I had created a global food crisis that dramatically increased food prices and caused food riots and starvation in the countries at war. Hoover's chief goal as food czar was to provide supplies to the Allied Powers, but he also sought to stabilize domestic prices and to prevent domestic shortages.

[ 83 ] Under the broad powers granted by the Food and Fuel Control Act , the Food Administration supervised food production throughout the United States, and the administration made use of its authority to buy, import, store, and sell food.

[ 84 ] Determined to avoid rationing, Hoover established set days for people to avoid eating specified foods and save them for soldiers' rations: meatless Mondays , wheatless Wednesdays, and "when in doubt, eat potatoes". These policies were dubbed "Hooverizing" by government publicists, in spite of Hoover's continual orders that publicity should not mention him by name.

[ 85 ] The Food Administration shipped 23 million metric tons of food to the Allied Powers, preventing their collapse and earning Hoover great acclaim.

[ 86 ] As head of the Food Administration, Hoover gained a following in the United States, especially among progressives who saw in Hoover an expert administrator and symbol of efficiency.

[ 87 ] He was elected to the American Philosophical Society during his tenure.

[ 88 ] Post-war relief in Europe Main article: American Relief Administration World War I came to an end in November 1918, but Europe continued to face a critical food situation; Hoover estimated that as many as 400 million people faced the possibility of starvation.

[ 89 ] The United States Food Administration became the American Relief Administration (ARA), and Hoover was charged with providing food to Central and Eastern Europe.

[ 90 ] In addition to providing relief, the ARA rebuilt infrastructure in an effort to rejuvenate the economy of Europe.

[ 91 ] Throughout the Paris Peace Conference , Hoover served as a close adviser to President Wilson, and he largely shared Wilson's goals of establishing the League of Nations , settling borders on the basis of self-determination , and refraining from inflicting a harsh punishment on the defeated Central Powers.

[ 92 ] The following year, the famed British economist John Maynard Keynes wrote in The Economic Consequences of the Peace that if Hoover's realism, "knowledge, magnanimity and disinterestedness" had found wider play in the councils of Paris, the world would have had "the Good Peace".

[ 93 ] After U.S. government funding for the ARA expired in mid-1919, Hoover transformed the ARA into a private organization, raising millions of dollars from private donors.

[ 90 ] He also established the European Children's Fund, which provided relief to fifteen million children across fourteen countries.

[ 94 ] Despite the opposition of Senator Henry Cabot Lodge and other Republicans, Hoover provided aid to the defeated German nation after the war, as well as relief to famine -stricken Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic .

[ 90 ] Hoover condemned the Bolsheviks but warned President Wilson against an intervention in the Russian Civil War , as he viewed the White Russian forces as little better than the Bolsheviks and feared the possibility of a protracted U.S. involvement.

[ 95 ] The Russian famine of 1921–22 claimed six million people, but the intervention of the ARA likely saved millions of lives.

[ 96 ] When asked if he was not helping Bolshevism by providing relief, Hoover stated, "twenty million people are starving. Whatever their politics, they shall be fed!" [ 90 ] Reflecting the gratitude of many Europeans, in July 1922, Soviet author Maxim Gorky told Hoover that "your help will enter history as a unique, gigantic achievement, worthy of the greatest glory, which will long remain in the memory of millions of Russians whom you have saved from death".

[ 97 ] In 1919, Hoover established the Hoover War Collection at Stanford University. He donated all the files of the Commission for Relief in Belgium, the U.S. Food Administration, and the American Relief Administration, and pledged $50,000 as an endowment (equivalent to $906,814 in 2024). Scholars were sent to Europe to collect pamphlets, society publications, government documents, newspapers, posters, proclamations, and other ephemeral materials related to the war and the revolutions that followed it. The collection was renamed the Hoover War Library in 1922 and is now known as the Hoover Institution Library and Archives .

[ 98 ] During the post-war period, Hoover also served as the president of the Federated American Engineering Societies.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] 1920 election Further information: 1920 United States presidential election Hoover had been little known among the American public before 1914, but his service in the Wilson administration established him as a contender in the 1920 presidential election. Hoover's wartime push for higher taxes, criticism of Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer 's actions during the First Red Scare , and his advocacy for measures such as the minimum wage , forty-eight-hour workweek, and elimination of child labor made him appealing to progressives of both parties.

[ 101 ] Despite his service in the Democratic administration of Woodrow Wilson, Hoover had never been closely affiliated with either the Democrats or the Republicans . He initially sought to avoid committing to any party in the 1920 election, hoping that either of the two major parties would draft him for president at their national conventions.

[ 102 ] In March 1920, he changed strategy and declared himself a Republican; he was motivated in large part by the belief that the Democrats had little chance of winning.

[ 103 ] Despite his national renown, Hoover's service in the Wilson administration had alienated farmers and the conservative Old Guard of the GOP , and his presidential candidacy fizzled out after his defeat in the California primary by favorite son Hiram Johnson . At the 1920 Republican National Convention , Warren G. Harding emerged as a compromise candidate after the convention became deadlocked among supporters of Johnson, Leonard Wood , and Frank Orren Lowden .

[ 101 ] Hoover backed Harding's successful campaign in the general election, and he began laying the groundwork for a future presidential run by building a base of strong supporters in the Republican Party.

[ 104 ] Secretary of Commerce (1921–1928) Further information: Presidency of Warren G. Harding and Presidency of Calvin Coolidge Assistants William McCracken (left) and Walter Drake (right) with Secretary Hoover (center) After his election as president in 1920, Harding rewarded Hoover for his support, offering to appoint him as either Secretary of the Interior or Secretary of Commerce . Secretary of Commerce was considered a minor Cabinet post, with limited and vaguely defined responsibilities, but Hoover decided to accept the position.

[ 105 ] Hoover's progressive stances, continuing support for the League of Nations , and recent conversion to the Republican Party aroused opposition to his appointment from many Senate Republicans .

[ 106 ] To overcome this opposition, Harding paired Hoover's nomination with that of conservative favorite Andrew Mellon as Secretary of the Treasury , and the nominations of both Hoover and Mellon were confirmed by the Senate. Hoover would serve as Secretary of Commerce from 1921 to 1928, serving under Harding and, after Harding's death in 1923, President Calvin Coolidge .

[ 105 ] While some of the most prominent members of the Harding administration, including Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty and Secretary of Interior Albert B. Fall , were implicated in major scandals , Hoover emerged largely unscathed from investigations into the Harding administration.

[ 107 ] Hoover envisioned the Commerce Department as the hub of the nation's growth and stability.

[ 108 ] His experience mobilizing the war-time economy convinced him that the federal government could promote efficiency by eliminating waste, increasing production, encouraging the adoption of data-based practices, investing in infrastructure, and conserving natural resources. Contemporaries described Hoover's approach as a "third alternative" between "unrestrained capitalism" and socialism , which was becoming increasingly popular in Europe.

[ 109 ] Hoover sought to foster a balance among labor, capital, and the government, and for this, he has been variously labeled a corporatist or an associationalist .

[ 110 ] A high priority was economic diplomacy, including promoting the growth of exports, as well as protection against monopolistic practices of foreign governments, especially regarding rubber and coffee.

[ 111 ] Hoover demanded, and received, authority to coordinate economic affairs throughout the government. He created many sub-departments and committees, overseeing and regulating everything from manufacturing statistics to air travel . In some instances, he "seized" control of responsibilities from other Cabinet departments when he deemed that they were not carrying out their responsibilities well; some began referring to him as the "Secretary of Commerce and Under-Secretary of all other departments".

[ 108 ] In response to the Depression of 1920–21 , he convinced Harding to assemble a presidential commission on unemployment, which encouraged local governments to engage in countercyclical infrastructure spending.

[ 112 ] He endorsed much of Mellon's tax reduction program but favored a more progressive tax system and opposed the treasury secretary's efforts to eliminate the estate tax .

[ 113 ] Regulation of radio and transportation Main article: Regulation of radio broadcast in the United States Hoover listening to a radio receiver , 1925 Between 1923 and 1929, the number of families with radios grew from 300,000 to 10 million, [ 114 ] and Hoover's tenure as Secretary of Commerce heavily influenced radio use in the United States. Between 1922 and 1925, Hoover organized conferences among radio manufacturers, news agencies, and government organizations which played a key role in the organization, development, and regulation of radio broadcasting . Hoover also helped pass the Radio Act of 1927 , which allowed the government to intervene and abolish radio stations that were deemed "non-useful" to the public. Hoover's attempts at regulating radio were not supported by all congressmen, and he received much opposition from the Senate and from radio station owners.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] Hoover was also influential in the early development of air travel, and he sought to create a thriving private industry boosted by indirect government subsidies. He encouraged the development of emergency landing fields, required all runways to be equipped with lights and radio beams, and encouraged farmers to make use of planes for crop dusting .

[ 119 ] He also established the federal government's power to inspect planes and license pilots, setting a precedent for the later Federal Aviation Administration .

[ 120 ] As Commerce Secretary, Hoover hosted national conferences on street traffic collectively known as the National Conference on Street and Highway Safety. Hoover's chief objective was to address the growing casualty toll of traffic accidents , but the scope of the conferences grew and soon embraced motor vehicle standards, rules of the road, and urban traffic control. He left the invited interest groups to negotiate agreements among themselves, which were then presented for adoption by states and localities. Because automotive trade associations were the best organized, many of the positions taken by the conferences reflected their interests. The conferences issued a model Uniform Vehicle Code for adoption by the states and a Model Municipal Traffic Ordinance for adoption by cities. Both were widely influential, promoting greater uniformity among jurisdictions and tending to promote the automobile's priority in city streets.

[ 121 ] Hoover's image building Phillips Payson O'Brien argues that Hoover had a Britain problem. He had spent so many years living in Britain and Australia, as an employee of British companies, there was a risk that he would be labeled a British tool. There were three solutions, all of which he tried in close collaboration with the media, which greatly admired him.

[ 122 ] First came the image of the dispassionate scientist, emotionally uninvolved but always committed to finding and implementing the best possible solution. The second solution was to gain the reputation of a humanitarian, deeply concerned with the world's troubles, such as famine in Belgium, as well as specific American problems which he had solved as food commissioner during the world war. The third solution was to fall back on the old tactic of twisting the British tail, which he employed during the 1925–1926 worldwide rubber crisis . The American auto industry consumed 70% of the world's output, but British investors controlled much of the supply. Their plan was to drastically cut back on output from British Malaya , which had the effect of tripling rubber prices. Hoover energetically gave a series of speeches and interviews denouncing the monopolistic practice and demanding that it be ended. The American State Department wanted no such crisis and compromised the issue in 1926. By then Hoover had solved his image problem, and during his 1928 campaign he successfully squelched attacks that alleged he was too close to British interests.

[ 123 ] Mississippi flood The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 broke the banks and levees of the lower Mississippi River in early 1927, resulting in the flooding of millions of acres and leaving 1.5 million people displaced from their homes. Although disaster response did not fall under the duties of the Commerce Department , the governors of six states along the Mississippi River specifically asked President Coolidge to appoint Hoover to coordinate the response to the flood.

[ 124 ] Believing that disaster response was not the domain of the federal government, Coolidge initially refused to become involved, but he eventually acceded to political pressure and appointed Hoover to chair a special committee to help the region.

[ 125 ] Hoover established over one hundred tent cities and a fleet of more than six hundred vessels and raised $17 million (equivalent to $307.73 million in 2024). In large part due to his leadership during the flood crisis, by 1928, Hoover had begun to overshadow President Coolidge himself.

[ 124 ] Though Hoover received wide acclaim for his role in the crisis, he ordered the suppression of reports of mistreatment of African Americans in refugee camps .

[ 126 ] He did so with the cooperation of black American leader Robert Russa Moton , who was promised unprecedented influence once Hoover became president.

[ 127 ] Other initiatives Hoover (left) with Florence Harding and President Warren Harding at a baseball game in 1921 With the goal of encouraging wise business investments, Hoover made the Commerce Department a clearinghouse of information. He recruited numerous academics from various fields and tasked them with publishing reports on different aspects of the economy, including steel production and films. To eliminate waste, he encouraged standardization of products like automobile tires and baby bottle nipples.

[ 128 ] Other efforts at eliminating waste included reducing labor losses from trade disputes and seasonal fluctuations, reducing industrial losses from accident and injury, and reducing the amount of crude oil spilled during extraction and shipping. He promoted international trade by opening overseas offices to advise businessmen. Hoover was especially eager to promote Hollywood films overseas.

[ 129 ] His "Own Your Own Home" campaign was a collaboration to promote ownership of single-family dwellings, with groups such as the Better Houses in America movement, the Architects' Small House Service Bureau, and the Home Modernizing Bureau. He worked with bankers and the savings and loan industry to promote the new long-term home mortgage, which dramatically stimulated home construction.

[ 130 ] Other accomplishments included winning the agreement of U.S. Steel to adopt an eight-hour workday, and the fostering of the Colorado River Compact , a water rights compact among Southwestern states .

[ 131 ] Presidential election of 1928 Main article: 1928 United States presidential election Hoover quietly gathered support for a future presidential bid throughout the 1920s, but he carefully avoided alienating Coolidge, who possibly could have run for another term in the 1928 presidential election .

[ 132 ] Along with the rest of the nation, he was surprised when Coolidge announced in August 1927 that he would not seek another term. With the impending retirement of Coolidge, Hoover immediately emerged as the front-runner for the 1928 Republican nomination, and he quickly put together a strong campaign team led by Hubert Work , Will H. Hays , and Reed Smoot .

[ 133 ] Coolidge was unwilling to anoint Hoover as his successor; on one occasion he remarked that, "for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice—all of it bad".

[ 134 ] Despite his lukewarm feelings towards Hoover, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the popular Commerce Secretary's candidacy.

[ 135 ] One public figure who endorsed Hoover for the Republican presidential candidacy was William Randolph Hearst , who argued that “The present situation demands conservatism, and Secretary Hoover’s conservatism is of the constructive and not the reactionary type.” [ 136 ] Many wary Republican leaders cast about for an alternative candidate, such as Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon or former secretary of state Charles Evans Hughes .

[ 137 ] However, Hughes and Mellon declined to run, and other potential contenders like Frank Orren Lowden and Vice President Charles G. Dawes failed to garner widespread support.

[ 138 ] Hoover won the presidential nomination on the first ballot of the 1928 Republican National Convention . Convention delegates considered re-nominating Vice President Charles Dawes to be Hoover's running mate , but Coolidge, who hated Dawes, remarked that this would be "a personal affront" to him. The convention instead selected Senator Charles Curtis of Kansas.

[ 139 ] Hoover accepted the nomination at Stanford Stadium , telling a huge crowd that he would continue the policies of the Harding and Coolidge administrations.

[ 140 ] The Democrats nominated New York governor Al Smith , who became the first Catholic major party nominee for president.

[ 141 ] 1928 electoral vote results Hoover submitted his resignation as Commerce Secretary on July 7, but Coolidge kept him on until August 21 to wind up pending business.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Hoover centered his campaign around the Republican record of peace and prosperity, as well as his own reputation as a successful engineer and public official. Averse to giving political speeches, Hoover largely stayed out of the fray and left the campaigning to Curtis and other Republicans.

[ 144 ] Smith was more charismatic and gregarious than Hoover, but his campaign was damaged by anti-Catholicism and his overt opposition to Prohibition. Hoover had never been a strong proponent of Prohibition, but he accepted the Republican Party's plank in favor of it and issued an ambivalent statement calling Prohibition "a great social and economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose".

[ 145 ] In the South, Hoover and the national party pursued a " lily-white " strategy, removing black Republicans from leadership positions in an attempt to curry favor with white Southerners.

[ 146 ] Hoover maintained polling leads throughout the 1928 campaign, and he decisively defeated Smith on election day, taking 58 percent of the popular vote and 444 of the 531 electoral votes.

[ 147 ] Historians agree that Hoover's national reputation and the booming economy, combined with deep splits in the Democratic Party over religion and Prohibition, guaranteed his landslide victory.

[ 148 ] Hoover's appeal to Southern white voters succeeded in cracking the " Solid South ", and he won five Southern states.

[ 149 ] Hoover's victory was positively received by newspapers; one wrote that Hoover would "drive so forcefully at the tasks now before the nation that the end of his eight years as president will find us looking back on an era of prodigious achievement".

[ 150 ] Hoover's detractors wondered why he did not do anything to reapportion congress after the 1920 United States census which saw an increase in urban and immigrant populations. The 1920 census was the first and only decennial census where the results were not used to reapportion Congress, which ultimately influenced the 1928 Electoral College and impacted the presidential election.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] Presidency (1929–1933) Main article: Presidency of Herbert Hoover Hoover's inauguration This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Hoover saw the presidency as a vehicle for improving the conditions of all Americans by encouraging public-private cooperation—what he termed "volunteerism". He tended to oppose governmental coercion or intervention, as he thought they infringed on American ideals of individualism and self-reliance.

[ 153 ] The first major bill that he signed, the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1929 , established the Federal Farm Board in order to stabilize farm prices.

[ 154 ] Hoover made extensive use of commissions to study issues and propose solutions, and many of those commissions were sponsored by private donors rather than by the government. One of the commissions started by Hoover, the Research Committee on Social Trends, was tasked with surveying the entirety of American society.

[ 155 ] He appointed a Cabinet consisting largely of wealthy, business-oriented conservatives, [ 156 ] including Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon .

[ 157 ] Lou Henry Hoover was an activist First Lady. She typified the new woman of the post–World War I era : intelligent, robust, and aware of multiple female possibilities.

[ 158 ] Great Depression See also: Great Depression in the United States On taking office, Hoover said that "given the chance to go forward with the policies of the last eight years, we shall soon with the help of God, be in sight of the day when poverty will be banished from this nation".

[ 159 ] Having seen the fruits of prosperity brought by technological progress, many shared Hoover's optimism, and the already bullish stock market climbed even higher on Hoover's accession.

[ 160 ] This optimism concealed several threats to sustained U.S. economic growth, including a persistent farm crisis , a saturation of consumer goods like automobiles , and growing income inequality .

[ 161 ] Most dangerous of all to the economy was excessive speculation that had raised stock prices far beyond their value.

[ 162 ] Some regulators and bankers had warned Coolidge and Hoover that a failure to curb speculation would lead to "one of the greatest financial catastrophes that this country has ever seen," but both presidents were reluctant to become involved with the workings of the Federal Reserve System , which regulated banks.

[ 163 ] In late October 1929, the stock market crashed , and the worldwide economy began to spiral downward into the Great Depression .

[ 164 ] The causes of the Great Depression remain a matter of debate, [ 165 ] but Hoover viewed a lack of confidence in the financial system as the fundamental economic problem facing the nation.

[ 166 ] He sought to avoid direct federal intervention, believing that the best way to bolster the economy was through the strengthening of businesses such as banks and railroads. He also feared that allowing individuals on the " dole " would permanently weaken the country.

[ 167 ] Instead, Hoover strongly believed that local governments and private giving should address the needs of individuals.

[ 168 ] Early policies Though he attempted to put a positive spin on Black Tuesday , Hoover moved quickly to address the stock market collapse .

[ 169 ] In the days following Black Tuesday, Hoover gathered business and labor leaders, asking them to avoid wage cuts and work stoppages while the country faced what he believed would be a short recession similar to the Depression of 1920–21.

[ 170 ] Hoover also convinced railroads and public utilities to increase spending on construction and maintenance, and the Federal Reserve announced that it would cut interest rates.

[ 171 ] In early 1930, Hoover acquired from Congress an additional $100 million to continue the Federal Farm Board lending and purchasing policies.

[ 172 ] These actions were collectively designed to prevent a cycle of deflation and provide a fiscal stimulus .

[ 171 ] At the same time, Hoover opposed congressional proposals to provide federal relief to the unemployed, as he believed that such programs were the responsibility of state and local governments and philanthropic organizations.

[ 173 ] Hoover had taken office hoping to raise agricultural tariffs in order to help farmers reeling from the farm crisis of the 1920s, but his attempt to raise agricultural tariffs became connected with a bill that broadly raised tariffs.

[ 174 ] Hoover refused to become closely involved in the congressional debate over the tariff, and Congress produced a tariff bill that raised rates for many goods.

[ 175 ] Despite the widespread unpopularity of the bill, Hoover felt that he could not reject the main legislative accomplishment of the Republican-controlled 71st Congress . Over the objection of many economists, Hoover signed the Smoot–Hawley Tariff Act into law in June 1930.

[ 176 ] Canada, France, and other nations retaliated by raising tariffs, resulting in a contraction of international trade and a worsening of the economy.

[ 177 ] Progressive Republicans such as Senator William E. Borah of Idaho were outraged when Hoover signed the tariff act, and Hoover's relations with that wing of the party never recovered.

[ 178 ] Later policies Hoover in the Oval Office with Ted Joslin , 1932 By the end of 1930, the national unemployment rate had reached 11.9 percent, but it was not yet clear to most Americans that the economic downturn would be worse than the Depression of 1920–21 .

[ 179 ] A series of bank failures in late 1930 heralded a larger collapse of the economy in 1931.

[ 180 ] While other countries left the gold standard , Hoover refused to abandon it; [ 181 ] he derided any other monetary system as " collectivism ".

[ 182 ] Hoover viewed the weak European economy as a major cause of economic troubles in the United States.

[ 183 ] In response to the collapse of the German economy , Hoover marshaled congressional support behind a one-year moratorium on European war debts.

[ 184 ] The Hoover Moratorium was warmly received in Europe and the United States, but Germany remained on the brink of defaulting on its loans.

[ 185 ] As the worldwide economy worsened, democratic governments fell; in Germany, Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler assumed power and dismantled the Weimar Republic .

[ 186 ] By mid-1931, the unemployment rate had reached 15 percent, giving rise to growing fears that the country was experiencing a depression far worse than recent economic downturns.

[ 187 ] A reserved man with a fear of public speaking, Hoover allowed his opponents in the Democratic Party to define him as cold, incompetent, reactionary, and out-of-touch.

[ 188 ] Hoover's opponents developed defamatory epithets to discredit him, such as " Hooverville " (the shanty towns and homeless encampments), "Hoover leather" (cardboard used to cover holes in the soles of shoes), and "Hoover blanket" (old newspaper used to cover oneself from the cold).

[ 189 ] While Hoover continued to resist direct federal relief efforts, Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt of New York launched the Temporary Emergency Relief Administration to provide aid to the unemployed. Democrats positioned the program as a kinder alternative to Hoover's alleged apathy towards the unemployed, despite Hoover's belief that such programs were the responsibility of state and local governments.

[ 190 ] The economy continued to worsen, with unemployment rates nearing 23 percent in early 1932, [ 191 ] and Hoover finally heeded calls for more direct federal intervention.

[ 192 ] In January 1932, he convinced Congress to authorize the establishment of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which would provide government-secured loans to financial institutions, railroads, and local governments.

[ 193 ] The RFC saved numerous businesses from failure, but it failed to stimulate commercial lending as much as Hoover had hoped, partly because it was run by conservative bankers unwilling to make riskier loans.

[ 194 ] The same month the RFC was established, Hoover signed the Federal Home Loan Bank Act , establishing 12 district banks overseen by a Federal Home Loan Bank Board in a manner similar to the Federal Reserve System.

[ 195 ] He also helped arrange passage of the Glass–Steagall Act of 1932 , emergency banking legislation designed to expand banking credit by expanding the collateral on which Federal Reserve banks were authorized to lend.

[ 196 ] As these measures failed to stem the economic crisis, Hoover signed the Emergency Relief and Construction Act , a $2 billion public works bill, in July 1932.

[ 191 ] Budget policy National debt as a fraction of GNP up from 20% to 40% under Hoover. From Historical Statistics US (1976).

After a decade of budget surpluses , the federal government experienced a budget deficit in 1931.

[ 197 ] Though some economists, like William Trufant Foster , favored deficit spending to address the Great Depression, most politicians and economists believed in the necessity of keeping a balanced budget .

[ 198 ] In late 1931, Hoover proposed a tax plan to increase tax revenue by 30 percent, resulting in the passage of the Revenue Act of 1932 .

[ 199 ] The act increased taxes across the board, rolling back much of the tax cut reduction program Mellon had presided over during the 1920s. Top earners were taxed at 63 percent on their net income, the highest rate since the early 1920s. The act also doubled the top estate tax rate, cut personal income tax exemptions, eliminated the corporate income tax exemption, and raised corporate tax rates.

[ 200 ] Despite the passage of the Revenue Act, the federal government continued to run a budget deficit.

[ 201 ] Civil rights and Mexican Repatriation Further information: Lily-white movement and Mexican Repatriation Herbert and Lou Henry Hoover aboard a train in Illinois Hoover seldom mentioned civil rights while he was president. He believed that African Americans and other races could improve themselves with education and individual initiative.

[ 202 ] Hoover appointed more African Americans to federal positions than Harding and Coolidge combined, but many African American leaders condemned various aspects of the Hoover administration, including Hoover's unwillingness to push for a federal anti-lynching law .

[ 203 ] Hoover also continued to pursue the lily-white strategy, removing African Americans from positions of leadership in the Republican Party in an attempt to end the Democratic Party's dominance in the South .

[ 204 ] Though Robert Moton and some other black leaders accepted the lily-white strategy as a temporary measure, most African American leaders were outraged.

[ 205 ] Hoover further alienated black leaders by nominating conservative Southern judge John J. Parker to the Supreme Court ; Parker's nomination ultimately failed in the Senate due to opposition from the NAACP and organized labor.

[ 206 ] Many black voters switched to the Democratic Party in the 1932 election, and African Americans would later become an important part of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal coalition .

[ 207 ] As part of his efforts to limit unemployment, Hoover sought to cut immigration to the United States , and in 1930 he promulgated an executive order requiring individuals to have employment before migrating to the United States.

[ 208 ] The Hoover Administration began a campaign to prosecute illegal immigrants in the United States , which most strongly affected Mexican Americans , especially those living in Southern California .

[ 209 ] The federal government also supported the Mexican repatriation which saw anywhere from 300,000 to two million Mexicans and Mexican Americans repatriated, deported, or expelled to Mexico during the 1930s primarily during Hoover's term. Forty to sixty percent of them were American citizens .

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] [ 212 ] While the federal government encouraged repatriations, they were largely organized by state and local authorities with support from private entities. The Hoover administration deported 34,000 people to Mexico between 1930 to 1933. It was however more common for people to repatriate voluntarily.

[ 213 ] [ 211 ] Some scholars argue that the mass repatriations was a policy of Hoover's administration.

[ 211 ] According to legal professor Kevin R. Johnson, the repatriation campaign meets the modern legal standards of ethnic cleansing , as it involved the forced removal of a racial minority by government actors.

[ 214 ] Hoover reorganized the Bureau of Indian Affairs to limit exploitation of Native Americans.

[ 215 ] Prohibition On taking office, Hoover urged Americans to obey the Eighteenth Amendment and the Volstead Act , which had established Prohibition across the United States.

[ 216 ] To make public policy recommendations regarding Prohibition, he created the Wickersham Commission .

[ 217 ] Hoover had hoped that the commission's public report would buttress his stance in favor of Prohibition, but the report criticized the enforcement of the Volstead Act and noted the growing public opposition to Prohibition. After the Wickersham Report was published in 1931, Hoover rejected the advice of some of his closest allies and refused to endorse any revision of the Volstead Act or the Eighteenth Amendment, as he feared doing so would undermine his support among Prohibition advocates.

[ 218 ] As public opinion increasingly turned against Prohibition, more and more people flouted the law, and a grassroots movement began working in earnest for Prohibition's repeal.

[ 219 ] In January 1933, a constitutional amendment repealing the Eighteenth Amendment was approved by Congress and submitted to the states for ratification. By December 1933, it had been ratified by the requisite number of states to become the Twenty-first Amendment .

[ 220 ] Foreign relations According to Leuchtenburg, Hoover was "the last American president to take office with no conspicuous need to pay attention to the rest of the world". Nevertheless, during Hoover's term, the world order established in the immediate aftermath of World War I began to crumble.

[ 221 ] As president, Hoover largely made good on his pledge made prior to assuming office not to interfere in Latin America's internal affairs. In 1930, he released the Clark Memorandum , a rejection of the Roosevelt Corollary and a move towards non-interventionism in Latin America. Hoover did not completely refrain from the use of the military in Latin American affairs ; he thrice threatened intervention in the Dominican Republic , and he sent warships to El Salvador to support the government against a left-wing revolution.

[ 222 ] Notwithstanding those actions, he wound down the Banana Wars , ending the occupation of Nicaragua and nearly bringing an end to the occupation of Haiti .

[ 223 ] Hoover placed a priority on disarmament , which he hoped would allow the United States to shift money from the military to domestic needs.

[ 224 ] Hoover and Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson focused on extending the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty , which sought to prevent a naval arms race .

[ 225 ] As a result of Hoover's efforts, the United States and other major naval powers signed the 1930 London Naval Treaty .

[ 226 ] The treaty represented the first time that the naval powers had agreed to cap their tonnage of auxiliary vessels , as previous agreements had only affected capital ships .

[ 227 ] At the 1932 World Disarmament Conference , Hoover urged further cutbacks in armaments and the outlawing of tanks and bombers , but his proposals were not adopted.

[ 227 ] In 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria , defeating the Republic of China 's National Revolutionary Army and establishing Manchukuo , a puppet state. The Hoover administration deplored the invasion, but also sought to avoid antagonizing the Japanese, fearing that taking too strong a stand would weaken the moderate forces in the Japanese government and alienate a potential ally against the Soviet Union , which he saw as a much greater threat.

[ 228 ] In response to the Japanese invasion, Hoover and Secretary of State Stimson outlined the Stimson Doctrine , which held that the United States would not recognize territories gained by force.

[ 229 ] Bonus Army Main article: Bonus Army Thousands of World War I veterans and their families demonstrated and camped out in Washington, DC, during June 1932, calling for immediate payment of bonuses that had been promised by the World War Adjusted Compensation Act in 1924; the terms of the act called for payment of the bonuses in 1945. Although offered money by Congress to return home, some members of the "Bonus Army" remained. Washington police attempted to disperse the demonstrators, but they were outnumbered and unsuccessful. Shots were fired by the police in a futile attempt to attain order, and two protesters were killed while many officers were injured. Hoover sent U.S. Army forces led by General Douglas MacArthur to the protests. MacArthur, believing he was fighting a Communist revolution , chose to clear out the camp with military force. Though Hoover had not ordered MacArthur's clearing out of the protesters, he endorsed it after the fact.

[ 230 ] The incident proved embarrassing for the Hoover administration and hurt his bid for re-election.

[ 231 ] 1932 re-election campaign Main article: 1932 United States presidential election By mid-1931 few observers thought that Hoover had much hope of winning a second term in the midst of the ongoing economic crisis.

[ 232 ] The Republican expectations were so bleak that Hoover faced no serious opposition for re-nomination at the 1932 Republican National Convention . Coolidge and other prominent Republicans all passed on the opportunity to challenge Hoover.

[ 233 ] Franklin D. Roosevelt won the presidential nomination on the fourth ballot of the 1932 Democratic National Convention , defeating the 1928 Democratic nominee, Al Smith. The Democrats attacked Hoover as the cause of the Great Depression, and for being indifferent to the suffering of millions.

[ 234 ] As Governor of New York, Roosevelt had called on the New York legislature to provide aid for the needy, establishing Roosevelt's reputation for being more favorable toward government interventionism during the economic crisis.

[ 235 ] The Democratic Party, including Al Smith and other national leaders, coalesced behind Roosevelt, while progressive Republicans like George Norris and Robert La Follette Jr.

deserted Hoover.

[ 236 ] Prohibition was increasingly unpopular and wets offered the argument that states and localities needed the tax money. Hoover proposed a new constitutional amendment that was vague on particulars. Roosevelt's platform promised repeal of the 18th Amendment.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] 1932 electoral vote results Hoover originally planned to make only one or two major speeches and to leave the rest of the campaigning to proxies, as sitting presidents had traditionally done. However, encouraged by Republican pleas and outraged by Democratic claims, Hoover entered the public fray. In his nine major radio addresses Hoover primarily defended his administration and his philosophy of government , urging voters to hold to the "foundations of experience" and reject the notion that government interventionism could save the country from the Depression.

[ 239 ] Historians contend that his radio speeches were not received well in part due to his monotone, awkward delivery.

[ 115 ] In his campaign trips around the country, Hoover was faced with perhaps the most hostile crowds ever seen by a sitting president. Besides having his train and motorcades pelted with eggs and rotten fruit, he was often heckled while speaking, and on several occasions, the Secret Service halted attempts to hurt Hoover, including capturing one man nearing Hoover carrying sticks of dynamite, and another already having removed several spikes from the rails in front of the president's train.

[ 240 ] [ failed verification ] Hoover's attempts to vindicate his administration fell on deaf ears, as much of the public blamed his administration for the depression.

[ 241 ] In the electoral vote, Hoover lost 59–472, carrying six states.

[ 242 ] Hoover won 39.6 percent of the popular vote, a plunge of 18.6 percentage points from his result in the 1928 election.

[ 243 ] Post-presidency (1933–1964) Roosevelt administration Opposition to the New Deal Further information: Presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1941) Hoover with Franklin D. Roosevelt , March 4, 1933 Hoover departed from Washington in March 1933, bitter at his election loss and continuing unpopularity.

[ 244 ] As Coolidge, Harding, Wilson, and Taft had all died during the 1920s or early 1930s and Roosevelt died in office, Hoover was the sole living former president from 1933 to 1953. He and his wife lived in Palo Alto until her death in 1944, at which point Hoover began to live permanently at the Waldorf Astoria hotel in New York City.

[ 245 ] During the 1930s, Hoover increasingly self-identified as a conservative .

[ 246 ] He closely followed national events after leaving public office, becoming a constant critic of Franklin Roosevelt. In response to continued attacks on his character and presidency, Hoover wrote more than two dozen books, including The Challenge to Liberty (1934), which harshly criticized Roosevelt's New Deal . Hoover described the New Deal's National Recovery Administration and Agricultural Adjustment Administration as "fascistic", and he called the 1933 Banking Act a "move to gigantic socialism".

[ 247 ] Only 58 when he left office, Hoover held out hope for another term as president throughout the 1930s. At the 1936 Republican National Convention , Hoover's speech attacking the New Deal was well received, but the nomination went to Kansas governor Alf Landon .

[ 248 ] In the general election , Hoover delivered numerous well-publicized speeches on behalf of Landon, but Landon was defeated by Roosevelt.

[ 249 ] Though Hoover was eager to oppose Roosevelt at every turn, Senator Arthur Vandenberg and other Republicans urged the still-unpopular Hoover to remain out of the fray during the debate over Roosevelt's proposed Judiciary Reorganization Bill of 1937 . At the 1940 Republican National Convention , he again hoped for the presidential nomination, but it went to the internationalist Wendell Willkie , who lost to Roosevelt in the general election.

[ 250 ] Hoover was the last president to seek public office after leaving office until 2022 when Donald Trump announced his successful bid for president in the 2024 presidential election .

[ 251 ] World War II Further information: Presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941–1945) During a 1938 trip to Europe, Hoover met with Adolf Hitler and stayed at Hermann Göring 's hunting lodge.

[ 252 ] He expressed dismay at the persecution of Jews in Germany and believed that Hitler was mad, but did not present a threat to the U.S. Instead, Hoover believed that Roosevelt posed the biggest threat to peace, holding that Roosevelt's policies provoked Japan and discouraged France and the United Kingdom from reaching an "accommodation" with Germany.

[ 253 ] After the September 1939 invasion of Poland by Germany, Hoover opposed U.S. involvement in World War II , including the Lend-Lease policy.

[ 254 ] He was active in the isolationist America First Committee .

[ 255 ] He rejected Roosevelt's offers to help coordinate relief in Europe, [ 256 ] but, with the help of old friends from the CRB, helped establish the Commission for Polish Relief .

[ 257 ] After the beginning of the occupation of Belgium in 1940, Hoover provided aid for Belgian civilians, though this aid was described as unnecessary by German broadcasts.

[ 258 ] [ 259 ] In December 1939, sympathetic Americans led by Hoover formed the Finnish Relief Fund to donate money to aid Finnish civilians and refugees after the Soviet Union had started the Winter War by attacking Finland, which had outraged Americans.

[ 260 ] By the end of January, it had already sent more than two million dollars to the Finns.

[ 261 ] During a radio broadcast on June 29, 1941, one week after the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union , Hoover disparaged any "tacit alliance" between the U.S. and the USSR, stating, "if we join the war and Stalin wins, we have aided him to impose more communism on Europe and the world... War alongside Stalin to impose freedom is more than a travesty. It is a tragedy." [ 262 ] Much to his frustration, Hoover was not called upon to serve after the United States entered World War II due to his differences with Roosevelt and his continuing unpopularity.

[ 245 ] He did not pursue the presidential nomination at the 1944 Republican National Convention , and, at the request of Republican nominee Thomas E. Dewey , refrained from campaigning during the general election.

[ 263 ] In 1945, Hoover advised President Harry S. Truman to drop the United States' demand for the unconditional surrender of Japan because of the high projected casualties of the planned invasion of Japan , although Hoover was unaware of the Manhattan Project and the atomic bomb .

[ 264 ] In 1943, Hoover expressed his support for Zionism .

[ 265 ] Post-World War II Further information: Presidency of Harry S. Truman and Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower Hoover with his son Allan (left) and his grandson Andrew (above), 1950 Following World War II, Hoover befriended President Truman despite their ideological differences.

[ 266 ] Because of Hoover's experience with Germany at the end of World War I, in 1946 Truman selected the former president to tour Allied-occupied Germany and Rome , Italy to ascertain the food needs of the occupied nations. After touring Germany, Hoover produced a number of reports critical of U.S. occupation policy.

[ 267 ] He stated in one report that "there is the illusion that the New Germany left after the annexations can be reduced to a ' pastoral state .' It cannot be done unless we exterminate or move 25,000,000 people out of it." [ 268 ] On Hoover's initiative, a school meals program in the American and British occupation zones of Germany was begun on April 14, 1947; the program served 3,500,000 children.

[ 269 ] External audio National Press Club Luncheon Speakers , Herbert Hoover, March 10, 1954, 37:23, Hoover speaks starting at 7:25 about the second reorganization commission, Library of Congress [ 270 ] Even more important, in 1947 Truman appointed Hoover to lead the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government a new high level study. Truman accepted some of the recommendations of the "Hoover Commission" for eliminating waste, fraud, and inefficiency, consolidating agencies, and strengthening White House control of policy.

[ 271 ] [ 272 ] Though Hoover had opposed Roosevelt's concentration of power in the 1930s, he believed that a stronger presidency was required with the advent of the Atomic Age .

[ 273 ] During the 1948 presidential election , Hoover supported Republican nominee Thomas E. Dewey 's unsuccessful campaign against Truman, but he remained on good terms with Truman.

[ 274 ] Hoover favored the United Nations in principle, but he opposed granting membership to the Soviet Union and other Communist states . He viewed the Soviet Union to be as morally repugnant as Nazi Germany and supported the efforts of Richard Nixon and others to expose Communists in the United States.

[ 275 ] Hoover with President John F. Kennedy in 1961 In 1949, Dewey, as governor of New York, offered Hoover the Senate seat vacated by Robert F. Wagner . It was a matter of being senator for only two months and he declined.

[ 276 ] Hoover with President Harry S. Truman and General Dwight D. Eisenhower at Princeton University Hoover backed conservative leader Robert A. Taft at the 1952 Republican National Convention , but the party's presidential nomination instead went to Dwight D. Eisenhower , who went on to win the 1952 election .

[ 277 ] Though Eisenhower appointed Hoover to another presidential commission, Hoover disliked Eisenhower, faulting the latter's failure to roll back the New Deal.

[ 273 ] Hoover's public work helped to rehabilitate his reputation, as did his use of self-deprecating humor; he occasionally remarked that "I am the only person of distinction who's ever had a depression named after him." [ 278 ] In 1958, Congress passed the Former Presidents Act , offering a $25,000 yearly pension (equivalent to $272,463 in 2024) to each former president.

[ 279 ] Hoover took the pension even though he did not need the money, possibly to avoid embarrassing Truman, whose allegedly precarious financial status played a role in the law's enactment.

[ 280 ] In the early 1960s, President John F. Kennedy offered Hoover various positions; Hoover declined the offers but defended the Kennedy administration after the Bay of Pigs Invasion , Cuban Missile Crisis and was personally distraught by Kennedy's assassination in 1963.

[ 281 ] Hoover wrote several books during his retirement, including The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson , in which he strongly defended Wilson's actions at the Paris Peace Conference.

[ 282 ] In 1944, he began working on Freedom Betrayed , which he often referred to as his " magnum opus ". In Freedom Betrayed , Hoover strongly critiques Roosevelt's foreign policy , especially Roosevelt's decision to recognize the Soviet Union in order to provide aid to that country during World War II.

[ 283 ] The book was published in 2012 after being edited by historian George H. Nash .

[ 284 ] Death The gravesite of Herbert and Lou Henry Hoover Hoover faced three major illnesses during the last two years of his life, including an August 1962 operation in which a growth on his large intestine was removed.

[ 285 ] [ 286 ] He died in New York City on October 20, 1964, following massive internal bleeding .

[ 287 ] [ 288 ] [ 289 ] Though Hoover's last spoken words are unknown, his last-known written words were a get-well message to his friend former President Harry S. Truman, six days before his death, after he heard that Truman had sustained injuries from slipping in a bathroom: [ 290 ] "Bathtubs are a menace to ex-presidents for as you may recall a bathtub rose up and fractured my vertebrae when I was in Venezuela on your world famine mission in 1946. My warmest sympathy and best wishes for your recovery." Two months earlier on August 10, Hoover reached the age of 90, [ 291 ] [ 292 ] only the second U.S. president (after John Adams ) to do so. When asked how he felt on reaching the milestone, Hoover replied, "Too old." [ 286 ] At the time of his death, Hoover had been out of office for over 31 years (11,553 days all together). This was the longest retirement in presidential history, surpassing Adams' 25 years, until Jimmy Carter broke that record in September 2012.

[ 293 ] President Lyndon B. Johnson ordered flags flown at half-staff and was among the 500 guests invited for the funeral service held at St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church , Other dignitaries included former Vice President Nixon, Representative William E. Miller , Governor Nelson Rockefeller , former Governor Thomas E. Dewey, former Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy , former Postmaster General James A. Farley , Rear Admiral Lewis L. Strauss and Senators Hubert Humphrey , Barry Goldwater , Kenneth Keating , and Jacob Javits .

Hoover was honored with a state funeral in which he lay in state in the United States Capitol rotunda .

[ 294 ] President Johnson and First Lady Lady Bird Johnson attended, but former presidents Truman and Eisenhower were both too ill to attend. Then, on October 25, he was buried in West Branch, Iowa, near his presidential library and birthplace on the grounds of the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site . Afterwards, Hoover's wife, Lou Henry Hoover, who had been buried in Palo Alto, California, following her death in 1944, was re-interred beside him.

[ 295 ] Hoover was the last surviving member of the Harding and Coolidge cabinets.

John Nance Garner (the speaker of the House during the second half of Hoover's term) was the only person in Hoover's United States presidential line of succession he did not outlive.

The state funeral was the third in a span of twelve months, following those of President John F. Kennedy and General of the Army Douglas MacArthur .

Black Jack was the riderless horse in all three funerals.

Legacy Historical reputation Hoover was extremely unpopular when he left office after the 1932 election, and his historical reputation would not begin to recover until the 1970s. According to Professor David E. Hamilton, historians have credited Hoover for his genuine belief in voluntarism and cooperation, as well as the innovation of some of his programs. However, Hamilton also notes that Hoover was politically inept and failed to recognize the severity of the Great Depression.

[ 296 ] Nicholas Lemann writes that Hoover has been remembered "as the man who was too rigidly conservative to react adeptly to the Depression, as the hapless foil to the great Franklin Roosevelt, and as the politician who managed to turn a Republican country into a Democratic one".

[ 3 ] Polls of historians and political scientists have generally ranked Hoover in the bottom third of presidents. A 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association 's Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Hoover as the 36th best president.

[ 297 ] A 2017 C-SPAN poll of historians also ranked Hoover as the 36th best president.

[ 298 ] Although Hoover is generally regarded as having had a failed presidency, he has also received praise for his actions as a humanitarian and public official.

[ 3 ] Biographer Glen Jeansonne writes that Hoover was "one of the most extraordinary Americans of modern times," adding that Hoover "led a life that was a prototypical Horatio Alger story, except that Horatio Alger stories stop at the pinnacle of success".

[ 299 ] Biographer Kenneth Whyte writes that, "the question of where Hoover belongs in the American political tradition remains a loaded one to this day. While he clearly played important roles in the development of both the progressive and conservative traditions, neither side will embrace him for fear of contamination with the other." [ 300 ] Historian Richard Pipes , on his actions leading the American Relief Administration , said of him: "Many statesmen occupy a prominent place in history for having sent millions to their death; Herbert Hoover, maligned for his performance as President, and soon forgotten in Russia, has the rare distinction of having saved millions." [ 301 ] Views of race Although racist remarks and humor were common at the time, Hoover never indulged in them while president, and deliberate discrimination was anathema to him. Like many of his peers, Hoover considered white people to be inherently superior to black people, considering the "mixture of bloods disadvantageous". He did think education and work would improve black people's standing, hence his support for the Tuskegee Institute .

[ 302 ] His wife Lou Henry Hoover broke the color bar as first lady by inviting Jessie De Priest , wife of the first black congressman elected in several decades, to a traditional tea for the wives of congressmen , as well as later inviting the Tuskegee Institute choir (then under the direction of William Dawson ).

[ 303 ] Although he thought of himself as a friend to black people and an advocate for their progress, [ 304 ] many of his black contemporaries had a different view.

W. E. B. Du Bois described him as an "undemocratic racist who saw blacks as a species of 'sub-men ' ".

[ 302 ] Some historians trace the disaffection of African-Americans with the Republican party to his time in office especially due to his attempt to remove African-Americans from leadership in the Republican party in the South.

[ 302 ] Hoover's time in China shaped his views of Asian people and Asian-Americans. He erroneously wrote that "no world-startling mechanical invention" had come from China, claiming this was due to Chinese people not possessing the same mechanical instincts as Europeans.

[ 302 ] This may have influenced his decision to reduce immigration through restrictions on visas.

[ 305 ] Memorials The Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum is located in West Branch, Iowa next to the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site . The library is one of thirteen presidential libraries run by the National Archives and Records Administration . The Hoover–Minthorn House , where Hoover lived from 1885 to 1891, is located in Newberg , Oregon. His Rapidan fishing camp in Virginia, which he donated to the government in 1933, is now a National Historic Landmark within the Shenandoah National Park . The Lou Henry and Herbert Hoover House , built in 1919 in Stanford, California , is now the official residence of the president of Stanford University, and a National Historic Landmark . Also located at Stanford is the Hoover Institution , a think tank and research institution started by Hoover.

Hoover has been memorialized in the names of several things, including the Hoover Dam on the Colorado River and numerous elementary, middle , and high schools across the United States. Two minor planets, 932 Hooveria [ 306 ] and 1363 Herberta , are named in his honor.

[ 307 ] The Polish capital of Warsaw has a square named after Hoover, [ 308 ] and the historic townsite of Gwalia, Western Australia contains the Hoover House Bed and Breakfast, where Hoover resided while managing and visiting the mine during the first decade of the twentieth century.

[ 309 ] A medicine ball game known as Hooverball is named for Hoover; it was invented by White House physician Admiral Joel T. Boone to help Hoover keep fit while serving as president.

[ 310 ] Hoover Presidential Library located in West Branch, Iowa A plaque in Poznań honoring Hoover Medal depicting Hoover, by Devreese Godefroi Other honors Hoover was inducted into the National Mining Hall of Fame in 1988 (inaugural class).

[ 311 ] His wife was inducted into the hall in 1990.

[ 312 ] Hoover was inducted into the Australian Prospectors and Miners' Hall of Fame in the category Directors and Management.

[ 313 ] Hoover was awarded an honorary doctorate by the Charles University in Prague and University of Helsinki in March 1938.

[ 314 ] [ 315 ] [ 316 ] The ceremonial sword is today on display in the lobby of the Hoover tower.

See also List of presidents of the United States List of presidents of the United States by previous experience Progressive Era Roaring Twenties Explanatory notes ^ Hoover later became the first president born west of the Mississippi River , and remains the only president born in Iowa.

[ 4 ] ^ Hoover later claimed to be the first student at Stanford, by virtue of having been the first person in the first class to sleep in the dormitory.

[ 21 ] References Citations ^ Levinson, Martin H. (2011). "Indexing and Dating America's 'Worst' Presidents".

ETC: A Review of General Semantics .

68 (2): 147– 155.

ISSN 0014-164X .

JSTOR 42579110 .

^ Merry, Robert W. (January 3, 2021).

"RANKED: Historians Don't Think Much of These Five U.S. Presidents" .

The National Interest . Retrieved February 25, 2022 .

^ a b c Lemann, Nicholas (October 23, 2017).

"Hating on Herbert Hoover" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved February 18, 2019 .

^ a b Burner 1996 , p. 4.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 5–10.

^ Burner, p. 6.

^ Burner, p. 7.

^ Burner, p. 9.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 13–14, 31.

^ Burner 1996 , p. 10.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 17–18.

^ Crippen, Ray (August 19, 2017).

"Column: President spent days of his boyhood only 90 miles away" .

Worthington Globe . Retrieved August 8, 2025 .

^ "National Park Service – The Presidents (Herbert Hoover)" .

^ "Timeline" . December 6, 2017.

^ Burner 1996 , p. 12.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 20–21.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 22–24.

^ "Timeline" . December 6, 2017.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 4–6.

^ Burner 1996 , p. 16.

^ Revsine, David 'Dave' (November 30, 2006), "One-sided numbers dominate Saturday's rivalry games" , ESPN , Go , retrieved November 30, 2006 ^ Lane, Rose Wilder (1920).

The Making of Herbert Hoover . New York: The Century Co. pp.

130– 139 . Retrieved November 2, 2020 .

^ Irwin, Will (1928).

Herbert Hoover: A Reminiscent Biography .

Century Company . Retrieved September 15, 2024 – via archive.org .

^ Lockley, Fred (1928). "W. Foster Hidden (William Foster Hidden (1871–1963))".

History of the Columbia River Valley from the Dalles to the Sea .

S. J. Clarke Publishing Company . p. 498 . Retrieved September 15, 2024 – via Google Books .

In 1891 he was among the first high school pupils to receive diplomas in  Vancouver and next matriculated in Leland Stanford University, becoming a  member of the class of 1895, with which Herbert Hoover was also identified.  While a sophomore in that institution he helped to establish the Romero Hall  Boarding Club, of which Mr. Hoover also became a member.

^ "Trail Breakers – Vol. 45, July 2018 to June 2019" (PDF) . Retrieved October 29, 2024 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 35–39.

^ a b c Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 6–9.

^ Big Games: College Football's Greatest Rivalries – Page 222 ^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 39–41.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 46–48.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 48–50.

^ "Herbert Hoover, the graduate: Have Stanford degree, will travel" . Hoover Institution. June 15, 2011 . Retrieved January 24, 2013 .

^ "What did the President do in Western Australia?", FAQ , Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum, archived from the original on January 18, 2012 , retrieved January 18, 2012 ^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 54–55.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 56.

^ Nash 1983 , p. 283.

^ Gwalia Historic Site , AU ^ "Hoover's Gold" (PDF) . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 2005 . Retrieved June 17, 2010 .

^ a b c Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 10–13.

^ Burner 1996 , p. 32.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 70–71, 76.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 72–73.

^ Burner 1996 , p. 34.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 77–81, 85–89.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 88–93, 98, 102–104.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 112–115.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 11–13.

^ Nash 1983 , p. 392.

^ Hoover, Herbert C. (1952).

The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover Years of Adventure 1874–1920 . London: Hollis & Carter. p. 99 ^ Nash 1983 , p. 569.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 115.

^ Burner 1996 , pp. 24–43.

^ Blainey, Geoffrey (1963).

The Rush That Never Ended . Melbourne: Melbourne University Press. pp.

265–268 .

^ a b Hoover, Herbert C. (1952).

The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover Years of Adventure 1874–1920 . London: Hollis & Carter ^ Nash 1983 , p. 381.

^ Kennan, George (1891).

Siberia and the Exile System . London: James R. Osgood, McIlvaine & Co. pp. 165, 286.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 18–20.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 119–120.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 124–125.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 43–44.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 109.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 109, 123, 369–370.

^ Hamilton, David E. (October 4, 2016).

"Herbert Hoover: Life Before the Presidency" .

Miller Center . Retrieved February 19, 2019 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 90, 96, 103.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 182–183, 207–208, 312.

^ Hoover, Bob (July 24, 2011).

"Fox News contributor Margaret Hoover defends her great-grandfather: President Hoover" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Retrieved November 15, 2018 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 132–136.

^ "The Humanitarian Years" , The Museum Exhibit Galleries , Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum , archived from the original on January 9, 2011 , retrieved February 16, 2011 ^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 137–138.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 140–142.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 143–144.

^ Burner 1996 , p. 79.

^ George H. Nash, "The "Great Humanitarian": Herbert Hoover, the Relief of Belgium, and the Reconstruction of Europe after War I." The Tocqueville Review 38.2 (2017): 55–70.

^ Hudson, John (October 6, 2014).

Christmas 1914: The First World War at Home and Abroad . History Press. p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-7509-6038-0 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 158–159.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 163.

^ Hendrick, Burton Jesse; Wilson, Woodrow (1926).

The life and letters of Walter H. Page . Doubleday, Page. p. 313.

^ Wilson, Woodrow; Link, Arthur Stanley (1982).

The Papers of Woodrow Wilson . Princeton University Press. p. 369.

ISBN 978-0-691-04690-7 .

vol 40 p 369.

^ Burner 1996 , pp. 96–97.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 178, 187–191.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 41–43.

^ Burner 1996 , p. 101.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 183–185.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 198–199.

^ Burner 1996 , pp. 104–109.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 212–213.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 204–206.

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved October 2, 2023 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 214–215.

^ a b c d Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 41–43, 57–58.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 215–217.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 216–222.

^ Keynes 1919 , p. 247.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 224.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 43–45.

^ "Food as a Weapon.", Hoover Digest , Hoover Institution ^ How the U.S. saved a starving Soviet Russia: PBS film highlights Stanford scholar's research on the 1921–23 famine Archived January 30, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ". Stanford University. April 4, 2011 ^ "Hoover Institution Timeline" . Hoover Institution . Retrieved September 25, 2017 .

^ Zieger, Robert H. (January 13, 2015).

Republicans and Labor: 1919—1929 . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0-8131-6499-1 – via Google Books.

^ Himmelberg, Robert F. (January 16, 1962).

Antitrust and Regulation During World War I and the Republican Era, 1917-1932 . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-8153-1406-6 – via Google Books.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 45–50.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 232–234.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 235–236.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 237–238.

^ a b Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 51–52.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 247–248.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 288–292.

^ a b Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 53–63.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 254–257.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 106.

^ Joseph Brandes, Herbert Hoover and Economic Diplomacy: Department of Commerce Policy, 1921–1928 (University of Pittsburgh Press, 1970) pp 83–74.

online .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 260–264.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 303–304.

^ Ferrell 1998 , pp. 32–33.

^ a b Lepore, Jill (2018). "A Constitution of the Air".

These Truths (1st ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. pp.

427– 428.

ISBN 9780393635249 .

LCCN 2018019180 .

^ Barnouw, Erik (1966), A Tower In Babel; A history of Broadcasting in the United States to 1933 , New York: Oxford University Press ^ "Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of 91st Congress, First Session. Volume 115, Part 4".

Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of 91st Congress .

^ Green, Edith (March 7, 1962).

"Program Practices of Television Networks" .

Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the 87th Congress, Second Session .

108 (part 3 (Pages 2851 to 4340)). United States Congress. U.S. Government Printing Office: 3558 .

Interestingly, ... an American ... recognized the problem that arose with general dissemination, as opposed to point-to-point transmission , of messages by wireless. ... The American was Herbert Hoover.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 53–54.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 271.

^ Peter D. Norton, Fighting Traffic: The Dawn of the Motor Age in the American City (MIT Press, 2008), pp. 178–197 ISBN 0-262-14100-0 ^ George H. Nash, "The Great Enigma and the Great Engineer", in John E. Haynes, ed., Calvin Coolidge and the Coolidge Era, (1998) pp 149–80.

^ Phillips Payson O'Brien, "Herbert Hoover, Anglo–American Relations and Republican Party Politics in the 1920s." Diplomacy & Statecraft 22.2 (2011): 200–218.

^ a b Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 68–71.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 328–329.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 333–335.

^ 'Robert Moton and the Colored Advisory Commission' , PBS.org ^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 257–200.

^ Hart 1998 .

^ Hutchison, Janet (1997), "Building for Babbitt: the State and the Suburban Home Ideal", Journal of Policy History , 9 (2): 184– 210, doi : 10.1017/S0898030600005923 , ISSN 0898-0306 , S2CID 155048376 ^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 269–271.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 322–323.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 335–338.

^ Ferrell 1957 , p. 195.

^ McCoy 1967 , pp. 390–391; Wilson 1975 , pp. 122–123.

^ Petersburg Times 10 Jun 1928 ^ Rusnak, Robert J. (Spring 1983). "Andrew W. Mellon: Reluctant Kingmaker".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

13 (2): 269– 278.

JSTOR 27547924 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 338–339.

^ Mencken, Henry Louis; Nathan, George Jean (1929), The American Mercury , p. 404 ^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 71–72.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 344–345, 350.

^ "Coolidge Defers Action on Hoover; President's Wishes as to Date of Resignation's Acceptance Are Not Revealed" .

The New York Times . July 8, 1928. p. 2 col. 2 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Clements 2010 , pp. 413–414.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 343–346.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 349–351.

^ Garcia 1980 , pp. 462–463.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 355, 360.

^ Elesha Coffman, 'The "Religious Issue" in Presidential Politics', American Catholic Studies , (Winter 2008) 119#4 pp 1–20 ^ Garcia 1980 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 369–370.

^ Slayton, Robert A. (June 2, 2002).

Empire Statesman: The Rise and Redemption of Al Smith . New York: Simon and Schuster. p.

13 .

ISBN 978-0-684-86302-3 .

^ Finan, Christomer M. (June 2, 2002).

Alfred E. Smith: The Happy Warrior . Hill and Wang.

ISBN 0-8090-3033-0 .

^ Biography , Miller center, October 4, 2016 ^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 65–66.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 84–85.

^ Fausold 1985 , p. 34.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 81–82.

^ See generally Nancy Beck Young, Lou Henry Hoover: Activist First Lady (University Press of Kansas, 2005) ^ Roark, James L.; Johnson, Michael P.; Cohen, Patricia Cline; Stage, Sarah; Hartmann, Susan M. (2012).

The American Promise, Volume C: A History of the United States: Since 1890 . Bedford/St. Martin's. p. 772.

ISBN 978-0-312-56944-0 .

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 80–81.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 65–68.

^ Kennedy 1999 , pp. 35–36.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 68–71.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 72–74.

^ Kaufman 2012 , p. 502.

^ Houck 2000 , pp. 155–156.

^ Carcasson 1998 , pp. 350–351.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009b .

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 74–75.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 104105.

^ a b Kennedy 1999 , pp. 53–55.

^ Harris Gaylord Warren, Herbert Hoover and the Great Depression (New York: Oxford University Press, 1959), p. 175.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 147–149.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 93–97.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 399–402, 414.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 414–415.

^ Kumiko Koyama, "The Passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act: Why Did the President Sign the Bill?" Journal of Policy History (2009) 21#2 pp. 163–86 ^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 91–92.

^ Kennedy 1999 , pp. 58–59.

^ Kennedy 1999 , pp. 65–66.

^ Kennedy 1999 , pp. 77–78.

^ Eichengreen & Temin 2000 , pp. 196–197.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 143–144.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 441–444, 449.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 450–452.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 485–486.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 140–141.

^ Carcasson 1998 , pp. 351–352.

^ Cabanes, Bruno (2014).

The Great War and the Origins of Humanitarianism, 1918–1924 . Cambridge University Press. p. 206.

ISBN 978-1-107-02062-7 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 457–459.

^ a b Fausold 1985 , pp. 162–166.

^ Olson 1972 , pp. 508–511.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 153–154.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 162–163.

^ Rappleye 2016 , pp. 309.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 483–484.

^ Rappleye 2016 , p. 303.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 158–159.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 472, 488–489.

^ Ippolito, Dennis S. (2012).

Deficits, Debt, and the New Politics of Tax Policy . Cambridge University Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-139-85157-2 .

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 159–161.

^ Lisio, Donald J.

Hoover, Blacks, & Lily-Whites: A Study of Southern Strategies , University of North Carolina Press, 1985 ( excerpt ) ^ Garcia 1980 , pp. 471–474.

^ Garcia 1980 , pp. 462–464.

^ Garcia 1980 , pp. 464–465.

^ Garcia 1980 , pp. 465–467.

^ Garcia 1980 , pp. 476–477.

^ Rappleye 2016 , p. 247.

^ Hoffman 1973 , pp. 206–207.

^ Rosales, F. Arturo (January 1, 2007).

"Repatriation of Mexicans from the US" . In Soto, Lourdes Diaz (ed.).

The Praeger Handbook of Latino Education in the U.S . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

400– 403.

ISBN 9780313338304 .

^ a b c Gratton, Brian; Merchant, Emily (December 2013).

"Immigration, Repatriation, and Deportation: The Mexican-Origin Population in the United States, 1920–1950" (PDF) . Vol. 47, no. 4. The International migration review. pp.

944– 975.

^ Johnson 2005 , p. 4–5.

^ Hoffman 1973 , pp. 208, 217–218.

^ Johnson 2005 , p. 6.

^ "The Ordeal of Herbert Hoover" .

National Archives . August 15, 2016 . Retrieved May 2, 2022 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 372–373.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , p. 85.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 433–435.

^ Kyvig, David E. (1979).

Repealing National Prohibition . Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. p. 49.

^ Huckabee, David C. (September 30, 1997).

"Ratification of Amendments to the U.S. Constitution" (PDF) .

Congressional Research Service reports . Washington D.C.: Congressional Research Service , The Library of Congress . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 27, 2004.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , p. 117.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 120–121.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 183–186.

^ Fausold 1985 , p. 58.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 479–480.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 175–176.

^ a b Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 117–119.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 122–123.

^ Current, Richard N. (1954). "The Stimson Doctrine and the Hoover Doctrine".

The American Historical Review .

59 (3): 513– 542.

doi : 10.2307/1844715 .

JSTOR 1844715 .

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 136–138.

^ Dickson, Paul; Allen, Thomas B. (February 2003).

"Marching on History" .

Smithsonian . Retrieved February 7, 2017 .

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 193–194.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 194–195.

^ Carcasson 1998 , pp. 353.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 138–140.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 211–212.

^ "Prohibition After the 1932 Elections" CQ Researcher ^ Herbert Brucker, "How Long, O Prohibition?" The North American Review , 234#4 (1932), pp. 347–357.

online ^ Carcasson 1998 , pp. 359.

^ Gibbs, Nancy (November 10, 2008).

"When New President Meets Old, It's Not Always Pretty" .

Time . Archived from the original on November 11, 2008.

^ Carcasson 1998 , pp. 361–362.

^ Fausold 1985 , pp. 212–213.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 142.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 147–149.

^ a b Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 155–156.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 555–557.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 147–151.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 151–153.

^ Short, Brant (1991). "The Rhetoric of the Post-Presidency: Herbert Hoover's Campaign against the New Deal, 1934–1936".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

21 (2): 333– 350.

JSTOR 27550722 .

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 147–154.

^ Zeitz, Joshua (November 15, 2022).

"4 Ex-Presidents Who Ran Again — And What They Mean for Trump" .

Politico . Retrieved June 8, 2023 .

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 558–559.

^ Kosner, Edward (October 28, 2017). "A Wonder Boy on the Wrong Side of History".

The Wall Street Journal . New York City.

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 152–154.

^ Katznelson, Ira (2013).

Fear Itself: The New Deal and the Origins of our Time. New York , NY: Liveright Publishing Corporation.

ISBN 978-0-87140-450-3 .

OCLC 783163618 .

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 565.

^ Jeansonne 2016 , pp. 328–329.

^ "The Great Humanitarian: Herbert Hoover's Food Relief Efforts" . Cornell College . Retrieved February 28, 2020 .

^ Churchill, Winston (August 20, 1940).

" 'The Few' Speech" . International Churchill Society . Retrieved February 28, 2020 .

^ "FOREIGN TRADE: Amtorg's Spree" .

Time . February 19, 1940. Archived from the original on October 14, 2010.

^ "THE CONGRESS: Sounding Trumpets" .

Time . January 29, 1940. Archived from the original on October 14, 2010.

^ Robinson, Edgar Eugene (1973). "Hoover, Herbert Clark".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 11. Chicago, Illinois: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

pp.

676– 77.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 572.

^ Cohen, Jared (April 9, 2019).

Accidental presidents : eight men who changed America (First hardcover ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 313.

ISBN 978-1-5011-0982-9 .

OCLC 1039375326 .

^ "Herbert Hoover's Plan for Palestine" (PDF) . Retrieved December 29, 2024 .

^ Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 157–158.

^ Beschloss, Michael R. (2002).

The Conquerors: Roosevelt, Truman and the Destruction of Hitler's Germany, 1941–1945 . New York City: Simon & Schuster . p.

277 .

ISBN 978-0-7432-4454-1 .

^ UN Chronicle (March 18, 1947).

"The Marshall Plan at 60: The General's Successful War on Poverty" . The United Nations. Archived from the original on April 14, 2008 . Retrieved June 17, 2010 .

^ Shephard, Roy J.

(2014).

An Illustrated History of Health and Fitness, from Pre-History to our Post-Modern World . New York City: Axel Springer SE . p. 782.

^ "National Press Club Luncheon Speakers, Herbert Hoover, March 10, 1954" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved October 20, 2016 .

^ Richard Norton Smith, An Uncommon Man, (1984) pp 371–380.

^ Christopher D. McKenna, "Agents of adhocracy: management consultants and the reorganization of the executive branch, 1947–1949." Business and Economic History (1996): 101–111.

^ a b Leuchtenburg 2009 , pp. 158–159.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 587–588.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 592–594.

^ Herbert Hoover, The Crusade Years, 1933–1955: Herbert Hoover's Lost Memoir of the New Deal Era and Its Aftermath , edited by George H. Nash,  (Hoover Institution Press, 2013) p 13.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 595.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 592.

^ Smith, Stephanie (March 18, 2008).

"Former Presidents: Federal Pension and Retirement Benefits" (PDF) .

Congressional Research Service .

U.S. Senate . Retrieved November 18, 2008 .

^ Martin, Joseph William (1960).

My First Fifty Years in Politics as Told to Robert J. Donovan . McGraw-Hill. p. 249.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 601.

^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 571, 604–605.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 606.

^ Yerxa, Donald A (September 2012), "Freedom Betrayed: An interview with George H. Nash about Herbert Hoover's Magnum Opus", Historically Speaking , XIII (4) ^ Whyte 2017 , pp. 606–607.

^ a b "Hoover Marks 90th Year Today; Predicts New Gains for Nation Because of Its Freedoms" .

The New York Times . August 10, 1964 . Retrieved March 25, 2019 .

^ Phillips, McCandlish (October 21, 1964).

"Herbert Hoover Is Dead; Ex-President, 90, Served Country in Varied Fields" . The Learning Network: The New York Times on the web . Retrieved March 25, 2019 .

^ Justice, Charles J. (October 20, 1964).

"Ex-President Herbert Hoover dead at 90" .

The Bulletin . (Bend, Oregon). UPI. p. 1.

^ Everett, Arthur (October 21, 1964).

"Hoover dies at 90 after long illness" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Associated Press. p. 1.

^ Mancini, Mark (August 30, 2013).

"Harry Truman and Herbert Hoover: An Unlikely Friendship" .

Mentalfloss.org . Mentalfloss . Retrieved April 6, 2019 .

^ Wilson, Lyle (August 10, 1964).

"Hoover, 90 years today, wants no honors" .

The Bulletin . (Bend, Oregon). UPI. p. 4.

^ Daniell, Raymond (August 10, 1964).

"Hoover marking 90th birthday" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Associated Press. p. 7.

^ Dillon, John (September 9, 2012).

"The Record-Setting Ex-Presidency of Jimmy Carter" .

The Atlantic . Boston, Massachusetts: Emerson Collective . Retrieved March 25, 2019 .

^ "Lying in State or in Honor" . Washington, D.C.: Architect of the Capitol . Retrieved March 25, 2019 .

^ "Gravesite" .

nps.gov . National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior . Retrieved March 25, 2019 .

^ Hamilton, David E. (October 4, 2016).

"HERBERT HOOVER: IMPACT AND LEGACY" .

Miller Center . Retrieved December 5, 2017 .

^ Rottinghaus, Brandon; Vaughn, Justin S. (February 19, 2018).

"How Does Trump Stack Up Against the Best — and Worst — Presidents?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 10, 2019.

^ "Presidential Historians Survey 2017" .

C-SPAN . Retrieved May 14, 2018 .

^ Jeansonne 2016 , pp. 1–2.

^ Whyte 2017 , p. 610.

^ Pipes, Richard (1993).

Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime . Knopf. p. 419.

^ a b c d Garcia, George F. (1979).

"Herbert Hoover and the Issue of Race" .

The Annals of Iowa .

44 (7): 507– 515.

doi : 10.17077/0003-4827.8609 .

ISSN 0003-4827 . Retrieved May 11, 2019 .

^ "William L. Dawson Tribute | Tuskegee University" .

www.tuskegee.edu . Retrieved March 5, 2023 .

^ Jeansonne, G. (April 3, 2012).

The Life of Herbert Hoover: Fighting Quaker, 1928–1933 . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-137-11189-0 .

^ Howard, Spencer (August 4, 2016).

"Hoover on Immigration" .

Hoover Heads . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

^ Schmadel, Lutz D. (2007). "(932) Hooveria".

Dictionary of Minor Planet Names . Springer Berlin Heidelberg. p. 83.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-29925-7_933 .

ISBN 978-3-540-00238-3 .

^ Schmadel, Lutz D. (2007). "(1363) Herberta".

Dictionary of Minor Planet Names . Springer Berlin Heidelberg. p. 110.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-29925-7_1364 .

ISBN 978-3-540-00238-3 .

^ "An American Friendship: Herbert Hoover and Poland" , Library & Archives , Stanford University : Hoover Institution , August 1, 2005, archived from the original on January 1, 2011 , retrieved February 17, 2011 ^ Gwalia House Archived April 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine . Gwalia.org.au. Retrieved on July 14, 2013.

^ "History of Hoover-Ball" .

Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum . Archived from the original on October 25, 2012 . Retrieved June 30, 2014 .

^ "Hoover | MiningHallOfFame.org" . Archived from the original on June 11, 2020 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ "Hoover | MiningHallOfFame.org" . Archived from the original on November 23, 2019 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ "Hoover, Herbert Clark" .

mininghalloffame.com.au . Retrieved June 21, 2021 .

^ "Herbert Hoover − z chudého synka nejmocnějším mužem planety" (in Czech). Témata. July 26, 2017 . Retrieved June 21, 2021 .

^ "USA:n entinen presidentti Herbert Hoover vastaanottaa tohtorinmiekan ja vihitään kunniatohtoriksi" .

Finna archive (in Finnish). National Library of Finland. 1938 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

^ Panu (January 26, 1986).

"Kunniatohtori Hoover" (PDF) . Oulu: Oulu-lehti . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

Works cited Burner, David (1996) [1979].

Herbert Hoover: A Public Life . Easton Press.

Originally published as Burner, David (1979).

Herbert Hoover: A Public Life . Knopf Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-394-46134-2 .

Carcasson, Martin (Spring 1998). "Herbert Hoover and the Presidential Campaign of 1932: The Failure of Apologia".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

28 (2): 349– 365.

JSTOR 27551864 .

Clements, Kendrick A. (June 2010).

Imperfect Visionary, 1918–1928 . The Life of Herbert Hoover. Vol. 4. Palgrave Macmillan.

doi : 10.1057/9780230107908 .

ISBN 978-0-230-10308-5 .

Eichengreen, Barry; Temin, Peter (2000).

"The Gold Standard and the Great Depression" (PDF) .

Contemporary European History .

9 (2): 183– 207.

doi : 10.1017/S0960777300002010 .

JSTOR 20081742 .

S2CID 158383956 .

Fausold, Martin L. (1985).

The Presidency of Herbert C. Hoover . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-0259-9 .

Ferrell, Robert H. (1998).

The Presidency of Calvin Coolidge .

University Press of Kansas .

ISBN 978-0-7006-0892-8 .

Ferrell, Robert H. (1957).

American Diplomacy in the Great Depression: Hoover–Stimson Foreign Policy, 1929–1933 . Yale University Press.

Garcia, George F. (January 1, 1980).

"Black Disaffection From the Republican Party During the Presidency of Herbert Hoover, 1928–1932" .

The Annals of Iowa .

45 (6): 462– 477.

doi : 10.17077/0003-4827.8734 .

ISSN 0003-4827 .

Hart, David M. (1998), "Herbert Hoover's Last Laugh: the Enduring Significance of the 'Associative State' in the United States", Journal of Policy History , 10 (4): 419– 444, doi : 10.1017/S0898030600007156 , S2CID 154120555 Herring, George C. (2008).

From Colony to Superpower; U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0 .

Hoffman, Abraham (May 1973). "Stimulus to Repatriation: The 1931 Federal Deportation Drive and the Los Angeles Mexican Community".

Pacific Historical Review .

42 (2): 205– 219.

doi : 10.2307/3638467 .

JSTOR 3638467 .

Houck, Davis W. (2000), "Rhetoric as Currency: Herbert Hoover and the 1929 Stock Market Crash", Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 3 (2): 155– 181, doi : 10.1353/rap.2010.0156 , ISSN 1094-8392 , S2CID 154447214 Johnson, Kevin (Fall 2005).

"The Forgotten Repatriation of Persons of Mexican Ancestry and Lessons for the War on Terror" .

Pace Law Review .

26 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.58948/2331-3528.1147 .

S2CID 140417518 .

Jeansonne, Glen (2016).

Herbert Hoover: A Life . Penguin.

ISBN 978-1-101-99100-8 .

Kaufman, Bruce E. (2012). "Wage Theory, New Deal Labor Policy, and the Great Depression: Were Government and Unions to Blame?".

Industrial and Labor Relations Review .

65 (3): 501– 532.

doi : 10.1177/001979391206500302 .

hdl : 10072/48703 .

JSTOR 24368882 .

S2CID 54877676 .

Kennedy, David M. (1999).

Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929-1945 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503834-7 .

Keynes, John Maynard (1919).

The Economic Consequences of the Peace . Harcourt Brace and Howe.

Leuchtenburg, William E. (2009).

Herbert Hoover . Times Books (Henry Holt and Company).

ISBN 978-0-8050-6958-7 .

Leuchtenburg, William E. (Summer 2009).

"The Wrong Man at the Wrong Time" .

American Heritage .

59 (2).

McCoy, Donald R. (1967).

Calvin Coolidge: The Quiet President . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-4680-1777-9 .

Nash, George H. (1983).

The Life of Herbert Hoover: The Engineer 1874–1914 . W W Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-01634-5 .

Book 1 in The Life of Herbert Hoover Series.

O'Brien, Patrick G.; Rosen, Philip T. (1981).

"Hoover and the Historians: the Resurrection of a President" .

The Annals of Iowa .

46 (2): 83– 99.

doi : 10.17077/0003-4827.8816 .

Olson, James S. (October 1972).

"Gifford Pinchot and the Politics of Hunger, 1932–1933" .

Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography .

96 (4): 508– 520.

JSTOR 20090681 .

Rappleye, Charles (2016).

Herbert Hoover in the White House: The Ordeal of the Presidency . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4516-4869-0 .

Whyte, Kenneth (2017).

Hoover: An Extraordinary Life in Extraordinary Times . Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-307-59796-0 .

Wilson, Joan Hoff (1975).

Herbert Hoover, Forgotten Progressive . Little, Brown.

ISBN 978-0-316-94416-8 .

Further reading Main article: Bibliography of Herbert Hoover Biographical Best, Gary Dean.

The Politics of American Individualism: Herbert Hoover in Transition, 1918–1921 (1975) Best, Gary Dean.

The Life of Herbert Hoover: Keeper of the Torch, 1933–1964.

Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.

Edwards, Barry C. "Putting Hoover on the Map: Was the 31st President a Progressive?" Congress & the Presidency 41#1 (2014) pp 49–83 Hatfield, Mark. ed.

Herbert Hoover Reassessed (2002) Hawley, Ellis (1989), Herbert Hoover and the Historians .

Jeansonne, Glen.

The Life of Herbert Hoover: Fighting Quaker, 1928–1933.

Palgrave Macmillan; 2012.

Lloyd, Craig.

Aggressive Introvert: A Study of Herbert Hoover and Public Relations Management, 1912–1932 (1973).

Nash, George H.

The Life of Herbert Hoover: The Engineer 1874–1914 (1983); in-depth scholarly study —— (1988), The Humanitarian, 1914–1917 , The Life of Herbert Hoover, vol. 2 .

—— (1996), Master of Emergencies, 1917–1918 , The Life of Herbert Hoover, vol. 3 .

Nash, Lee, ed.

Understanding Herbert Hoover: Ten Perspectives (1987); essays by scholars Smith, Richard Norton.

An Uncommon Man: The Triumph of Herbert Hoover , (1987), biography concentrating on post 1932.

Walch, Timothy. ed.

Uncommon Americans: The Lives and Legacies of Herbert and Lou Henry Hoover Praeger, 2003.

West, Hal Elliott.

Hoover, the Fishing President: Portrait of the Man and his Life Outdoors (2005).

Scholarly studies Arnold, Peri E. "The 'Great Engineer' as Administrator: Herbert Hoover and Modern Bureaucracy." Review of Politics 42.3 (1980): 329–348.

JSTOR 1406794 .

Barber, William J.

From New Era to New Deal: Herbert Hoover, the Economists, and American Economic Policy, 1921–1933 . (1985) Claus Bernet (2009). "Hoover, Herbert". In Bautz, Traugott (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 30. Nordhausen: Bautz. cols. 644–653.

ISBN 978-3-88309-478-6 .

Brandes, Joseph.

Herbert Hoover and Economic Diplomacy: Department of Commerce Policy, 1921–1928.

(U of Pittsburgh Press, 1970).

Britten, Thomas A. "Hoover and the Indians: the Case for Continuity in Federal Indian Policy, 1900–1933" Historian 1999 61 (3): 518–538.

ISSN 0018-2370 .

Clements, Kendrick A.

Hoover, Conservation, and Consumerism: Engineering the Good Life . University Press of Kansas, 2000 Dodge, Mark M., ed.

Herbert Hoover and the Historians . (1989) Fausold Martin L. and George Mazuzan, eds.

The Hoover Presidency: A Reappraisal (1974) Goodman, Mark, and Mark Gring.

"The Radio Act of 1927: progressive ideology, epistemology, and praxis" .

Rhetoric & Public Affairs 3.3 (2000): 397–418.

Hawley, Ellis."Herbert Hoover and the Historians—Recent Developments: A Review Essay" Annals of Iowa 78#1 (2018) pp. 75–86 doi : 10.17077/0003-4827.12547 Hawley, Ellis.

"Herbert Hoover, the Commerce Secretariat, and the Vision of an 'Associative State', 1921–1928" [ usurped ] .

Journal of American History , (June 1974) 61#1: 116–140.

Jansky Jr, C. M. "The contribution of Herbert Hoover to broadcasting." Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 1.3 (1957): 241–249.

Lee, David D. "Herbert Hoover and the Development of Commercial Aviation, 1921–1926." Business History Review 58.1 (1984): 78–102.

Lichtman, Allan J.

Prejudice and the Old Politics: The Presidential Election of 1928 (1979) Lisio, Donald J.

The President and Protest: Hoover, MacArthur, and the Bonus Riot , 2d ed. (1994) Lisio, Donald J.

Hoover, Blacks, and Lily-whites: A Study of Southern Strategies (1985) Parafianowicz, Halina.

'Herbert C. Hoover and Poland: 1919–1933. Between Myth and Reality' Polsky, Andrew J., and Olesya Tkacheva. "Legacies Versus Politics: Herbert Hoover, Partisan Conflict, and the Symbolic Appeal of Associationalism in the 1920s." International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society 16.2 (2002): 207–235.

online Short, Brant.  "The Rhetoric of the Post-Presidency: Herbert Hoover's Campaign against the New Deal, 1934–1936" Presidential Studies Quarterly (1991) 21#2   pp. 333–350 online Sibley, Katherine A.S., ed.

A Companion to Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover (2014); 616pp; essays by scholars stressing historiography Wueschner, Silvano A.

Charting Twentieth-Century Monetary Policy: Herbert Hoover and Benjamin Strong, 1917–1927 . Greenwood, 1999 Primary sources Myers, William Starr; Walter H. Newton, eds. (1936).

The Hoover Administration; a documented narrative .

Hawley, Ellis, ed. (1974–1977).

Herbert Hoover: Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President , 4 vols.

Hoover, Herbert Clark (1934), The Challenge to Liberty .

—— (1938), Addresses Upon The American Road, 1933–1938 .

—— (1941), Addresses Upon The American Road, 1940–41 .

——; and Gibson, Hugh (1942), The Problems of Lasting Peace .

—— (1949), Addresses Upon The American Road, 1945–48 .

—— (1952a), Years of adventure, 1874–1920 , Memoirs, vol. 1, New York: Macmillan .

—— (1952b), The Cabinet and the Presidency, 1920–1933 , Memoirs, vol. 2, New York: Macmillan .

—— (1952c), The Great Depression, 1929–1941 , Memoirs, vol. 3, New York: Macmillan .

Miller, Dwight M.; Walch, Timothy, eds. (1998), Herbert Hoover and Franklin D. Roosevelt: A Documentary History , Contributions in American History, Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, ISBN 978-0-313-30608-2 Hoover, Herbert Clark (2011), Nash, George H.

(ed.), Freedom Betrayed: Herbert Hoover's Secret History of the Second World War and Its Aftermath , Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, ISBN 978-0-8179-1234-5 .

Hoover, Herbert Clark (2013), Nash, George H.

(ed.), The Crusade Years, 1933–1955: Herbert Hoover's Lost Memoir of the New Deal Era and Its Aftermath , Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, ISBN 978-0-8179-1674-9 .

External links Works by Herbert Hoover at Project Gutenberg Appearances on C-SPAN Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and Museum Archived May 28, 2020, at the Wayback Machine Herbert Hoover National Historic Site , National Park Service Herbert Hoover: The Man and His Work (1920) by Vernon Lyman Kellogg Herbert Hoover collected news and commentary at The New York Times Herbert Hoover at IMDb Works by Herbert Hoover at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by or about Herbert Hoover at the Internet Archive v t e Herbert Hoover 31st President of the United States (1929–1933) 3rd United States Secretary of Commerce (1921–1928) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition Inauguration Foreign policy Hoover Dam Agricultural Marketing Act of 1929 Federal Farm Board Reapportionment Act of 1929 Wall Street crash of 1929 Smoot–Hawley Tariff Act National anthem Economy Act of 1932 Revenue Act of 1932 Mexican Repatriation Federal Home Loan Bank Act Federal Home Loan Bank Board Federal Home Loan Banks Hooverville Bonus Army Banana Wars U.S. occupation of Nicaragua U.S. occupation of Haiti London Naval Treaty Hoover Moratorium Stimson Doctrine Cabinet Medicine Ball Cabinet Hooverball State of the Union Address, 1929 1930 Presidential transition of Franklin D. Roosevelt Judicial appointments Supreme Court Executive Orders Hoover desk Other events Sons of Gwalia mine Zinc Corporation Commission for Relief in Belgium University Foundation Belgian American Educational Foundation American Relief Administration Russian Famine Relief Act U.S. Food Administration Commission for Polish Relief Finnish Relief Fund Hoover Commission Life Early life Birthplace and childhood home National Historic Site Hoover–Minthorn House Lou Henry Hoover House Rapidan Camp Legacy Bibliography Presidential Library, Museum, and gravesite Hoover Institution Library and Archives Hoover Tower Hoover Institution Herbert C. Hoover Building U.S. Postage stamp Hoover Medal Hoover Chair Hoover Field SS President Hoover Black Jack (riderless horse at state funeral) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) The Angel of Pennsylvania Avenue (1996 film) Books Freedom Betrayed English translation of De re metallica Elections Republican National Convention, 1920 1928 1932 1940 1928 United States presidential election 1932 Family Lou Henry Hoover (wife) Herbert Hoover Jr.

(son) Allan Hoover (son) Margaret Hoover (great-granddaughter) ← Calvin Coolidge Franklin D. Roosevelt → Category Offices and distinctions Other offices New office Chairman of the Commission for Relief in Belgium 1914–1917 Office abolished Government offices New office Director of the United States Food Administration 1917–1918 Office abolished Political offices Preceded by Joshua W. Alexander United States Secretary of Commerce 1921–1928 Succeeded by William F. Whiting Preceded by Calvin Coolidge President of the United States 1929–1933 Succeeded by Franklin D. Roosevelt Party political offices Preceded by Calvin Coolidge Republican nominee for President of the United States 1928 , 1932 Succeeded by Alf Landon Awards and achievements Preceded by Aristide Briand Cover of Time November 16, 1925 Succeeded by Gifford Pinchot Preceded by Paul Painlevé Preceded by Douglas MacArthur Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1964 Succeeded by Dwight D. Eisenhower Articles related to Herbert Hoover v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Unsuccessful major party candidates for President of the United States Thomas Jefferson ( 1796 ) John Adams ( 1800 ) Charles C. Pinckney ( 1804 , 1808 ) DeWitt Clinton ( 1812 ) Rufus King ( 1816 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1824 ) William H. Crawford ( 1824 ) Henry Clay ( 1824 , 1832 , 1844 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1828 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1836 ) Hugh Lawson White ( 1836 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1840 ) Lewis Cass ( 1848 ) Winfield Scott ( 1852 ) John C. Frémont ( 1856 ) Stephen A. Douglas ( 1860 ) George B. McClellan ( 1864 ) Horatio Seymour ( 1868 ) Horace Greeley ( 1872 ) Samuel J. Tilden ( 1876 ) Winfield Scott Hancock ( 1880 ) James G. Blaine ( 1884 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1888 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1892 ) William J. Bryan ( 1896 , 1900 , 1908 ) Alton B. Parker ( 1904 ) William Howard Taft ( 1912 ) Charles Evans Hughes ( 1916 ) James M. Cox ( 1920 ) John W. Davis ( 1924 ) Al Smith ( 1928 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1932 ) Alf Landon ( 1936 ) Wendell Willkie ( 1940 ) Thomas E. Dewey ( 1944 , 1948 ) Adlai Stevenson ( 1952 , 1956 ) Richard Nixon ( 1960 ) Barry Goldwater ( 1964 ) Hubert Humphrey ( 1968 ) George McGovern ( 1972 ) Gerald Ford ( 1976 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1980 ) Walter Mondale ( 1984 ) Michael Dukakis ( 1988 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1992 ) Bob Dole ( 1996 ) Al Gore ( 2000 ) John Kerry ( 2004 ) John McCain ( 2008 ) Mitt Romney ( 2012 ) Hillary Clinton ( 2016 ) Donald Trump ( 2020 ) Kamala Harris ( 2024 ) All presidential candidates Presidents Third-party candidates v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e United States secretaries of commerce Commerce and labor Cortelyou Metcalf Straus Nagel Commerce Redfield Alexander Hoover Whiting Lamont Chapin Roper Hopkins Jones Wallace Harriman Sawyer Weeks Strauss Mueller Hodges Connor Trowbridge Smith Stans Peterson Dent Morton Richardson Kreps Klutznick Baldrige Verity Mosbacher Franklin Brown Kantor Daley Mineta Evans Gutierrez Locke Bryson Pritzker Ross Raimondo Lutnick v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron "Whizzer" White 1963: Roger Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown , Willie Davis , Jack Kemp , Ron Kramer , Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby 2011: Robert Gates 2012: Roscoe Brown 2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell 2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss 2015: Condoleezza Rice 2016: Archie Manning 2017: None awarded 2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman 2019: Mark Harmon v t e Cabinet of President Warren G. Harding (1921–1923) Vice President Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes (1921–1923) Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon (1921–1923) Secretary of War John W. Weeks (1921–1923) Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty (1921–1923) Postmaster General Will H. Hays (1921–1922) Hubert Work (1922–1923) Harry S. New (1923) Secretary of the Navy Edwin Denby (1921–1923) Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall (1921–1923) Hubert Work (1923) Secretary of Agriculture Henry Cantwell Wallace (1921–1923) Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover (1921–1923) Secretary of Labor James J. Davis (1921–1923) v t e Cabinet of President Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929) Vice President None (1923–1925) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes (1923–1925) Frank B. Kellogg (1925–1929) Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon (1923–1929) Secretary of War John W. Weeks (1923–1925) Dwight F. Davis (1925–1929) Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty (1923–1924) Harlan F. Stone (1924–1925) John G. Sargent (1925–1929) Postmaster General Harry S. New (1923–1929) Secretary of the Navy Edwin Denby (1923–1924) Curtis D. Wilbur (1924–1929) Secretary of the Interior Hubert Work (1923–1928) Roy Owen West (1928–1929) Secretary of Agriculture Henry Cantwell Wallace (1923–1924) Howard Mason Gore (1924–1925) William Marion Jardine (1925–1929) Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover (1923–1928) William F. Whiting (1928–1929) Secretary of Labor James J. Davis (1923–1929) v t e Cabinet of President Herbert Hoover (1929–1933) Vice President Charles Curtis (1929–1933) Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg (1929) Henry L. Stimson (1929–1933) Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon (1929–1932) Ogden L. Mills (1932–1933) Secretary of War James William Good (1929) Patrick J. Hurley (1929–1933) Attorney General William D. Mitchell (1929–1933) Postmaster General Walter Folger Brown (1929–1933) Secretary of the Navy Charles Francis Adams III (1929–1933) Secretary of the Interior Ray Lyman Wilbur (1929–1933) Secretary of Agriculture Arthur M. Hyde (1929–1933) Secretary of Commerce Robert P. Lamont (1929–1932) Roy D. Chapin (1932–1933) Secretary of Labor James J. Davis (1929–1930) William N. Doak (1930–1933) v t e ( ← 1916 ) 1920 United States presidential election ( → 1924 ) Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Warren G. Harding Vice President: Calvin Coolidge Other candidates Leonard Wood Frank Orren Lowden Hiram Johnson William Cameron Sproul Nicholas Murray Butler Calvin Coolidge Robert M. La Follette Jeter C. Pritchard Miles Poindexter Howard Sutherland Herbert Hoover Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: James M. Cox Vice President: Franklin D. Roosevelt Other candidates William Gibbs McAdoo A. Mitchell Palmer Al Smith John W. Davis Edward I. Edwards Woodrow Wilson (incumbent) Robert L. Owen Third party and independent candidates Socialist Party Nominee: Eugene V. Debs VP nominee: Seymour Stedman Farmer–Labor Party Nominee: Parley P. Christensen VP nominee: Max S. Hayes Prohibition Party Nominee: Aaron S. Watkins VP nominee: D. Leigh Colvin American Party Nominee: James E. Ferguson VP nominee: William J. Hough Socialist Labor Party Nominee: William Wesley Cox VP nominee: August Gillhaus Single Tax Nominee: Robert Colvin Macauley VP nominee: Richard C. Barnum Other 1920 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1924 ) 1928 United States presidential election ( → 1932 ) Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Herbert Hoover Vice President: Charles Curtis Other candidates Charles Curtis Guy D. Goff Frank O. Lowden George W. Norris Frank B. Willis Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Al Smith campaign Vice President: Joseph T. Robinson Other candidates Cordell Hull Atlee Pomerene James A. Reed Evans Woollen Third party and independent candidates Communist Party Nominee: William Z. Foster VP nominee: Benjamin Gitlow Prohibition Party Nominee: William F. Varney Socialist Party Nominee: Norman Thomas VP nominee: James H. Maurer Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Frank T. Johns VP nominee: Verne L. Reynolds Independents William Dudley Pelley Other 1928 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1928 ) 1932 United States presidential election ( → 1936 ) Democratic Party ( Primaries · Convention ) Nominees President: Franklin D. Roosevelt Vice President: John Nance Garner Other candidates John Nance Garner William H. Murray James A. Reed Albert Ritchie Al Smith ( campaign ) Republican Party ( Primaries · Convention ) Nominees President: Herbert Hoover (incumbent) Vice President: Charles Curtis (incumbent) Other candidates John J. Blaine Calvin Coolidge Joseph I. France James W. Wadsworth Third party and independent candidates Communist Party Nominee: William Z. Foster VP nominee: James W. Ford Prohibition Party Nominee: William David Upshaw Socialist Party Nominee: Norman Thomas VP nominee: James H. Maurer Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Verne L. Reynolds VP nominee: John W. Aiken Independents James Renshaw Cox William Hope Harvey Other 1932 elections : House Senate v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices Portals : Biography 1920s Conservatism Geology Politics Iowa United States Herbert Hoover at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Australia Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Herbert_Hoover&oldid=1306492408 " Categories : Herbert Hoover 1874 births 1964 deaths 19th-century Quakers 20th-century presidents of the United States 20th-century Quakers American expatriates in Australia American expatriates in China American geologists American male non-fiction writers American memoirists American mining engineers American non-fiction outdoors writers American people of Canadian descent American people of English descent American people of German descent American anti–World War II activists American people of Irish descent American people of Swiss descent American political writers American Quakers Belgian relief in World War I California Republicans Candidates in the 1920 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1928 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1932 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1936 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1940 United States presidential election Coolidge administration cabinet members Deaths from bleeding Engineers from California Engineers from Iowa Engineers from New York (state) George Fox University alumni Harding administration cabinet members Hoover family John Fritz Medal recipients Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences People from Newberg, Oregon People from Stanford, California People from West Branch, Iowa Presidents of the United States Republican Party presidents of the United States Members of the Sons of the American Revolution Stanford University alumni Stanford University trustees United States secretaries of commerce Writers from California Writers from Iowa Writers from New York City American anti-communists American founders American Christian Zionists American expatriates in the United Kingdom Members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Czech-language sources (cs) CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2023 Articles with failed verification from April 2025 CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with Project Gutenberg links People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Herbert Hoover 128 languages Add topic

