Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and other names 2 Religious significance 3 Performing salah Toggle Performing salah subsection 3.1 Salah in congregation 3.2 Places and times at which salah is prohibited 4 Obligatory salah Toggle Obligatory salah subsection 4.1 The daily prayers 4.2 Friday and Eid prayers 4.3 Jam' and Qasr 5 Supererogatory salah Toggle Supererogatory salah subsection 5.1 Sunan ar-Rawatib 5.2 Salah before noon 5.3 Salah during the night 5.4 Eclipse prayers 5.5 Istikhara salah 6 Differences in practice 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Footnotes 8.2 Citations 8.3 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Salah 115 languages Acèh Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk ГӀалгӀай ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Лакку Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Basa Ugi Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Betawi Ghanaian Pidgin Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Salat ) Form of daily obligatory prayer in Islam This article is about the Islamic prayers. For other uses, see Salah (disambiguation) .

"Salat" redirects here. For other uses, see Salat (disambiguation) .

Various prescribed movements in salah , which collectively constitute a rak'ah . From left to right: rukū' , qiyām /i'tidal , sujūd , takbīr , and qu'ūd/julūs .

Part of a series on Islam Beliefs Oneness of God Angels Holy books Prophets Judgement Day Predestination Practices Profession of faith Prayer Almsgiving Fasting Pilgrimage Texts Foundations Quran Sunnah ( Hadith , Sirah ) Tafsir (exegesis) Ijtihad Aqidah (creed) Qisas al-Anbiya ( Stories of the Prophets ) Mathnawi (poems) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) History Timeline Jahiliyyah Muhammad Ahl al-Bayt Sahabah Rashidun Caliphate Imamate Spread of Islam Succession to Muhammad Abbasid Caliphate Al-Andalus Golden Age Seljuk Empire Ilkhanate Timurid Renaissance Gunpowder empires Ottoman Empire Saudi Arabia Culture and society Academics Animals Art Association football Calendar Cats Censorship Children Circumcision Democracy Demographics Diaspora Denominations Sunni Shia Ibadi Economics Education Ethics Exorcism Feminism Festivals Finance Liberalism Madrasa Moral teachings Mosque Music Mysticism Philosophy Poetry Politics Proselytizing Science Sexuality LGBTQ Slavery Concubinage Social welfare Women Related topics Arabic language Apostasy Criticism Muhammad Quran Hadith Other religions Islamism Violence terrorism war Islamophobia Jihad Jihadism Salafi jihadism Deobandi jihadism Military laws Peace Pacifism Glossary Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Aqidah Sunni Six Articles of Iman God Prophets Holy books Angels The Last Judgement Predestination Five Pillars of Islam Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj Schools of theology Ahl al-Hadith Athari 1 Ahl al-Ra'y Ash'ari 2 Maturidi 3 Shi'a Basic Tenets of Faith Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj Khums Jihad Commanding what is just Forbidding what is evil Tawalla Tabarra Theology of the Twelvers 4, 5 Tawhid Adalah Prophecy Imamah Qiyamah Theology of the Ismailis 6 Walayah Tawhid Salah Zakat Sawm Hajj Jihad Theology of the Zaydis Muhakkima Theology of the Ibadis Other variants Jabriyya Jahmiyya Mujassimah Murji Mu'tazila Qadariyya Quraniyya Ahmadiyya Nation of Islam Unaffiliated Including: 1 Hanbali school Zahiri school 2 Maliki school Shafi'i school 3 Hanafi school 4 Ja'fari school ( Usuli Akhbari Shaykhi ) 5 Ghulat ( Alawi Alevi Bektashi Qizilbash Ishiki ) 6 Nizari ( Khoja Satpanth ) Mustali ( Dawoodi Bohra Sulaymani Bohra Alavi Bohra Hebtiahs Bohra Atba-i-Malak Bohra Qutbi Bohra ) Islam portal v t e This article, in the section Sunan ar-Rawatib, may incorporate text from a large language model .

Such text potentially includes hallucinated information or fictitious references .

Copyright violations or claims lacking verification must be removed . Please see the associated project page for additional guidance.

( August 2025 ) Salah ( Arabic : ٱلصَّلَاةُ , romanized : aṣ-Ṣalāh , also spelled salat ) is the practice of formal worship in Islam , consisting of a series of ritual prayers performed at prescribed times daily. These prayers, which consist of units known as rak'ah , include a specific set of physical postures, recitation from the Quran , and prayers from the Sunnah , and are performed while facing the direction towards the Kaaba in Mecca ( qibla ). The number of rak'ah varies depending on the specific prayer. Variations in practice are observed among adherents of different madhahib (schools of Islamic jurisprudence ). The term salah may denote worship in general or specifically refer to the obligatory prayers performed by Muslims five times daily, or, in some traditions, three times daily.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The obligatory prayers play an integral role in the Islamic faith, and are regarded as the second and most important, after shahadah , of the Five Pillars of Islam for Sunnis , and one of the Ancillaries of the Faith for Shiites . In addition, supererogatory salah , such as Sunnah prayer and Nafl prayer , may be performed at any time, subject to certain restrictions.

Wudu , an act of ritual purification, is required prior to performing salah . Prayers may be conducted individually or in congregation, with certain prayers, such as the Friday and Eid prayers , requiring a collective setting and a khutbah (sermon). Some concessions are made for Muslims who are physically unable to perform the salah in its original form, or are travelling.

In early Islam , the direction of prayer ( qibla ) was toward Bayt al-Maqdis in Jerusalem before being changed to face the Kaaba, believed by Muslims to be a result of a Quranic verse revelation to Muhammad .

[ 4 ] Etymology and other names [ edit ] The Arabic word salah ( Arabic : صلاة , romanized : Ṣalāh , pronounced [sˤa.laːh] or Arabic pronunciation: [sˤə.ɫaːt] ) means 'prayer'.

[ 5 ] The word is used primarily by English speakers to refer to the five daily obligatory prayers. Similar terms are used to refer to the prayer in Malaysia , Brunei , Indonesia , Somalia , Tanzania , and by some Swahili speakers.

The origin of the word is debated. Some have suggested that salah derives from the triliteral root و-ص-ل ( w-ṣ-l ) which means 'linking things together', [ citation needed ] relating it to the obligatory prayers in the sense that one connects to Allah through prayer. In some translations, namely that of Quranist Rashad Khalifa , salah is translated as the 'contact prayer', [ 6 ] either because of the physical contact the head makes with the ground during the prostration , or again because the prayer connects the one who performs it to Allah. Another theory suggests the word derives from the triliteral root ص-ل-و ( ṣ-l-w ), the meaning of which is not agreed upon.

[ 7 ] [ full citation needed ] In Iran and regions influenced by Persian culture – particularly the Indo-Persian and Turco-Persian traditions – such as South Asia , Central Asia , China , Russia , Turkey , the Caucasus or the Balkans , the Persian word namaz ( Persian : نماز , romanized : namāz ) is used to refer to salah . This word originates from the Middle Persian word for 'reverence'.

[ 8 ] Religious significance [ edit ] Muslims praying ( salah ) in 1865 Cairo by Jean-Léon Gérôme The word salah is mentioned 83 times in the Quran as a noun.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Islamic jurisprudence ( fiqh ) divides human actions into five categories, known as "the five rulings " ( al-aḥkām al-khamsa ), and acts of worship will be classified accordingly; mandatory ( farḍ or wājib ), recommended ( mandūb or mustaḥabb ), neutral ( mubāḥ ), reprehensible ( makrūh ), and forbidden ( ḥarām ).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Salah is generally classified into obligatory or mandatory ( fard ) prayers and supererogatory prayers, the latter being further divided into Sunnah prayers and Nafl prayers .

Hanafi fiqh does not consider both terms as synonymous and makes a distinction between " fard " and " wajib "; In Hanafi fiqh, two conditions are required to impose the fard rule. 1.

Nass , (only verses of the Qur'an can be accepted as evidence here, not hadiths ) 2.The expression of the text referring to the subject must be clear and precise enough not to allow other interpretations. The term wajib is used for situations that do not meet the second of these conditions.

[ 13 ] However, this understanding may not be sufficient to explain every situation. For example, Hanafis accept 5 daily prayers as fard. However, some religious groups such as Quranists and Shiites , who do not doubt that the Quran existing today is a religious source, infer from the same verses that it is clearly ordered to pray two or three times, [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] not five times. In addition, in religious literature, wajib is widely used for all kinds of religious requirements, without expressing any fiqh definition.

According to riwāya, prayer is held to be extremely important in Islam, and according to all four of the madhabs , those who have a disdain towards prayer are no longer seen as Muslims .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] While some sects claimed that those killed in this way remained Muslims, others claimed that they had apostatized from the religion . In this case, Islamic duties could not be made for their funerals, they would not be buried in Muslim cemeteries, and their heirs could not claim inheritance rights from the property they left behind, and would be public property.

[ 21 ] However, even if today's dominant understanding defines the abandonment of worship as sinfulness , does not approve of giving worldly punishment for them. However, in sharia governments, their testimony against a devout Muslim may not be accepted, they may be humiliated and barred from certain positions because of this tag. In practice, since early on in Islamic history, criminal cases were usually handled by ruler-administered courts or local police using procedures which were only loosely related to Sharia.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] In sermon language, the main purpose of the salah is given as acting as a means of communication with Allah .

[ 24 ] Other emphases include cleansing the heart, getting closer to God, and strengthening faith. It is believed that the soul requires prayer and closeness to Allah to stay sustained and healthy, and that prayer spiritually sustains the human soul, just as food provides nourishment to the physical body.

[ 25 ] Tafsir ( exegesis ) of the Quran can give four reasons for the observation of salah . First, in order to commend God , Allah's servants, together with the angels, do salah ("blessing, salutations").

[ 26 ] [ a ] Second, salah is done involuntarily by all beings in creation, in the sense that they are always in contact with Allah by virtue of him creating and sustaining them.

[ 27 ] [ b ] Third, Muslims voluntarily offer salah to reveal that it is the particular form of worship that belongs to the prophets.

[ c ] Fourth, salah is described as the second pillar of Islam.

[ 5 ] Performing salah [ edit ] Main article: Rak'a The prayer room in Khonakhan Mosque , Uzbekistan There is consensus on the vast majority of the major details of the salah , but there are different views on some of the more intricate details. A Muslim is required to perform Wudu (ablution) before performing salah , [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] and making the niyyah (intention) is a prerequisite for all deeds in Islam, including salah . Some schools of Islamic jurisprudence hold that intending to pray suffices in the heart, and some require that the intention be spoken, usually under the breath.

[ 31 ] The person praying begins in a standing position known as Qiyam , although people who find it difficult to do so may begin while sitting or lying on the ground.

[ 5 ] This is followed by raising the hands to the head and recitation of the takbir, an action known as the Takbirat al-Ihram (Arabic: تكبيرة الإحرام , romanized: Takbīrat al-Iḥrām ). The hands are then lowered, and may be clasped on the abdomen (qabd), or hang by one's sides (sadl). A Muslim may not converse, eat, or do things that are otherwise halal after the Takbirat al-Ihram. A Muslim must keep their vision low during prayer, looking at the place where their face will contact the ground during prostration.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] A prayer may be said before the recitation of the Quran commences. Next, Al-Fatiha , the first chapter of the Quran, is recited. In the first and second rak'a of all prayers, a surah other than Al-Fatiha or part thereof is recited after Al-Fatiha. This is followed by another takbir after which the person praying bows down their waist in a position known as ruku with their hands on their knees (depending on the madhhab , rules may differ for women). While bowing, specific versions of tasbih are uttered once or more. As the worshipper straightens their back, they say the Arabic phrase " سمع الله لمن حمده " ( lit.

' Allah hears the one who praises him.

' ), followed by the phrase " ربنا لك الحمد " ( lit.

' Our Lord, all praise is for you.

' ) [ 31 ] Following the recitation of these words of praise, the takbir is recited once again before the worshipper kneels and prostrates with the forehead, nose, knees, palms and toes touching the floor, a position known as sujud . Similar to ruku, specific versions of tasbih are uttered once or more in sujud. The worshipper recites the takbir and rises up to sit briefly, then recites takbir and returns to sujud once again. Lifting the head from the second prostration completes a rak'ah . If this is the second or last rak'a, the worshipper rises up to sit once again and recites the Tashahhud , Salawat , and other prayers.

[ 31 ] Many Sunni scholars, including Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab [ 34 ] and Al-Albani [ 35 ] hold that the right index finger should be raised when reciting the prayers in this sitting position, [ 31 ] Once the worshipper is done praying in the sitting position in their last rak'a, they perform the taslim, reciting lengthened versions of the Islamic greeting As-salamu alaykum , once while facing the right and another time while facing the left. Taslim represents the end of prayer.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Mistakes and doubts in salah are compensated for by prostrating twice at the end of the prayer, either before or after the taslim depending on the Madhab . These prostrations are known as sujud sahwi (Arabic: سجود السهو , romanized: Sujud as-Sahw ).

[ 39 ] Salah in congregation [ edit ] Main article: Congregational prayer (Islam) In Islamic belief, performing salah in congregation is considered to have more social and spiritual benefits than praying alone.

[ 40 ] The majority of Sunni scholars recommend performing the obligatory salah in congregation without viewing the congregational prayer as an obligation. A minority view exists viewing performing the obligatory salah in congregation as an obligation.

[ 41 ] Women performing the Friday prayer at a mosque, Ohio , US When praying in congregation, the people stand in straight parallel rows behind one person who leads the prayer service, called the imam . The imam must be above the rest in knowledge of the Quran, action, piety, and justness, and should be known to possess faith and commitment the people trust.

[ 42 ] The prayer is offered just as it is when one prays alone, with the congregation following the imam as they offer their salah .

[ 43 ] Two people of the same gender praying in congregation would stand beside each other, with the imam on the left and the other person to his right.

[ citation needed ] When the worshippers consist of men and women combined, a man leads the prayer. In this situation, women are typically forbidden from assuming this role with unanimous agreement within the major schools of Islam. This is disputed by some, partly based on a hadith with controversial interpretations. When the congregation consists entirely of women and/or pre-pubescent children, a woman may lead the prayer.

[ 44 ] Some configurations allow for rows of men and women to stand side by side separated by a curtain or other barrier, [ 45 ] with the primary intention being for there to be no direct line of sight between male and female worshippers.

[ 46 ] Places and times at which salah is prohibited [ edit ] Salah is not performed in graveyards and bathrooms. It is prohibited from being performed after Fajr prayer until sunrise, during a small period of time around noon, and after Asr prayer until sunset. The prohibition of salah at these times is to prevent the practice of sun worship .

[ 47 ] Obligatory salah [ edit ] The daily prayers [ edit ] Display showing salah times in a Turkish mosque The word salah, when used to refer to the Sunni second pillar of Islam or the Shia ancillary of faith, refers to the five obligatory daily prayers.

[ 48 ] Each of the five prayers has a prescribed time which depends on the position of the sun in the sky. Given the Islamic day begins at sunset, the first prayer of the day would be Maghrib , performed directly after sunset. It is followed by the Isha salah that is performed during the night, the Fajr salah performed before sunrise, and the Dhuhr and Asr prayers performed in the afternoon.

The five daily prayers must be performed in their prescribed times. However, if extenuating circumstances prevent a Muslim from performing them on time, they must be performed as soon as possible. Several hadith narrations quote the Islamic prophet Muhammad saying that a person who slept past the prescribed time or forgot to perform the obligatory salah must pray it as soon as they remember.

[ 42 ] These prayers are considered obligatory upon every adult Muslim, [ 48 ] with the exception of those with some physical or mental disabilities, [ 49 ] menstruating women , and women experiencing postnatal bleeding.

[ 50 ] Those who are sick or otherwise physically unable to perform their salah standing may perform them sitting or lying down according to their ability.

[ 51 ] Some Muslims pray three times a day, believing the Qur'an mentions three prayers instead of five.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 3 ] Friday and Eid prayers [ edit ] Main articles: Friday prayer and Eid prayers Friday prayer for Muslims in the streets of Dhaka , Bangladesh In general, Sunnis view the five daily prayers, in addition to the Friday salah , as obligatory. There is a difference of opinion within the Sunni schools of jurisprudence regarding whether the Eid and Witr prayers are obligatory on all Muslims, [ 54 ] obligatory only such that a sufficient number of Muslims perform it, [ 55 ] or sunnah .

[ 56 ] All Sunni schools of jurisprudence view the Friday salah as an obligatory prayer replacing Zuhr on Fridays exclusively. It is obligatory upon men and is to be prayed in congregation, while women have the choice to offer it in congregation or pray Zuhr at home.

[ 57 ] Preceding the Friday salah , a khutbah (sermon) is delivered by a khatib , after which the 2 rak'a Friday prayer is performed.

[ 58 ] A minority view within the Sunni schools holds that listening to the khutbah compensates for the spiritual reward of the 2 rak'a that are discounted from the prayer.

[ 59 ] The Eid salah is offered on the mornings of Muslim holidays Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha . It consists of 2 rak'a, with extra takbirs pronounced before the beginning of the recitation of the Quran in each. The exact number of extra takbirs is differed upon within the Sunni schools, with the majority opining that seven takbirs are pronounced in the first rak'a and five in the second. The Hanafi school holds that 3 takbirs are to be pronounced in each rak'a. After the prayer, a khutbah is delivered. However, unlike the Friday prayer, the khutbah is not an integral part of the Eid prayer.

[ 60 ] The prescribed time of the Eid prayer is after that of Fajr and before that of Zuhr.

[ 61 ] Jam' and Qasr [ edit ] Muslims may pray two obligatory prayers together at the prescribed time of one, a practice known as jam'. This is restricted to two pairs of salah: the afternoon prayers of Zuhr and Asr, and the night-time prayers of Maghrib and Isha. Within the schools of jurisprudence in Sunni Islam , there is a difference of opinion regarding the range of reasons that permit one to perform jam'. With the exception of the Hanafi school , the other schools of jurisprudence allow one to perform jam' when travelling or when incapable of performing the prayers separately.

Hanbalis and members of the Salafi movement allow jam' for a wider range of reasons.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Some Salafis ascribing to the Ahl-i Hadith movement also permit jam' without reason while preferring that the prayers be performed separately.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] The Shia Ja'fari school allows one to perform jam' without reason.

[ 66 ] Exclusively when traveling, a Muslim may shorten the Zuhr, Asr, and Isha prayers, which normally consist of 4 rak'a , to two. This is known as qasr.

[ 61 ] Supererogatory salah [ edit ] Muslims may perform supererogatory salah as an act of worship at any time except the times of prohibition. Such salah is called nafil .

[ 67 ] Prayers performed by Muhammad consistently, or those that he recommended be performed but are not considered obligatory, are called sunnah prayers.

Sunan ar-Rawatib [ edit ] Sunan ar-Rawatib (Arabic: السنن الرواتب, romanized: as-Sunan ar-Rawātib) refers to the regular voluntary (Sunnah) prayers that are associated with the five daily obligatory (Fard) prayers. These prayers are highly recommended and were regularly practiced by the Islamic Prophet Muhammad. Performing them brings great reward and helps to make up for any deficiencies in the obligatory prayers. They are performed by Sunni Muslims during the prescribed times of the five daily obligatory prayers, either before performing the obligatory prayer or after it. Within the Sunni schools of jurisprudence, these amount to 10 or 12 rak'a, spread between the five prayers except Asr. The Sunan ar-Rawatib performed before the obligatory prayers are performed between the adhan and iqama of their associated salah, while those performed after the obligatory prayer may be performed up to the end of the prescribed time of the associated salah.

[ citation needed ] The Sunan ar-Rawatib are classified into two categories: [ citation needed ] 1.

Sunnah Mu'akkadah (Emphasized Sunnah) : These are the prayers that the Islamic prophet Muhammad regularly performed and strongly encouraged, making them highly recommended.

2.

Sunnah Ghair Mu'akkadah (Non-emphasized Sunnah) : These prayers were sometimes performed by the Islamic prophet Muhammad but not as consistently, and they are not as strongly emphasized.

Number and Timing of Sunan ar-Rawatib [ citation needed ] According to most scholars, there are 12 units (rak'ahs) of Sunnah Mu'akkadah in total, associated with the five daily prayers. These are broken down as follows: Sunnah Mu'akkadah (Emphasized) [ citation needed ] – 2 Rak'ahs before Fajr The Prophet never missed these two rak'ahs, even while traveling.

– 4 Rak'ahs before Dhuhr (prayed in sets of 2)
Strongly recommended to pray these 4 rak'ahs before the Dhuhr prayer.

– 2 Rak'ahs after Dhuhr Prayed immediately after the obligatory Dhuhr prayer.

– 2 Rak'ahs after Maghrib Prayed after the Maghrib prayer.

– 2 Rak'ahs after Isha Prayed after the Isha prayer.

Additional Sunnah Ghair Mu'akkadah (Non-emphasized) [ citation needed ] Some additional Sunnah prayers, which the Islamic prophet Muhammad occasionally prayed but not consistently, include: – 2 or 4 Rak'ahs before Asr – 2 Rak'ahs before Maghrib – 2 Rak'ahs before Isha These are not emphasized as strongly as the Sunnah Mu'akkadah but are still meritorious to perform.

Importance and Benefits [ citation needed ] Performing the Sunan ar-Rawatib offers several benefits: – It helps to compensate for any shortcomings or deficiencies in the obligatory prayers.

– It brings great reward and draws a person closer to Allah.

– Muhammad promised that whoever regularly performs these 12 rak'ahs will have a house built in Paradise (Sahih Muslim).

In conclusion, the Sunan ar-Rawatib are a valuable part of a Muslim's daily worship routine, supplementing the obligatory prayers and enhancing one's connection to Allah.

Salah before noon [ edit ] Duha salah is a prayer that can be performed after sunrise until noon. (which the time for the Dhuhr Prayer begins) It consists of an even number of rak'a, starting from two and going up to twelve. This prayer is one of 4 sunnah prayers which can be done in congregation.

Salah during the night [ edit ] Witr salah (Arabic: صلاة الوتر ) is a short prayer generally performed as the last prayer of the night. It consists of an odd number of rak'a, starting from one and going up to eleven, with slight differences between the different schools of jurisprudence.

[ 68 ] Witr salah often includes the qunut .

[ 69 ] Within Sunni schools of jurisprudence, the Hanafis view that the Witr salah is obligatory, while the other schools consider it a sunnah salah .

Within Sunni schools of jurisprudence, Tahajjud (Arabic: تَهَجُّد ) refers to night-time prayers generally performed after midnight. The prayer includes any number of even rak'a, performed as individual prayers of two rak'a or four. Tahajjud is generally concluded with Witr salah.

[ 68 ] Shia Muslims offer similar prayers, called Salawat al-Layl (Arabic: صَلَوَات اللَّيل ). These are considered highly meritorious, consist of 11 rak'a: 8 nafl (performed as 4 prayers of 2 rak'a each) followed by 3 witr, [ 70 ] and can be offered in the same time as Tahajjud.

[ 69 ] Tarawih salah (Arabic: صلاة التراويح ) is a sunnah prayer performed exclusively during Ramadan by Sunnis. It is performed immediately after the Isha prayer, and consists of 8 to 36 rak'a. Shi'ites hold that Tarawih is a bid'ah initiated by the second Rashidun caliph, Umar . Tarawih is also generally concluded with Witr salah.

Eclipse prayers [ edit ] Following the sunnah of Muhammad during the solar eclipse that followed his son Ibrahim's death, Sunni Muslims perform the solar eclipse prayer ( Arabic : صلاة الكسوف , romanized : Ṣalāt al-Kusuf ), and the lunar eclipse prayer (Arabic: صلاة الخسوف , romanized: Ṣalāt al-Khusuf ) during solar and lunar eclipses, respectively. These consist of 2 rak'a with 2 ruku in each rak'a instead of one. It is recommended to lengthen the recitation of the Quran, the bowing , and prostration in these prayers.

[ citation needed ] Istikhara salah [ edit ] The word istikharah is derived from the root ḵ-y-r (خير) "well-being, goodness, choice, selection".

[ 71 ] Salat al-Istikhaarah is a prayer offered when a Muslim needs guidance on a particular matter. To say this salah one should pray two rakats of non-obligatory salah to completion. After completion one should request Allah that which on is better.

[ 61 ] The intention for the salah should be in one's heart to pray two rakats of salah followed by Istikhaarah . The salah can be offered at any of the times where salah is not forbidden.

[ 72 ] Other prayers include the tahiyyat al-masjid , which Muslims are encouraged to offer these two rakat.

[ 73 ] Differences in practice [ edit ] A Sunni Muslim (left) and Shia Muslim (right) performing the Friday prayer in Tehran . Some Sunnis perform salah with the hands clasped ("qabd"), while Shia offer salah with their hands at their sides ("sadl").

While most Muslims pray five times a day, some Muslims pray three times a day, believing the Qur'an only mentions three prayers.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Qur'anists are among those who pray three times a day.

[ 74 ] Most Muslims believe that Muhammad practiced, taught, and disseminated the salah in the whole community of Muslims and made it part of their life. The practice has, therefore, been concurrently and perpetually practiced by the community in each of the generations. The authority for the basic forms of the salah is neither the hadiths nor the Quran, but rather the consensus of Muslims.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] A turbah or mohr is a small piece of soil or clay, often a clay tablet, used during salah to symbolize earth.

This is not inconsistent with another fact that Muslims have shown diversity in their practice since the earliest days of practice, so the salah practiced by one Muslim may differ from another's in minor details. In some cases the hadith suggest some of this diversity of practice was known of and approved by Muhammad himself.

[ 77 ] Most differences arise because of different interpretations of the Islamic legal sources by the different schools of law ( madhhabs ) in Sunni Islam , and by different legal traditions within Shia Islam . In the case of ritual worship these differences are generally minor, and should rarely cause dispute.

[ 78 ] Common differences, which may vary between schools and gender, include the position of legs, feet, hands and fingers, where the eyes should focus, the minimum amount of recitation, the volume of recitation, and which of the principal elements of the prayer are indispensable, versus recommended or optional.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Dua Sabr (Islamic term) Salawat al-Sha'baniyya Tasbih References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Quran, 33:43 ^ Quran, 24:41 ^ Quran, 21:71–73 Citations [ edit ] ^ Na, Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im; Naʻīm, ʻabd Allāh Aḥmad (30 June 2009).

Islam and the Secular State . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674033764 .

^ Edward E. Curtis IV (1 October 2009).

Muslims in America: A Short History . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-974567-8 .

^ a b Jafarli, Durdana. "The historical conditions for the emergence of the Quranist movement in Egypt in the 19th-20th centuries." МОВА І КУЛЬТУРА (2017): 91.

^ Mubarakpuri, Safiur Rahman (1976).

Ar-Raheeq Al-Makhtum [ The Sealed Nectar ] (PDF) (in Arabic). Translated by Diab, Issam. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2018.

^ a b c Chittick, William C.; Murata, Sachiko (1994).

The vision of Islam . Paragon House.

ISBN 9781557785169 .

^ "Quran The Final Testament, translated by Rashad Khalifa, Ph.D." www.masjidtucson.org . Retrieved 12 May 2022 .

^ Last Name, First Name (2020).

"Title" .

Scientific Route .

doi : 10.21303/978-617-7319-30-5 .

^ "British Library" .

^ Dukes, Kais, ed. (2009–2017).

"Quran Dictionary" .

Quranic Arabic Corpus . Retrieved 26 October 2019 .

^ Gerrans, S., "The Quran: A Complete Revelation", 2016 ^ Vikør 2014 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFVikør2014 ( help ) ^ Schneider 2014 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFSchneider2014 ( help ) ^ "According to the Bishair the fardh, is like the wajib but the wajib expresses [that something should] occur and the fard, expresses [that something has] a definitive assessment.

https://brill.com/display/book/edcoll/9789047400851/B9789047400851_s012.xml?language=en Archived 6 April 2024 at the Wayback Machine ^ Zum Beispiel Sayyid Ahmad Khan. Vgl. Ahmad: Islamic Modernism in India and Pakistan 1857–1964 . 1967, S. 49.

^ "Ek 15 – Dini Görevler: Tanrı'dan Bir Armağan" .

Teslimolanlar . Archived from the original on 5 November 2021 . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .

^ Vgl. Birışık: "Kurʾâniyyûn" in Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı İslâm Ansiklopedisi . 2002, Bd. 26, S. 429.; Yüksel; al-Shaiban; Schulte-Nafeh: Quran: A Reformist Translation . 2007, S. 507.

^ "10. How Can we Observe the Sala Prayers by Following the Quran Alone? - Edip-Layth - quranix.org" .

quranix.org .

Archived from the original on 2 March 2024 . Retrieved 14 August 2023 .

^ "Sahih al-Bukhari 1399, 1400 - Obligatory Charity Tax (Zakat) - كتاب الزكاة - Sunnah.com - Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)" .

sunnah.com . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ "Do all the Imams Agree Neglecting the prayer Continuously Entails Disbelief? (Important Clarification)" .

Darul Iftaa . 4 November 2011 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 .

^ Eki̇Nci̇, Ahmet (2021).

"İslam Hukukunda Namaz Kılmayanın Hükmü" .

Kocatepe İslami İlimler Dergisi .

4 (2): 388– 409.

doi : 10.52637/kiid.982657 .

^ Peters, Rudolph; Vries, Gert J. J. De (1976). "Apostasy in Islam".

Die Welt des Islams .

17 (1/4): 7– 9.

doi : 10.2307/1570336 .

JSTOR 1570336 .

^ Calder 2009 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFCalder2009 ( help ) ^ Ziadeh 2009c .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFZiadeh2009c ( help ) ^ Sheihul Mufliheen (October 2012).

Holy Quran's Judgement . XLIBRIS. p. 57.

ISBN 978-1479724550 .

^ Elias, Abu Amina (25 June 2015).

"The purpose of prayer in Islam | Faith in Allah الإيمان بالله" . Retrieved 17 November 2019 .

^ BIN SAAD, ADEL (January 2016).

A COMPREHENSIVE DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPHET'S WAY OF PRAYER: صفة صلاة النبي . Dar Al Kotob Al Ilmiyah دار الكتب العلمية.

ISBN 978-2745167804 .

^ "An Enlightening Commentary into the Light of the Holy Qur'an vol. 11" . Imam Ali Foundation. 24 January 2014.

^ The Oxford Dictionary of Islam.

"Salat" .

oxfordislamicstudies . Archived from the original on 1 September 2009.

^ "salat | Definition & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 4 January 2016 .

^ "Sahih Muslim 428 - The Book of Prayers - كتاب الصلاة - Sunnah.com - Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)" .

sunnah.com . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ a b c d e Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck; Smith, Jane I. (1 January 2014).

The Oxford Handbook of American Islam . Oxford University Press. p. 162.

ISBN 9780199862634 .

^ Ciaravino, Helene (2001).

How to Pray: Tapping into the Power of Divine Communication . Square One Publishers (2001). p. 137.

ISBN 9780757000126 .

^ Al-Tusi, Muhammad Ibn Hasan (2008).

Concise Description of Islamic Law and Legal Opinions . Islamic College for Advanced Studie; UK ed. edition (1 October 2008). pp.

57– 59.

ISBN 978-1904063292 .

^ Abd al-Wahhab (2019 , p. 197) ^ al-Albani (2004 , p. 108) ^ Du'a before Taslim (Sunni View) ^ About the Taslim ^ "Sahih Muslim 672a - The Book of Mosques and Places of Prayer - كتاب الْمَسَاجِدِ وَمَوَاضِعِ الصَّلاَةِ - Sunnah.com - Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)" .

sunnah.com . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ "The Prostration of Forgetfulness : Shaikh 'Abdullaah bin Saalih Al-'Ubaylaan" .

AbdurRahman.Org . Translated by Abu Maryam. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014 . Retrieved 28 June 2014 .

^ Qara ati, Muhsin (18 February 2018).

The Radiance of the Secrets of Prayer . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 978-1496053961 .

^ "Rules of Salat (Part III of III)" . Al-Islam.org.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2012 . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

^ a b Qara'ati, Muhsin (5 January 2017).

"The Radiance of the Secrets of Prayer" . Ahlul Bayt World Assembly.

^ Hussain, Musharraf (10 October 2012).

The Five Pillars of Islam: Laying the Foundations of Divine Love and Service to Humanity . Kube Publishing Ltd (10 October 2012). pp.

77– 78.

ISBN 978-1847740540 .

^ "Iranian women to lead prayers" . BBC. 1 August 2000 . Retrieved 11 February 2008 .

^ Cornell, Vincent J. (2007).

Voices of Islam: Voices of life : family, home, and society . Praeger Publishers; 1st edition (1 January 2007). pp.

25– 28.

ISBN 978-0275987350 .

^ Maghniyyah, Muhammad Jawad (21 November 2016).

"Prayer (Salat), According to the Five Islamic Schools of Law" . Islamic Culture and Relations Organisation.

^ Ringwald, Christopher D (20 November 2008).

A Day Apart: How Jews, Christians, and Muslims Find Faith, Freedom, and Joy on the Sabbath . Oxford University Press (8 January 2007). pp.

117– 119.

ISBN 978-0195165364 .

^ a b "Salah (Prayer) – The Second Pillar of Islam" .

Islamic Relief UK . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ Elshabrawy, Elsayed; Hassanein, Ahmad (3 February 2015).

Inclusion, Disability and Culture (Studies in Inclusive Education) . Sense Publishers (28 November 2014). pp.

3– 6.

ISBN 978-9462099227 .

^ GhaneaBassiri, Kambiz (1997).

Competing Visions of Islam in the United States: A Study of Los Angeles . Praeger (30 July 1997).

ISBN 9780313299513 .

^ Turner, Colin (19 December 2013).

Islam: The Basics . Routledge; 2nd edition (24 May 2011). pp.

106– 108.

ISBN 978-0415584920 .

^ a b Na, Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im; Naʻīm, ʻabd Allāh Aḥmad (30 June 2009).

Islam and the Secular State . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674033764 .

^ a b Curtis Iv, Edward E. (October 2009).

Muslims in America: A Short History . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-974567-8 .

^ The Oxford Dictionary of Islam.

"Fard al-Ayn" .

oxfordislamicstudies . Archived from the original on 18 August 2010.

^ The Oxford Dictionary of Islam.

"Fard al-Kifayah" .

oxfordislamicstudies . Archived from the original on 14 June 2010.

^ Schade, Johannes (2006).

Encyclopedia of World Religions . Mars Media/Foreign Media (9 January 2007).

ISBN 978-1601360007 .

^ Fahd Salem Bahammam.

The Muslim's Prayer . Modern Guide.

ISBN 9781909322950 . Retrieved 29 January 2018 .

^ Akhtar Rizvi, Sayyid Saeed (1989).

Elements of Islamic Studies . Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania.

^ Margoliouth, G. (2003). "Sabbath (Muhammadan)". In Hastings, James (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics . Vol. 20. Selbie, John A., contrib. Kessinger Publishing. pp.

893– 894.

ISBN 978-0-7661-3698-4 .

^ "Islam Today" . Archived from the original on 17 October 2007.

^ a b c Buyukcelebi, Ismail (2005).

Living in the Shade of Islam . Tughra (1 March 2005).

ISBN 978-1932099867 .

^ "Combining two prayers" .

Islamweb.net . 16 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020.

^ Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Muhammad (10 September 2014).

"A resident may combine prayers to avoid difficulties – Shaykh al Albaani" .

Abdurrahman.org .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2017.

^ Silmi, Shaykh Yahya.

"THE WEAKNESS ABOUT THE NARRATION "COMBINING THE PRAYER WITHOUT REASON IS A MAJOR SIN" AND AN ADVICE TO BROTHER ABU KHADEEJA ABDUL WAHID" .

Uthman Ibn Affan Library .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2021.

^ Abu Hibban; Abu Khuzaimah Ansari (15 July 2015).

"When To Combine And Shorten Prayers" .

Salafi Research Institute .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2020.

^ Sharaf al-Din al-Musawi, Sayyid Abd al-Husayn (18 October 2012).

"Combining The Two Prayers" . Hydery Canada Ltd.

^ "prayers" .

islamicsupremecouncil.com .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2012 . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ a b Islam International Publications (January 2016).

Salat: The Muslim prayer book . Islam International Publishers (1997).

ISBN 978-1853725463 .

^ a b Majlisi, Muhammad Baqir (18 November 2021).

"Salat al-Layl" . Al-Fath Al-Mubin Publications.

^ Kassamali, Tahera; Kassamali, Hasnain (9 January 2013).

"Salatul Layl" . Tayyiba Publishers & Distributors.

^ Nieuwkerk, Karin van (October 2013).

Performing Piety: Singers and Actors in Egypt's Islamic Revival . University of Texas Press; Reprint edition (1 October 2013).

ISBN 9780292745865 .

^ Iṣlāhī, Muḥammad Yūsuf (1989).

"Etiquettes of Life in Islam" .

^ Firdaus Mediapro, Jannah (17 October 2019).

The Path to Islamic Prayer English Edition Standard Version . Blurb (18 October 2019).

ISBN 978-1714100736 .

^ Jafarli, Durdana. "The historical conditions for the emergence of the Quranist movement in Egypt in the 19th–20th centuries." МОВА І КУЛЬТУРА (2017): 91.

^ "Al-Mawrid" .

al-mawrid.org . Archived from the original on 24 July 2011.

^ "Mishkat al-Masabih 981 – Prayer – كتاب الصلاة – Sunnah.com – Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)" .

sunnah.com . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ Muhammad al-Bukhari .

"Sahih al-Bukhari, Book of military expeditions" . Retrieved 17 October 2019 .

^ Abdal Hakim Murad .

"Understanding the Four Madhhabs" .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2010 . Retrieved 25 May 2010 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad ibn (2019).

Syarah Adab Berjalan Menuju Shalat [ Manners of Walking to the Prayer ]. Darul Falah. p. 197.

ISBN 9789793036892 . Retrieved 22 November 2021 .

al-Albani, Muhammad Nasiruddin (2004).

Fikih Syekh Albani (in Indonesian). Translated by Mahmud bin Ahmad Rasyid ·. Pustaka Azzam . Retrieved 21 November 2021 .

Nur Baits, Ammi (2021).

Tafsir Shalat . Muamalah Publishing. p. 248 Hadith Riwayat Muslim 1336 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Smith, Jane I.; Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck (1993).

The Oxford Handbook of American Islam (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

162– 163.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Salat .

Learn how to Pray Salah Islamic Prayer Times: 11 Things You Need to Know How to Perform Salah Muslim Prayer Times: Calculating Prayer Times in Islam The Importance of Salah in Islam v t e Salah (Islamic prayer) Islamic prayers - Prayer compensation - Woman prayer Categories and types Regular mandatory prayers Fajr ( Fajr nafl prayer , Qunut ) Zuhr Asr Maghrib Isha ( Chafa'a , Witr ) Jumu'ah (weekly Friday prayer) Communal mandatory prayers Salat al-Janazah Prayers for the absent Eid prayers (according to some Islamic scholars) Congregational prayers Jumu'ah Tarawih Eid prayers Rain prayer Eclipse prayer Supererogatory prayers Prayers of the tradition Voluntary prayers Duha Ishraq Tahajjud Night nafl prayer [ ar ] Tarawih Tawassul Chafa'a Witr Tahiyyat masjid [ ar ] Occasional prayers Salat al-Istikharah Salat al-Tawba Sick prayer [ ar ] Need prayer [ ar ] Fear prayer [ ar ] Tasbih prayer [ ar ] Eid prayers Tarawih (Ramadan) Prayer unit ( raka'ah ) and its constituents Intention ( Niyyah ) Basmala Takbir Al-Fatiha Standing ( Qiyam ) Recitation Qira'at Proper pronunciation ( Tajwid ) Tilawa Loud prayer [ ar ] Silent prayer [ ar ] Supplication ( Qunut ) Bowing ( Ruku ) Prostration Sujud Sujud Sahwi Sujud Shukr Sujud Tilawa Sitting in salah ( Tashahhud ) Peace greeting ( Taslim ) Reverence ( Khouchouâa [ ar ] ) Contentment Mosque Mihrab Podium ( Minbar ) Sermon ( Khutbah ) Prayer hall ( Musalla ) Prayer rug ( sajjādah ) Conditions Prayer call Adhan Iqama Salah times Prayer forbidden times Prayer direction ( Qibla ) Islamic hygienical jurisprudence Ritual purity in Islam Junub Menstruation in Islam Istihadha Najis Bath ( Ghusl ) Ablution ( Wudu ) Dry ablution ( Tayammum ) Screen or barrier ( Sutrah ) Category v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e People and things in the Quran Characters Non-humans Allāh ('The God ') Names of Allah found in the Quran, such as Karīm (Generous) Animals Related The baqara (cow) of Israelites The dhiʾb (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph The fīl ( elephant ) of the Abyssinians Ḥimār ( Domesticated donkey ) The hud-hud ( hoopoe ) of Solomon The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave The namlah (female ant) of Solomon The nūn (fish or whale) of Jonah The nāqat (she-camel) of Ṣāliḥ Non-related ʿAnkabūt (Female spider ) Dābbat al-Arḍ ( Beast of the Earth ) Ḥimār ( Wild ass ) Naḥl ( Honey bee ) Qaswarah (' Lion ', 'beast of prey' or 'hunter') Malāʾikah ( Angels ) Angels of Hell Mālik Zabāniyah Bearers of the Throne Harut and Marut Jundallah Kirāman Kātibīn (Honourable Scribes) Raqib Atid Muqarrabun Jibrīl (Gabriel, chief) Ar-Rūḥ ('The Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Amīn ('The Trustworthy Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Qudus ('The Holy Spirit ') Angel of the Trumpet ( Isrāfīl or Raphael ) Malakul-Mawt (Angel of Death, Azrael) Mīkāil (Michael) Jinn (Genies) Jann ʿIfrīt Sakhr (Asmodeus) Qarīn Shayāṭīn ( Demons ) Iblīs ash-Shayṭān (the (chief) Devil ) Mārid ('Rebellious one') Others Ghilmān or Wildān Ḥūr Prophets Mentioned Ādam ( Adam ) Al-Yasa ʿ ( Elisha ) Ayyūb ( Job ) Dāwūd ( David ) Dhūl-Kifl (Ezekiel?) Hārūn (Aaron) Hūd (Eber?) Idrīs ( Enoch ?) Ilyās (Elijah) ʿImrān (Joachim the father of Maryam) Isḥāq ( Isaac ) Ismāʿīl ( Ishmael ) Dhabih Ullah Lūṭ ( Lot ) Ṣāliḥ Shuʿayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab ?) Sulaymān ibn Dāwūd ( Solomon son of David) ʿ Uzair ( Ezra ?) Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā ( John the Baptist the son of Zechariah) Yaʿqūb ( Jacob ) Isrāʾīl (Israel) Yūnus ( Jonah ) Dhūn-Nūn ('He of the Fish (or Whale )' or 'Owner of the Fish (or Whale)') Ṣāḥib al-Ḥūt ('Companion of the Whale') Yūsuf ibn Ya‘qūb ( Joseph son of Jacob) Zakariyyā ( Zechariah ) Ulul-ʿAzm ('Those of the Perseverance and Strong Will') Muḥammad Aḥmad Other names and titles of Muhammad ʿĪsā ( Jesus ) Al-Masīḥ (The Messiah ) Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary) Mūsā Kalīmullāh ( Moses He who spoke to God) Ibrāhīm Khalīlullāh ( Abraham Friend of God) Nūḥ ( Noah ) Debatable ones Dhūl-Qarnain Luqmān Maryam ( Mary ) Ṭālūt ( Saul or Gideon ?) Implied Irmiyā (Jeremiah) Ṣamūʾīl ( Samuel ) Yūshaʿ ibn Nūn (Joshua, companion and successor of Moses) People of Prophets Good ones Adam's immediate relatives Martyred son Wife Believer of Ya-Sin Family of Noah Father Lamech Mother Shamkhah bint Anush or Betenos Luqman's son People of Abraham Mother Abiona or Amtelai the daughter of Karnebo Ishmael's mother Isaac's mother People of Jesus Disciples (including Peter ) Mary's mother Zechariah's wife People of Solomon Mother Queen of Sheba Vizier Zayd (Muhammad's adopted son) People of Joseph Brothers (including Binyāmin (Benjamin) and Simeon ) Egyptians ʿAzīz ( Potiphar , Qatafir or Qittin) Malik (King Ar-Rayyān ibn Al-Walīd)) Wife of ʿAzīz ( Zulaykhah ) Mother People of Aaron and Moses Egyptians Believer (Hizbil or Hizqil ibn Sabura) Imraʾat Firʿawn ( Āsiyá bint Muzāḥim the Wife of Pharaoh , who adopted Moses) Magicians of the Pharaoh Wise, pious man Moses' wife Moses' sister-in-law Mother Sister Evil ones Āzar (possibly Terah ) Firʿawn ( Pharaoh of Moses' time) Hāmān Jālūt (Goliath) Qārūn (Korah, cousin of Moses) As-Sāmirī Abū Lahab Slayers of Ṣāliḥ's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr) Implied or not specified Abraha Abu Bakr Bal'am/Balaam Barṣīṣā Caleb or Kaleb the companion of Joshua Luqman's son Nebuchadnezzar II Nimrod Rahmah the wife of Ayyub Shaddad Groups Mentioned Aṣḥāb al-Jannah People of Paradise People of the Burnt Garden Aṣḥāb as-Sabt (Companions of the Sabbath ) Jesus' apostles Ḥawāriyyūn ( Disciples of Jesus ) Companions of Noah's Ark Aṣḥāb al-Kahf war-Raqīm ( Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?

Companions of the Elephant People of al-Ukhdūd People of a township in Surah Ya-Sin People of Yathrib or Medina Qawm Lūṭ (People of Sodom and Gomorrah) Nation of Noah Tribes, ethnicities or families ‘ Ajam Ar-Rūm (literally 'The Romans') Banī Isrāʾīl (Children of Israel) Muʾtafikāt (Sodom and Gomorrah) People of Ibrahim People of Ilyas People of Nuh People of Shuaib Ahl Madyan People of Madyan ) Aṣḥāb al-Aykah ('Companions of the Wood') Qawm Yūnus (People of Jonah) Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog People of Fir'aun Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad) Aṣḥāb Muḥammad ( Companions of Muhammad ) Anṣār (literally 'Helpers') Muhajirun (Emigrants from Mecca to Medina) People of Mecca Wife of Abu Lahab Children of Ayyub Sons of Adam Wife of Nuh Wife of Lut Yaʾjūj wa Maʾjūj (Gog and Magog) Son of Nuh Aʿrāb ( Arabs or Bedouins ) ʿĀd (people of Hud) Companions of the Rass Qawm Tubbaʿ (People of Tubba ) People of Sabaʾ or Sheba Quraysh Thamūd (people of Ṣāliḥ) Aṣḥāb al-Ḥijr ('Companions of the Stoneland ') Ahl al-Bayt ('People of the Household') Household of Abraham Brothers of Yūsuf Lot's daughters Progeny of Imran Household of Moses Household of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim Daughters of Muhammad Muhammad's wives Household of Salih Implicitly mentioned Amalek Ahl as-Suffa (People of the Verandah) Banu Nadir Banu Qaynuqa Banu Qurayza Iranian people Umayyad Dynasty Aus and Khazraj People of Quba Religious groups Ahl al-Dhimmah Kāfirūn disbelievers Majūs Zoroastrians Munāfiqūn ( Hypocrites ) Muslims Believers Ahl al-Kitāb ( People of the Book ) Naṣārā ( Christian (s) or People of the Injil) Ruhban (Christian monks) Qissis (Christian priest) Yahūd ( Jews ) Ahbār (Jewish scholars) Rabbani/Rabbi Sabians Polytheists Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot Locations Mentioned Al-Arḍ Al-Muqaddasah ('The Holy Land') 'Blessed' Land' Al- Jannah ( Paradise , literally 'The Garden') Jahannam ( Hell ) Door of Hittah Madyan ( Midian ) Majmaʿ al-Baḥrayn Miṣr (Mainland Egypt ) Salsabīl (A river in Paradise) In the Arabian Peninsula (excluding Madyan) Al-Aḥqāf ('The Sandy Plains,' or 'the Wind-curved Sand-hills') Iram dhāt al-ʿImād ( Iram of the Pillars ) Al- Madīnah (formerly Yathrib ) ʿArafāt and Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām Al-Ḥijr (Hegra) Badr Ḥunayn Makkah ( Mecca ) Bakkah Ḥaraman Āminan ('Sanctuary (which is) Secure') Kaʿbah ( Kaaba ) Maqām Ibrāhīm (Station of Abraham) Safa and Marwa Sabaʾ ( Sheba ) ʿArim Sabaʾ ( Dam of Sheba ) Rass Sinai Region or Tīh Desert Al- Wād Al-Muqaddas Ṭuwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa ) Al-Wādil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai ) Al-Buqʿah Al-Mubārakah ('The Blessed Place') Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor In Mesopotamia Al-Jūdiyy Munzalanm-Mubārakan ('Place-of-Landing Blessed') Bābil ( Babylon ) Qaryat Yūnus ('Township of Jonah ,' that is Nineveh ) Religious locations Bayʿa (Church) Miḥrāb Monastery Masjid ( Mosque , literally 'Place of Prostration ') Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām ('The Sacred Grove') Al-Masjid Al-Aqṣā ( Al-Aqsa , literally 'The Farthest Place-of-Prostration') Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca) Masjid al-Dirar A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly: Masjid Qubāʾ ( Quba Mosque ) The Prophet's Mosque Salat (Synagogue) Implied Antioch Antakya Arabia Al- Ḥijāz (literally 'The Barrier') Al-Ḥajar al-Aswad (Black Stone)  & Al-Hijr of Isma'il Cave of Hira Ghār ath-Thawr (Cave of the Bull) Hudaybiyyah Ta'if Ayla Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha Bilād ar-Rāfidayn (Mesopotamia) Canaan Cave of Seven Sleepers Dār an-Nadwa Jordan River Nile River Palestine River Paradise of Shaddad Events, incidents, occasions or times Incident of Ifk Laylat al-Qadr (Night of Decree) Event of Mubahala Sayl al-ʿArim (Flood of the Great Dam of Ma'rib in Sheba) The Farewell Pilgrimage Treaty of Hudaybiyyah Battles or military expeditions Battle of al-Aḥzāb ('the Confederates') Battle of Badr Battle of Hunayn Battle of Khaybar Battle of Uhud Expedition of Tabuk Conquest of Mecca Days Al- Jumuʿah (The Friday) As- Sabt (The Sabbath or Saturday) Days of battles Days of Hajj Doomsday Months of the Islamic calendar 12 months: Four holy months Ash-Shahr Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred or Forbidden Month) Ramaḍān Pilgrimages Al- Ḥajj (literally 'The Pilgrimage', the Greater Pilgrimage) Al-ʿ Umrah (The Lesser Pilgrimage) Times for prayer or remembrance Times for Duʿāʾ (' Invocation '), Ṣalāh and Dhikr ('Remembrance', including Taḥmīd ('Praising'), Takbīr and Tasbīḥ ): Al-ʿAshiyy (The Afternoon or the Night) Al-Ghuduww ('The Mornings') Al-Bukrah ('The Morning') Aṣ-Ṣabāḥ ('The Morning') Al-Layl ('The Night') Al- ʿIshāʾ ('The Late-Night') Aẓ- Ẓuhr ('The Noon') Dulūk ash-Shams ('Decline of the Sun') Al- Masāʾ ('The Evening') Qabl al- Ghurūb ('Before the Setting (of the Sun)') Al-Aṣīl ('The Afternoon') Al- ʿAṣr ('The Afternoon') Qabl ṭulūʿ ash-Shams ('Before the rising of the Sun') Al- Fajr ('The Dawn') Implied Ghadir Khumm Laylat al-Mabit First Pilgrimage Other Holy books Al- Injīl (The Gospel of Jesus) Al- Qurʾān (The Book of Muhammad) Ṣuḥuf-i Ibrāhīm (Scroll(s) of Abraham) At- Tawrāt (The Torah ) Ṣuḥuf-i-Mūsā (Scroll(s) of Moses) Tablets of Stone Az- Zabūr (The Psalms of David) Umm al-Kitāb ('Mother of the Book(s)') Objects of people or beings Heavenly food of Jesus' apostles Noah's Ark Staff of Musa Tābūt as-Sakīnah (Casket of Shekhinah) Throne of Bilqis Trumpet of Israfil Mentioned idols (cult images) 'Ansāb Jibt and Ṭāghūt ( False god ) Of Israelites Baʿal The ʿijl ( golden calf statue) of Israelites Of Noah's people Nasr Suwāʿ Wadd Yaghūth Yaʿūq Of Quraysh Al-Lāt Al-ʿUzzā Manāt Celestial bodies Maṣābīḥ (literally 'lamps'): Al-Qamar (The Moon) Kawākib (Planets) Al-Arḍ (The Earth) Nujūm (Stars) Ash-Shams (The Sun) Plant matter Baṣal (Onion) Fūm (Garlic or wheat) Shaṭʾ (Shoot) Sūq (Plant stem) Zarʿ (Seed) Fruits ʿAdas ( Lentil ) Baql (Herb) Qith-thāʾ ( Cucumber ) Rummān ( Pomegranate ) Tīn ( Fig ) Zaytūn ( Olive ) In Paradise Forbidden fruit of Adam Bushes, trees or plants Plants of Sheba Athl ( Tamarisk ) Sidr ( Lote-tree ) Līnah (Tender Palm tree ) Nakhl ( Date palm ) Sidrat al-Muntahā Zaqqūm Liquids Māʾ (Water or fluid) Nahr (River) Yamm (River or sea) Sharāb (Drink) Note: Names are sorted alphabetically. Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship) Authority control databases International VIAF 2 FAST 2 National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Sweden Israel Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Salah&oldid=1305055639 " Categories : Salah Islamic terminology Prayer Hidden categories: CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Harv and Sfn no-target errors Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2021 Articles containing suspected AI-generated texts from August 2025 Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages with Arabic IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2024 Articles containing Persian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 20:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Salah 115 languages Add topic

