Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geometry 2 Examples 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Translational symmetry 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Nederlands Português Română Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Translation invariance ) Invariance of operations under geometric translation For translational invariant functions it is f ( A ) = f ( A + t ) {\displaystyle f(A)=f(A+t)} . The Lebesgue measure is an example for such a function.

In physics and mathematics , continuous translational symmetry is the invariance of a system of equations under any translation (without rotation ). Discrete translational symmetry is invariance under discrete translation.

Analogously, an operator A on functions is said to be translationally invariant with respect to a translation operator T δ δ {\displaystyle T_{\delta }} if the result after applying A doesn't change if the argument function is translated.
More precisely it must hold that ∀ ∀ δ δ A f = A ( T δ δ f ) .

{\displaystyle \forall \delta \ Af=A(T_{\delta }f).} Laws of physics are translationally invariant under a spatial translation if they do not distinguish different points in space. According to Noether's theorem , space translational symmetry of a physical system is equivalent to the momentum conservation law .

Translational symmetry of an object means that a particular translation does not change the object. For a given object, the translations for which this applies form a group, the symmetry group of the object, or, if the object has more kinds of symmetry, a subgroup of the symmetry group.

Geometry [ edit ] Lie groups and Lie algebras Classical groups General linear GL( n ) Special linear SL( n ) Orthogonal O( n ) Special orthogonal SO( n ) Unitary U( n ) Special unitary SU( n ) Symplectic Sp( n ) Simple Lie groups Classical A n B n C n D n Exceptional G 2 F 4 E 6 E 7 E 8 Other Lie groups Circle Lorentz Poincaré Conformal group Diffeomorphism Loop Euclidean Lie algebras Lie group–Lie algebra correspondence Exponential map Adjoint representation Killing form Index Simple Lie algebra Loop algebra Affine Lie algebra Semisimple Lie algebra Dynkin diagrams Cartan subalgebra Root system Weyl group Real form Complexification Split Lie algebra Compact Lie algebra Representation theory Lie group representation Lie algebra representation Representation theory of semisimple Lie algebras Representations of classical Lie groups Theorem of the highest weight Borel–Weil–Bott theorem Lie groups in physics Particle physics and representation theory Lorentz group representations Poincaré group representations Galilean group representations Scientists Sophus Lie Henri Poincaré Wilhelm Killing Élie Cartan Hermann Weyl Claude Chevalley Harish-Chandra Armand Borel Glossary Table of Lie groups v t e Translational invariance implies that, at least in one direction, the object is infinite: for any given point p , the set of points with the same properties due to the translational symmetry form the infinite discrete set { p + n a | n ∈ Z } = p + Z a . Fundamental domains are e.g.

H + [0, 1] a for any hyperplane H for which a has an independent direction. This is in 1D a line segment , in 2D an infinite strip, and in 3D a slab, such that the vector starting at one side ends at the other side. Note that the strip and slab need not be perpendicular to the vector, hence can be narrower or thinner than the length of the vector.

In spaces with dimension higher than 1, there may be multiple translational symmetries. For each set of k independent translation vectors, the symmetry group is isomorphic with Z k . 
In particular, the multiplicity may be equal to the dimension. This implies that the object is infinite in all directions. In this case, the set of all translations forms a lattice . Different bases of translation vectors generate the same lattice if and only if one is transformed into the other by a matrix of integer coefficients of which the absolute value of the determinant is 1. The absolute value of the determinant of the matrix formed by a set of translation vectors is the hypervolume of the n -dimensional parallelepiped the set subtends (also called the covolume of the lattice). This parallelepiped is a fundamental region of the symmetry: any pattern on or in it is possible, and this defines the whole object. 
See also lattice (group) .

E.g. in 2D, instead of a and b we can also take a and a − b , etc. In general in 2D, we can take p a + q b and r a + s b for integers p , q , r , and s such  that ps − qr is 1 or −1. This ensures that a and b themselves are integer linear combinations of the other two vectors. If not, not all translations are possible with the other pair. Each pair a , b defines a parallelogram, all with the same area, the magnitude of the cross product . One parallelogram fully defines the whole  object. Without further symmetry, this parallelogram is a fundamental domain. The vectors a and b can be represented by complex numbers. For two given lattice points, equivalence of choices of a third point to generate a lattice shape is represented by the modular group , see lattice (group) .

Alternatively, e.g. a rectangle may define the whole object, even if the translation vectors are not perpendicular, if it has two sides parallel to one translation vector, while the other translation vector starting at one side of the rectangle ends at the opposite side.

For example, consider a tiling with equal rectangular tiles with an  asymmetric pattern on them, all oriented the same, in rows, with for each row a shift of a fraction, not one half, of a tile, always the same, then we have only translational symmetry, wallpaper group p 1 (the same applies without shift). With rotational symmetry of order two of the pattern on the tile we have p 2 (more symmetry of the pattern on the tile does not change that, because of the arrangement of the tiles). The rectangle is a more convenient unit to consider as fundamental domain (or set of two of them) than a parallelogram consisting of part of a tile and part of another one.

In 2D there may be translational symmetry in one direction for vectors of any length. One line, not in the same direction, fully defines the whole object. Similarly, in 3D there may be translational symmetry in one or two directions for vectors of any length. One plane ( cross-section ) or line, respectively, fully defines the whole object.

Examples [ edit ] The less-than-relation on the real numbers is invariant under translation.

Frieze patterns all have translational symmetries, and sometimes other kinds.

The Fourier transform with subsequent computation of absolute values is a translation-invariant operator.

The mapping from a polynomial function to the polynomial degree is a translation-invariant functional.

The Lebesgue measure is a complete translation-invariant measure .

See also [ edit ] Glide reflection Displacement Periodic function Lattice (group) Translation operator (quantum mechanics) Rotational symmetry Lorentz symmetry Tessellation List of cycles § Mathematics of waves and cycles References [ edit ] Stenger, Victor J. (2000) and MahouShiroUSA (2007).

Timeless Reality . Prometheus Books. Especially chpt. 12. Nontechnical.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐x58j5
Cached time: 20250812003535
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.164 seconds
Real time usage: 0.499 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 941/1000000
Revision size: 6746/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 32134/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5400/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48821/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.088/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2444979/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  164.984      1 -total
 53.58%   88.402      1 Template:Lie_groups
 52.55%   86.694      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 38.96%   64.272      1 Template:Short_description
 28.50%   47.021      1 Template:Sidebar
 20.13%   33.205      2 Template:Pagetype
 13.84%   22.835     12 Template:Main_other
 12.16%   20.054      1 Template:SDcat
  8.23%   13.571      5 Template:Plainlist
  4.49%    7.415      3 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:701100:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003535 and revision id 1302346895. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Translational_symmetry&oldid=1302346895 " Categories : Classical mechanics Symmetry Conservation laws Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 21:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Translational symmetry 12 languages Add topic

