Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Speculative versus realistic fiction Toggle Speculative versus realistic fiction subsection 1.1 Distinguishing science fiction from other speculative fiction 2 History 3 Genres 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Speculative fiction 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of fiction including science fiction, horror and fantasy Speculative fiction Alternate history List of alternate history fiction Retrofuturism Sidewise Award Writers Fantasy fiction Anime Fandom Fantasy art Fiction magazines Films Genres History Early history Legendary creatures Literature Podcasts Quests Magic Superheroes Television Worlds Writers Science fiction Anime Artists Awards Climate fiction Editors Fandom Conventions Fanzine Fiction magazines Genres History Timeline Organizations Podcasts Film Television Themes Writers Horror fiction Anime Awards Conventions Fiction magazines Films History Genres Podcasts Television Writers Miscellaneous Fictional universe Fictional species Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of Japanese SF writers The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Portal v t e Speculative fiction is an umbrella genre of fiction that encompasses all the subgenres that depart from realism , or strictly imitating everyday reality , [ 1 ] instead presenting fantastical , supernatural , futuristic , or other highly imaginative realms or beings.

[ 2 ] This catch-all genre includes, but is not limited to: fantasy , science fiction , science fantasy , superhero fiction , paranormal fiction , supernatural horror , alternate history , magical realism , [ 3 ] slipstream , weird fiction , utopia and dystopia , and apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction . In other words, the genre presents individuals, events, or places beyond the ordinary real world.

The term speculative fiction has been used for works of literature , film , television , drama , video games , radio , and hybrid media.

[ 1 ] Speculative versus realistic fiction [ edit ] The umbrella genre of speculative fiction is characterized by a lesser degree of adherence to plausible depictions of individuals, events, or places, while the umbrella genre of realistic fiction (partly crossing over with literary realism ) is characterized by a greater degree of adherence to such depictions. For instance, speculative fiction may depict an entirely imaginary universe or one in which the laws of nature do not strictly apply (often the subgenre of fantasy ). Alternatively, the genre depicts actual historical moments, except that they have concluded in an entirely imaginary way or been followed by major imaginary events (i.e., the subgenre of alternative history ). As another alternative, the genre depicts impossible technology or technology that defies current scientific understanding or capabilities (i.e., the subgenre of science fiction ).

By contrast, realistic fiction involves a story whose basic setting is real and whose events could plausibly occur in the real world. One realistic fiction subgenre is historical fiction , which is centred around actual major events and time periods of the past.

[ 4 ] The attempt to make stories seem faithful to reality or to more objectively describe details—and also the 19th-century artistic movement that vigorously promoted this approach—is called "literary realism"; this includes both fiction and non-fiction works.

Distinguishing science fiction from other speculative fiction [ edit ] "Speculative fiction" is sometimes abbreviated as spec-fic , spec fic , specfic , [ 5 ] S-F , SF , or sf .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The last three abbreviations, however, are ambiguous since they have long been used to refer to science fiction (which lies within this general area of literature).

[ 8 ] The genre is sometimes known as the fantastic [ 9 ] or fantastika ; the latter term is attributed to science fiction scholar John Clute , who coined it in 2007 after the term for the genre in some Slavic languages .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The term speculative fiction has been used by some critics and writers who oppose a perceived limitation of science fiction: the requirement for a story to adhere to scientific principles. These people argue that speculative fiction better defines an expanded, open, imaginative type of fiction than does genre fiction , and the categories of fantasy , mystery , horror and science fiction .

[ 11 ] Harlan Ellison used the term to avoid being classified as a science fiction writer. Ellison, a fervent proponent of writers embracing more literary and modernist directions, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] broke out of genre conventions to push the boundaries of speculative fiction.

The term suppositional fiction is sometimes used as a subcategory designating fiction in which characters and stories are constrained by an internally consistent world, but not necessarily one defined by any particular genre.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] History [ edit ] Euripides Speculative fiction as a category ranges from ancient works to paradigm-changing and neotraditional works of the 21st century.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Characteristics of speculative fiction have been recognized in older works whose authors' intentions are now known, or in the social contexts of the stories they tell. An example is the ancient Greek dramatist, Euripides ( c.

480 – c.

406 BCE ), whose play Medea seems to have offended Athenian audiences; in this play, he speculated that the titular sorceress Medea killed her own children, as opposed to their being killed by other Corinthians after her departure.

[ 19 ] In historiography , what is now called speculative fiction has previously been termed historical invention , [ 20 ] historical fiction , and similar names. These terms have been extensively applied in literary criticism to the works of William Shakespeare .

[ 21 ] For example, in A Midsummer Night's Dream , he places several characters from different locations and times into the Fairyland of the fictional Merovingian Germanic sovereign Oberon ; these characters include the Athenian Duke Theseus , the Amazonian Queen Hippolyta , the English fairy Puck , and the Roman god Cupid .

[ 22 ] In mythography , the concept of speculative fiction has been termed mythopoesis or mythopoeia . This process involves the creative design and development of lore and mythology for works of fiction. The term's definition comes from use by J. R. R. Tolkien ; his series of novels, The Lord of the Rings , [ 23 ] shows an application of the process. Themes common in mythopoeia, such as the supernatural , alternate history , and sexuality , continue to be explored in works produced in modern speculative fiction.

[ 24 ] Speculative fiction in the general sense of hypothetical history, explanation, or ahistorical storytelling has been attributed to authors in ostensibly non-fiction modes since Herodotus of Halicarnassus (fl. 5th century BCE) with his Histories ; [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] it was already both created and edited out by early encyclopedic writers such Sima Qian ( c.

145 or 135 BCE–86 BCE), author of Shiji .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] These examples highlight a caveat—many works that are now viewed as speculative fiction long predated the labelling of the genre. In the broadest sense, the genre's concept does two things: it captures both conscious and unconscious aspects of human psychology in making sense of the world, and it responds to the world by creating imaginative , inventive , and artistic expressions. Such expressions can contribute to practical societal progress through interpersonal influences; social and cultural movements ; scientific research and advances; and the philosophy of science .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Robert Heinlein c.1953 In English-language usage in arts and literature since the mid 20th century, the term speculative fiction has often been attributed to Robert A. Heinlein , who first used it in an editorial in The Saturday Evening Post (on 8 February 1947). In the article, Heinlein used Speculative Fiction as a synonym for science fiction ; in a later article, he stated explicitly that his use of the term excluded fantasy. Although Heinlein may have invented the term independently, earlier citations exist. An article in Lippincott's Monthly Magazine in 1889 used the term in reference to Edward Bellamy 's novel Looking Backward: 2000–1887 and other works; and an article in the May 1900 issue of The Bookman mentioned that John Uri Lloyd 's novel Etidorhpa, or, The End of the Earth had "created a great deal of discussion among people interested in speculative fiction".

[ 33 ] A variant of this term is speculative literature .

[ 34 ] The use of the term speculative fiction to express dissatisfaction with traditional or establishment science fiction was popularized in the 1960s and early 1970s by Judith Merril , as well as other writers and editors connected with the New Wave movement. However, this use of the term became less popular toward the mid-1970s.

[ 35 ] During the 2000s, the term speculative fiction came into wider use as a convenient way to describe a set of genres. However, some writers (such as Margaret Atwood ) still distinguish "speculative fiction" as a specifically "no Martians " type of science fiction, "about things that really could happen." [ 36 ] The term speculative fiction is also used to describe genres combined into a single narrative or fictional world , such as "science fiction, horror, fantasy...[and]...mystery".

[ 37 ] In documenting this broad genre, the Internet Speculative Fiction Database includes a list of different subtypes.

According to publisher statistics, men outnumber women about two to one among English-language speculative fiction writers who seek professional publication. However, the percentages vary considerably by genre, with women outnumbering men in the areas of urban fantasy , paranormal romance and young adult fiction .

[ 38 ] Academic journals that publish essays on speculative fiction include Extrapolation and Foundation .

[ 39 ] Genres [ edit ] Speculative fiction may include elements from one or more of the following genres: Subgenres of speculative fiction Name Description Examples Fantasy Includes elements and beings originating from or inspired by traditional stories, such as mythical creatures ( dragons , elves , dwarves and fairies ), magic , witchcraft , and potions .

The Lord of the Rings , Conan the Barbarian , Elric of Melniboné , Dungeons and Dragons , The Legend of Zelda , A Song of Ice and Fire , Magic: The Gathering , Warcraft , The Witcher Science fiction Features technologies and other elements that do not actually exist, but may be imagined as being created or discovered in the future through scientific advancement, such as advanced robots , interstellar travel , aliens , time travel , mutants and cyborgs . Many science fiction stories are set in the future.

Frankenstein , Halo , The Time Machine , Cyberpunk 2077 , Mass Effect , 2001: A Space Odyssey , Terminator , Doctor Who , Stranger in a Strange Land , Blade Runner , The Expanse , Transformers , The Three-Body Problem , Stargate , Babylon 5 , Andromeda , Dune , Star Trek , Patternist series , Lilith's Brood Science fantasy Hybrid genre that draws on or combines tropes and elements from both science fiction and fantasy.

Star Wars , Barsoom , Space Dandy , ThunderCats , Masters of the Universe , Warhammer 40,000 Superhero Centers on superheroes (i.e., heroes with extraordinary abilities or powers) and their fight against evil forces such as supervillains . Typically incorporates elements of science fiction or fantasy, and may be a subgenre of these.

DC Universe , Marvel Universe , Kamen Rider , My Hero Academia , Super Sentai , Metal Heroes Space Western Hybrid genre that draws on or combines tropes and elements from both science fiction and the Western genre.

The Mandalorian , BraveStarr , Firefly , Outlaw Star , Space Dandy , Trigun , Bucky O'Hare , Cowboy Bebop , ThunderCats , Masters of the Universe , Buck Rogers , Dan Dare , Flash Gordon , Duck Dodgers Weird West Also known as Weird Western— the hybrid genres of fantasy Western, horror Western and science fiction Western, combining elements of the Western genre with those of fantasy, horror and science fiction.

Jonah Hex , Dead in the West , The Dark Tower , Westworld , Bone Tomahawk , Cowboys & Aliens , Undead Nightmare , Hard West Supernatural Similar to horror and fantasy, this genre overlaps with Paranormal Romance, Contemporary Fantasy, Urban Fantasy, Occult Detective Fiction, and Paranormal Fiction. It exploits or requires plot devices or themes that often contradict commonplace, materialist assumptions about the natural world .

The Castle of Otranto , Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Angel , Big Wolf on Campus , Teen Wolf , Harry Potter , Percy Jackson & the Olympians , Stranger Things , Paranormal Activity , Dark , Fallen , The Vampire Diaries , Charmed , The Others , The Gift , The Skeleton Key , SCP Foundation , Fledgling Horror Focuses on stories that inspire fear. Villains may be either supernatural entities, such as monsters , vampires , ghosts and demons , or mundane people, such as psychopathic and cruel murderers. Often features violence and death.

Dracula , The Exorcist , Cthulhu Mythos , A Nightmare on Elm Street , Us , Books of Blood , The Hellbound Heart , Resident Evil , The Blair Witch Project Utopian Takes place in a highly desirable society, often presented as advanced, happy, intelligent, or even perfect and problem-free.

Island , Ecotopia , 17776 Dystopian Takes place in a highly undesirable society, often troubled by strict control, violence, chaos, brainwashing, or other negative elements.

Neon Genesis Evangelion , 1984 , Brazil , The Handmaid's Tale , A Clockwork Orange , The Hunger Games , Judge Dredd , Alternate history Focuses on historical events as if they had occurred differently, and the resulting implications for the present.

The Man in the High Castle , The Last Starship from Earth , Inglourious Basterds , The Guns of the South , Fatherland , The Years of Rice and Salt , Wolfenstein Apocalyptic Takes place before and during a global catastrophe, typically a large-scale pandemic , natural disaster , or nuclear holocaust .

Godzilla , On the Beach , Threads , The Day After Tomorrow , Birdbox , 2012 , War of the Worlds , World War Z , Parable of the Sower , Parable of the Talents Post-apocalyptic Focuses on groups of survivors after global disasters.

Planet of the Apes , The Stand , Mad Max , Waterworld , Fallout , Metroid Prime , Metro 2033 , The Last Of Us , Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind , Wasteland , Z213: Exit Speculative evolution Focuses on a hypothetical alternative or future evolution of humans and/or animals.

Expedition , After Man: A Zoology of the Future , All Tomorrows , The New Dinosaurs: An Alternative Evolution , Man After Man: An Anthropology of the Future , Snaiad See also [ edit ] Biblical speculative fiction Comic genres Genre fiction List of genres Megatext Speculative art Speculative fiction by writers of color Speculative poetry Weird fiction References [ edit ] ^ a b Oziewicz, Marek (2017).

"Speculative Fiction" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Literature .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190201098.013.78 .

ISBN 978-0-19-020109-8 . Archived from the original on 18 October 2022.

... a super category for all genres that deliberately depart from imitating "consensus reality" of everyday experience. In this latter sense, speculative fiction includes fantasy, science fiction, and horror, but also their derivatives, hybrids, and cognate genres like the gothic, dystopia, weird fiction, post-apocalyptic fiction, ghost stories, superhero tales, alternate history, steampunk, slipstream, magic realism, fractured fairy tales, and more.

^ "speculative fiction" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

^ Henwood, Belinda (2007).

Publishing . Career FAQs.

ISBN 978-1-921106-43-9 .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2023 . Retrieved 29 December 2022 .

^ Kuzminski, Adrian (1979). "Defending Historical Realism".

History and Theory .

18 (3): 316– 349.

doi : 10.2307/2504534 .

ISSN 0018-2656 .

JSTOR 2504534 .

^ "SpecFicWorld" . SpecFicWorld.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ "A Speculative Fiction Blog" . SFSignal.

Archived from the original on 10 February 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Vint, Sherryl (16 February 2021).

Science Fiction . The MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262539999 . Retrieved 1 May 2023 .

^ "The Best in Science Fiction and Fantasy" . The SF Site.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2006 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ a b Golovacheva, Irina (27 March 2018), "Is the Fantastic Really Fantastic?" , Is the Fantastic Really Fantastic?

, transcript Verlag, pp.

61– 90, doi : 10.1515/9783839440278-004/html , ISBN 978-3-8394-4027-8 , retrieved 9 September 2024 ^ Clute, John; Langford, David.

"SFE: Fantastika" .

sf-encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 31 August 2024 .

^ "Citations and definitions for the term 'speculative fiction' by speculative fiction reviewers" . Greententacles.com.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Watts, Peter (Summer 2003).

"Margaret Atwood and the Hierarchy of Contempt" (PDF) .

On Spec . Vol. 15, no. 2. pp.

3– 5 . Retrieved 9 November 2019 .

^ Davies, Philip. "Review [untitled; reviewed work(s): Science Fiction: Its Criticism and Teaching by Patrick Parrinder; Fantastic Lives: Autobiographical Essays by Notable Science Fiction Writers by Martin Greenberg; Robert A. Heinlein: America as Science Fiction by H. Bruce Franklin; Bridges to Science Fiction by George E. Slusser, George R. Guffey, Mark Rose].

Journal of American Studies Vol. 16, No. 1 (April 1982). pp. 157–159.

^ Izenberg, Orin (2011).

Being Numerous: Poetry and the Ground of Social Life . Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 210.

^ Leitch, Thomas M.

What Stories Are: Narrative Theory and Interpretation University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1986; p. 127 ^ Domańska, Ewa (1998).

Encounters: Philosophy of History After Postmodernism . Charlottesville, Virginia: University Press of Virginia. p. 10.

^ Barry Baldwin, Emeritus Professor of Classics, University of Calgary, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, "Ancient Science Fiction", Shattercolors Literary Review ^ "逆援助紹介PARADOX!" .

paradoxmag.com . Archived from the original on 28 July 2010.

^ This theory of Euripides ' invention has gained wide acceptance. See (e.g.) McDermott 1989, 12; Powell 1990, 35; Sommerstein 2002, 16; Griffiths, 2006 81; Ewans 2007, 55.

^ "Mark Wagstaff – Historical invention and political purpose | Re-public: re-imagining democracy – english version" . Re-public.gr. 17 January 2005. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Martha Tuck Rozett, "Creating a Context for Shakespeare with Historical Fiction", Shakespeare Quarterly
Vol. 46, No. 2 (Summer, 1995), pp. 220–227 ^ Dorothea Kehler, A midsummer night's dream: critical essays, 2001 ^ Adcox, John, "Can Fantasy be Myth? Mythopoeia and The Lord of the Rings" in "The Newsletter of the Mythic Imagination Institute, September/October, 2003" ^ Eric Garber, Lyn Paleo Uranian Worlds: A Guide to Alternative Sexuality in Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror, 2nd Edition, G K Hall: 1990 ISBN 978-0-8161-1832-8 ^ Herodotus and Myth Conference, Christ Church, Oxford, 2003 ^ John M. Marincola, Introduction and Notes, The Histories by Herodotus, tr. Aubrey De Sélincourt, 2007 ^ Lendering, Jona.

"Herodotus of Halicarnassus" . Livius.org. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Stephen W. Durrant, The cloudy mirror: tension and conflict in the writings of Sima Qian, 1995 ^ Craig A. Lockard, Societies, Networks, and Transitions: A Global History: To 1500 , 2007, p. 133.

^ Heather Urbanski, Plagues, apocalypses and bug-eyed monsters: how speculative fiction shows us our nightmares, 2007, pp. 127.

^ Sonu Shamdasani, Cult Fictions: C.G. Jung and the Founding of Analytical Psychology, 1998 ^ Relativity, The Special and the General Theory by Albert Einstein (1920), with an introduction by Niger Calder, 2006 ^ "Dictionary citations for the term "speculative fiction" " . Jessesword.com. 28 April 2009.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ "The Speculative Literature Foundation" . Speculativeliterature.org.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ "New Wave" . Virtual.clemson.edu. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Atwood, Margaret (2011).

In Other Worlds: SF and the Human Imagination . New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. p.

6 .

ISBN 978-0-385-53396-6 .

^ Canton, James; Cleary, Helen; Kramer, Ann; Laxby, Robin; Loxley, Diana; Ripley, Esther; Todd, Megan; Shaghar, Hila; Valente, Alex; et al. (Authors) (2016).

The Literature Book (First American ed.). New York: DK . p. 343.

ISBN 978-1-4654-2988-9 .

^ Crisp, Julie (10 July 2013).

"SEXISM IN GENRE PUBLISHING: A PUBLISHER'S PERSPECTIVE" .

Tor Books . Archived from the original on 30 April 2015 . Retrieved 29 April 2015 .

^ "SF Foundation Journal | The Science Fiction Foundation" . Sf-foundation.org . Retrieved 1 April 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] Speculative fiction at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Internet Speculative Fiction Database The SF Page at Project Gutenberg of Australia v t e Speculative fiction Science fiction Media Comics Films list Magazines list Television Creators list Authors Editors Studies Awards Definitions History Subgenres Alternate history Apocalyptic/post-apocalyptic Climate fiction Comic/comedy Cyberpunk ( derivatives ) Dying Earth Feminist Future history ( Speculative evolution ) Military Space opera Space Western Tech-noir Themes Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Aliens AI Parallel universes Time travel Utopia/dystopia Space pirates Subculture Community Gathering list Fantasy Media Anime Art Fantastic Comics Fantasy film Literature Magazines Television Creators Authors Studies High fantasy Tolkien's influence Literature Sources Subgenres Bangsian Comic Contemporary Dark Dying Earth Fairytale Folklore mythology (based) Gaslamp Hard High Historical Lost world Low Medieval Romantic Sword and sorcery Urban Supernatural fiction Tropes Fantasy races Fantasy worlds Legendary creatures Magic (fantasy) Magician (fantasy) Norse mythology Magic item Quest Occult detective Horror Media Comics Films list Magazines Television programs Video games Subgenres Body Goosebumps Lovecraftian Mass hysteria Psychological Splatterpunk Queer Urban legend Occult detective Tropes Gargoyle Vampires list Werewolves Zombie apocalypse General Authors of color Fictional species Gender Japanese authors Masquerade Sexuality Homosexuality Reproduction and pregnancy Women Related Science fantasy Superhero Western Noir Crime Pulps Technofantasy Fantastique Magic realism Slipstream Techno-thriller LitRPG Crossover Portal Category v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Speculative_fiction&oldid=1306420828 " Categories : Speculative fiction Fiction by genre Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Pages using Sister project links with default search Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 17:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Speculative fiction 51 languages Add topic

