Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Early career 3 Diplomat 4 Later life 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Simon Arnauld, Marquis de Pomponne 14 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Arnauld de Pomponne ) French diplomat and minister Simon Arnauld, marquis de Pomponne Simon Arnauld de Pomponne , Seigneur and then Marquis (1682) of Pomponne ( Paris , November 1618 – Fontainebleau , 26 September 1699) was a French diplomat and minister.

Early life [ edit ] Simon Arnauld was born in Paris in 1618. He was son of Robert Arnauld d'Andilly , governor of Monsieur and "intendant d'armée" under Richelieu , and of Catherine Le Fevre de la Boderie. A member of the famous Jansenist family Arnauld (his siblings were Antoine Arnauld and Angélique de Saint-Jean Arnauld d'Andilly ), he was named Simon Arnauld de Briottes until 1643, then Simon Arnauld d'Andilly from 1643 to 1660, and eventually Simon Arnauld de Pomponne, after the estate of Pomponne, which was left to him by his mother, when he got married in 1660.

After being taught by Martin Barcos , he entered the world of the "précieuses", attending the salon of Mme de Rambouillet with several members of his family. He wrote a number of poems for the " Guirlande de Julie ", and was a friend of important writers, such as Marie de Rabutin-Chantal, marquise de Sévigné , Marie-Madeleine Pioche de la Vergne, comtesse de la Fayette , and Duke François de La Rochefoucauld .

Early career [ edit ] He began his career as an intendant of the French garrison in Casale , where he staid from 1642 to 1647. Then, supported by Mazarin and Michel Le Tellier , he was appointed "intendant d'armée" in Italy , in Paris during the Fronde , and in Catalonia .

He first acted as a diplomat in 1655, having to negotiate and sign a treaty with the Duke of Mantua , a mission he was to achieve outstandingly. However, as Jansenism began to widespread, his uncle Antoine Arnauld became one of its leaders, and his own father decided to retire in Port-Royal-des-Champs . In 1658, Mazarin thus refused to let him become chancellor of Monsieur , Louis XIV 's own brother. Worse, Pomponne turned to be both a client and a friend of Nicolas Fouquet and married one of his cousins, which caused his exiles in Verdun , in eastern France (1662–1664), then to his estate of Pomponne (1664–1665).

Diplomat [ edit ] Though he was allowed back to Paris by the King only in 1665, his friendships with Michel Le Tellier, Le Pelletier and Hugues de Lionne enabled him to be promoted as ambassador to Sweden . His part was to prevent it from entering the Triple Alliance (1665–1668). Even if Sweden strengthened its links with the United Provinces , Pomponne gave the King complete satisfaction and so was entrusted a new mission, this time in the United Provinces (1668–1671). In 1671, however, he was recalled to Sweden for the delicate mission of forging a new alliance between Sweden and France. Therefore, the United Provinces were isolated on a diplomatic scale and could be attacked by Louis XIV.

After Hugues de Lionne, Secretary of State for Foreign affairs, died in September 1671, Simon Arnauld de Pomponne was brought to the board of which he remained in charge until 1679. His style is one of a real diplomat, trying to find agreements with other countries in wartime, and Louvois , Secretary of State for War, was more aggressive and keen to fight. From 1673 to 1675, when the ardently-Catholic English courtier Edward Colman asked the French Government for large sums of money to persuade King Charles II to pursue a pro-French policy, Pomponne showed his strong common sense by telling his own King firmly that Charles' support was not worth bidding for. While Pomponne managed to obtain the Treaty of Nijmegen (1678), he was eventually dismissed at a time when Louis wanted to conduct a more warlike foreign policy (18 November 1679).

Later life [ edit ] However, Louis remained favourable to him since his estate of Pomponne became a marquisate in 1682, and his sons were offered a regiment and an important abbey. The King called him back in 1691 (as a member of the Conseil d'en haut but without the charge of a specific board), right after Louvois's death and fostered the marriage of the son of the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, the marquis de Torcy , with Pomponne's daughter. Pomponne still played an important role in French policy in the 1690s.

He died in Fontainebleau in 1699.

References [ edit ] Simon Arnauld de Pomponne, Mémoires , Paris, 1860, 2 vol.

Simon Arnauld de Pomponne, Relation de mon ambassade en Hollande , ed.

Herbert H. Rowen , Utrecht, 1955.

Herbert H. Rowen, The Ambassador prepares for war , The Hague, 1957.

Rémi Mathis , "De la négociation à la relation d'ambassade. La seconde ambassade de Suède de Simon Arnauld de Pomponne (1671)" in Revue d'Histoire diplomatique , n°3, 2005.

v t e Foreign ministers of France Ancien Régime Revol Villeroy A. J. Richelieu Sillery R. Phélypeaux Bouthillier Chavigny Brienne Lionne Pomponne Croissy Torcy Huxelles Dubois Morville Chauvelin Chaillou Noailles Argenson Puisieulx Saint-Contest Rouillé Bernis É. Choiseul C. Choiseul É. Choiseul L. Phélypeaux Aiguillon Bertin Vergennes Montmorin Vauguyon Montmorin Lessart Dumouriez Naillac Chambonas Dubouchage Sainte-Croix First Republic Lebrun-Tondu Deforgues Goujon Herman Delacroix Talleyrand Reinhard Talleyrand First Empire Talleyrand Champagny Bassano Caulaincourt First Restoration Laforest Talleyrand Hundred Days Caulaincourt Bignon Second Restoration Talleyrand A. E. Richelieu Dessolles Pasquier M. Montmorency Chateaubriand Damas La Ferronays Montmorency-Laval Portalis Polignac Mortemart July Monarchy Bignon Jourdan Molé Maison Sébastiani V. Broglie Rigny Bresson Rigny V. Broglie Thiers Molé Montebello Soult Thiers Guizot Second Republic Lamartine Bastide Bedeau Bastide Drouyn de Lhuys Tocqueville Rayneval La Hitte Drouyn de Lhuys Brénier Baroche Turgot Drouyn de Lhuys Second Empire Drouyn de Lhuys Walewski Baroche Thouvenel Drouyn de Lhuys La Valette Moustier La Valette La Tour Auvergne Daru Ollivier Gramont La Tour d'Auvergne Third Republic Favre Rémusat A. Broglie Decazes Banneville Waddington Freycinet Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Challemel-Lacour Ferry Freycinet Flourens Goblet Spuller Ribot Develle Casimir-Perier Hanotaux Berthelot Bourgeois Hanotaux Delcassé Rouvier Bourgeois Pichon Cruppi Selves Poincaré Jonnart Pichon Doumergue Bourgeois Viviani Doumergue Delcassé Viviani Briand Ribot Barthou Pichon Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré Lefebvre Herriot Briand Herriot Briand Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Barthou Laval Flandin Delbos Paul-Boncour Bonnet Daladier Reynaud Daladier Reynaud Baudouin Vichy France Baudouin Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Bidault Schuman Bidault Mendès France Faure Pinay Pineau Pleven Couve de Murville Fifth Republic Couve de Murville Debré Schumann Bettencourt Jobert Sauvagnargues Guiringaud François-Poncet Cheysson Dumas Raimond Dumas Juppé Charette Védrine Villepin Barnier Douste-Blazy Kouchner Alliot-Marie Juppé Fabius Ayrault Le Drian Colonna Séjourné Barrot External links [ edit ] Société Arnauld de Pomponne .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simon_Arnauld,_Marquis_de_Pomponne&oldid=1301049746 " Categories : 1618 births 1699 deaths Politicians from Paris Marquesses of Pomponne 17th-century French diplomats Ambassadors of France to Sweden Ancien Régime office-holders Jansenists 17th-century French writers 17th-century French male writers 17th-century French politicians French male poets People from the Province of Île-de-France Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Simon Arnauld, Marquis de Pomponne 14 languages Add topic

