Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Comparison to legal instrumentalism 3 Prominent Figures Toggle Prominent Figures subsection 3.1 Justice Antonin Scalia and formalism 3.2 Frederick Schauer 3.3 Jan Woleński 4 See also 5 Footnotes and references 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Legal formalism 10 languages العربية Български فارسی हिन्दी Italiano עברית Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal philosophy in which judges decide cases by applying logical principles Judicial interpretation Forms Constitutional review Judicial opinion In Catholic canon law In Islamic jurisprudence Kritarchy Statutory interpretation Judicial misconduct Activism Chilling effect Discretion Immunity Restraint Ultra vires General rules of interpretation Accountability Adversarial system Appeal Conflict of laws Forum shopping Jurisdictional arbitrage Lex loci Golden rule Inquisitorial system Interpretation Act Jury nullification Justiciability Letter and spirit of the law Mischief rule Nondelegation doctrine Plain meaning rule Polycentric law Precedent Reasonableness Rule according to higher law Separation of powers Judicial independence Parliamentary sovereignty General theories of interpretation Common good constitutionalism Court administration Judicial reform Jurisprudence Indeterminacy debate Legal realism Legal process Legal formalism Legitimacy Living Constitution / Living tree / Living instrument Opinio juris sive necessitatis Originalism ( original meaning ) Original intent ( legislative intent , legislative history ) Purposive approach Strict constructionism Textualism International Anarchy Hard law International litigation International legal theories Monism and dualism Peremptory norm Soft law Universal jurisdiction v t e Legal formalism is both a descriptive theory of how judges decide cases and a normative theory of how judges should decide cases .

[ 1 ] In its descriptive sense, formalists maintain that judges reach their decisions by applying uncontroversial principles to the facts ; formalists believe that there is an underlying logic to the many legal principles that may be applied in different cases. These principles, they claim, are straightforward and can be readily discovered by anyone with some legal expertise. U.S. Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

, by contrast, believed that "The life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience".

[ 2 ] The formalist era is generally viewed as having existed from the 1870s to the 1920s, but some scholars deny that legal formalism ever existed in practice.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The ultimate goal of legal formalism would be to describe the underlying principles in a single and determinate system that could be applied mechanically—from which the term "mechanical jurisprudence " comes. Judge Richard Posner defined "legal formalism" as "the use of deductive logic to derive the outcome of a case from premises accepted as authoritative".

[ 5 ] The antithesis of formalism is legal realism , which has been said to be "[p]erhaps the most pervasive and accepted theory of how judges arrive at legal decisions." [ 6 ] This descriptive conception of "legal formalism" can be extended to a normative theory, which holds that judges should decide cases by the application of uncontroversial principles to the facts; "sound legal
decisions can be justified as the conclusions of valid deductive syllogisms ." [ 7 ] Definition [ edit ] Formalism remains one of the most influential and important theories of adjudication and has been called the thesis to which realism is the antithesis.

[ 8 ] Formalism sees adjudication as the uncontroversial application of accepted principles to known facts to derive the outcome in the manner of a deductive syllogism.

[ 9 ] Formalists believe that the relevant principles of law of a given area can be discerned by surveying the case law of that area.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Christopher Columbus Langdell believed that the only resources needed to create a science of law was a law library.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Formalism has been called an "autonomous discipline," [ 14 ] in reference to the formalist belief that judges require only the facts and the law, all normative issues such as morality or politics being irrelevant.

[ 15 ] If judges are seen to be simply applying the rules in a mechanical and uncontroversial manner, this protects judges from criticism. For this reason, formalism has been called "the official theory of judging." [ 16 ] Formalists, contrary to Realists, take the judge at face value, assuming that the facts and principles as recorded in a judge's reasons reflect the facts that the judge considered to be relevant, and the principles that the judge arrived at to reach the judgement. They therefore place little emphasis on the means by which a judge determines the facts.

As a normative theory, legal formalists argue that judges and other public officials should be constrained in their interpretation of legal texts, suggesting that investing the judiciary with the power to say what the law should be, rather than confining them to expositing what the law does say, violates the separation of powers . This argument is expressed clearly in Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, which provides that the judiciary "shall never exercise the legislative and executive powers, or either of them; to the end [that Massachusetts' government] may be a government of laws, and not of men." [ 17 ] Formalism seeks to maintain that separation as a "theory that law is a set of rules and principles independent of other political and social institutions." [ 18 ] Though formalist thought and influence in the United States has been greatly reduced since the early 20th century, some of its influence remains—especially in the theories of textualism and originalism .

[ 19 ] Comparison to legal instrumentalism [ edit ] Legal formalism can be contrasted with legal instrumentalism, a view associated with American legal realism .

[ 20 ] Instrumentalism is the view that creativity in the interpretation of legal texts is justified to ensure that the law serves good public policy and social interests, including the promotion of justice and the protection of human rights . Legal formalists counter that for judges to change the law to serve their own ideas regarding policy undermines the rule of law.

Prominent Figures [ edit ] Justice Antonin Scalia and formalism [ edit ] The late United States Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia was noted for his formalist views about a variety of topics, particularly his view that the United States Constitution should be interpreted in accord with its original meaning and his view that statutes should be read in accord with their plain meaning .

In A Matter of Interpretation , Scalia defended textualism – and, by extension, formalism – saying: Of all the criticisms leveled against textualism, the most mindless is that it is "formalistic." The answer to that is, of course it's formalistic ! The rule of law is about form... A murderer has been caught with blood on his hands, bending over the body of his victim; a neighbor with a video camera has filmed the crime; and the murderer has confessed in writing and on videotape. We nonetheless insist that before the state can punish this miscreant, it must conduct a full-dress criminal trial that results in a verdict of guilty. Is that not formalism? Long live formalism. It is what makes a government a government of laws and not of men.

[ 21 ] Scalia's strongest claim on formalist credentials can be found in his essay, The Rule of Law as a Law of Rules .

[ 22 ] Frederick Schauer [ edit ] In 1998, Frederick Schauer , a professor at the University of Virginia School of Law , published a law review article titled "Formalism" in The Yale Law Journal . In it he urges scholars to rethink the "contemporary aversion to formalism" and states that his goal is to "rescue formalism from conceptual banishment".

[ 23 ] He argues that formalism should be conceptually rethought, not in terms merely of whether it is a good or bad thing, but also in terms of how language both can and should be used to restrict the power of decision-makers in the decision-making process.

Jan Woleński [ edit ] In his essay "Formal and informal in legal logic", Jan Woleński contends that there are "rhetorical functions of metalogical concepts that are used in legal discourse", and hence the introduction of the informal into otherwise imperative logic . He reviews Jørgensen's paradox to introduce deontic logic , and acknowledges this innovation by Georg Henrik von Wright .

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Critical legal studies Judicial activism Legal positivism Metacognition Originalism Reasonable doubt Rule according to higher law Footnotes and references [ edit ] ^ "Posner, Richard A., "Legal Formalism, Legal Realism, and the Interpretation of Statutes and the Constitution," Case Western Reserve Law Review , vol. 37, no. 2 (1986), pp. 179-217" (PDF) .

^ Holmes, Oliver Wendell Jr. (1881).

The Common Law . Vol. I. Boston: Little, Brown and Company .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021.

^ Tamanaha, Brian Z., Beyond the Formalist-Realist Divide: The Role of Politics in Judging (Princeton University Press, 2009) Review ; Alschuler, Albert W.

, Law Without Values: The Life, Work, and Legacy of Justice Holmes (University of Chicago Press, 2000), p. 98.

^ After quoting a passage from page 36 of Holmes's The Common Law about "the failure of all theories which consider law only from its formal side", Alschuler writes, "For generations, readers of this passage have inferred that someone (perhaps even someone notable) had attempted to deduce the entire corpus of law from a priori postulates. Why else would Holmes have disparaged the idea? Possibly some now-obscure German legal theorist fit Holmes's description of the deductive formalist bogeyman, but I know of no American who did". Alschuler, Albert W., Law Without Values , p. 98.

^ "Posner, Richard A., "Legal Formalism, Legal Realism, and the Interpretation of Statutes and the Constitution," Case Western Reserve Law Review , vol. 37, no. 2 (1986), p. 181" (PDF) .

^ "Capurso, Timothy J., "How Judges Judge: Theories on Judicial Decision Making," University of Baltimore Law Forum, vol. 29, no. 1 (Fall 1998)" .

^ "Lyons, David, "Legal Formalism and Instrumentalism-a Pathological Study," Cornell Law Review , vol. 66, issue 5 (June 1981)" .

^ Grey, Thomas C.

(1983). "Langdell's Orthodoxy." University of Pittsburgh Law Review , 45, 1. p. 3.

^ Posner, Richard A.

(2008).

How Judges Think . Cambridge, Massachusetts; London: Harvard University Press, p. 41.

^ Kronman, Anthony T.

(1993).

The Lost Lawyer: Failing Ideals of the Legal Profession . Cambridge, Massachusetts; London: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, p. 171.

^ Leiter, Brian (1997). "Is There an 'American' Jurisprudence?" Oxford Journal of Legal Studies , 17(2), 367–387. p. 373.

^ Langdell, Christoper C.

(1887). Harvard Law School.

Law Quarterly Review , 3, 123.

^ Bix, Brian H. (2009).

Jurisprudence: Theory and Context (5th ed.), Sweet & Maxwell, p. 192.

^ Posner, How Judges Think , 2008, p. 42.

^ Leiter, Brian (2010). "Legal Formalism and Legal Realism: What Is the Issue?" Legal Theory , 16(02), 111–133.

[1] ^ Posner, How Judges Think , 2008, p. 41.

^ [2] Archived 2015-06-19 at the Wayback Machine Mass. Const. (1780).

^ Black's Law Dictionary 913 (7th ed. 1999).

^ "legal formalism" .

Cornell Law School Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ "Legal Theory Lexicon: Formalism & Instrumentalism" .

Legal Theory Blog .

^ Scalia, Antonin (1997).

"Common-Law Courts in a Civil-Law System: The Role of United States Federal Courts in Interpreting the Constitution and Laws" .

In a Matter of Interpretation: Federal Courts and the Law (2018 new ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press: 3–48 (quotation on p. 25).

ISBN 9780691174044 . Retrieved 27 June 2021 .

(emphasis in original).

^ Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law as a Law of Rules , 56 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1175 (1989).

^ Frederick Schauer, Formalism , 97 Yale L.J. 509, 511, 539 (1988).

^ Jan Woleński (2011) "Formal and Informal in Legal Logic", pages 73 to 86 in Approaches to Legal Rationality , edited by D.M Gabbay, P. Canivez, S. Rahman & A. Thierselin, Springer books ISBN 978-90-481-9587-9 External links [ edit ] Social Theory of Law v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legal_formalism&oldid=1306019080 " Categories : Sociology of law Formalism (deductive) Theories of law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 12:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legal formalism 10 languages Add topic

