Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Inshore 2 Offshore 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Recreational boat fishing 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Recreational fishing on water vessels This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fly fishing from a dinghy Recreational fishermen usually fish either from a boat or from a shoreline or river bank . When fishing from a boat, or fishing vessel , most fishing techniques can be used, from nets to fish traps , but some form of angling is by far the most common. Compared to fishing from the land, fishing from a boat allows more access to different fishing grounds and different species of fish.

Inshore [ edit ] Inshore boat fishing is fishing from a boat in easy sight of land and in water less than about 30 metres deep. The boat can be either human-powered watercraft such as a dinghy , row boat , kayak or canoe , or light motorboats such as a runabout , inflatable , fanboat or small cabin cruiser . Inshore boats are typically small enough to be carried atop of a vehicle roof rack or be towed on a boat trailer , and are much more affordable than offshore fishing boats. In recent times, fishing from a kayak has become popular form of inshore boat fishing.

Anglers either use an uptide sea rod between 9 and 10 feet in length to cast from the boat or a shorter downtide rod between 6 and 8 feet.

Lines are usually between 18 pounds and 50 pounds breaking strain dependent on the species of fish being targeted.

Reels are usually multipliers, although fixed spool reels are being used more and more.

Baits are similar to those used for beach and rock fishing except they are often larger since larger fish are targeted.  The species will include all the beach species, but now also include big conger eels and small sharks like tope and smoothhound.

Menominees spearfishing salmon at night by torchlight and canoe on Fox River Fishing dingy in Switzerland Fishing from a boat on the Doubs , France An angler in a float tube plays a pike .

Offshore [ edit ] Deep sea fishing from a boat in the Gulf of Mexico Offshore boat fishing, sometimes called deep sea or open water fishing, is fishing in deep water (more than 30 metres) and at some distance from land. It is dangerous compared to shallow water or lake fishing. More knowledge is needed about weather patterns, navigation and safety precautions, and this is not an activity for beginners.

Offshore boats are generally much larger than inshore boats, and may need to be moored in a marina. They are sturdily constructed so they can brave the weather and water conditions encountered in open waters. Though they differ in design and purpose and prices vary widely they are generally expensive to build and maintain. Most offshore recreational fishermen charter boats rather than own them. It is often a pastime of the affluent, and there is a demand for charter boats equipped and catered to luxurious excess.

Offshore game fish, like marlin and tuna , can be very large and heavy tackle is needed. Fishing is usually done with sea rods , such as  downtide rods, with lines of 30 to 50 pounds and multiplier reels . Baits are the same as for inshore fishing and include squid and whole mackerel as well as artificial lures such as perks. Fishing takes place over reefs and wrecks for very large cod, ling and congers.

Small sport fishing boat Larger charter boat in Bermuda On the bridge of a sport fishing boat in Long Island Sound See also [ edit ] Fishing vessel Traditional fishing boats References [ edit ] Gibson, Barry (2001) Inshore Salt Water Fishing.

Creative Publishing.

ISBN 0-86573-132-2 Newman, Bob (1994) Inshore Fishing: The Carolina Coast.

Down Home Press.

ISBN 978-1-878086-27-3 v t e Angling topics General Angling Boat fishing Big-game fishing Flats fishing Flosser Float tube Trolling Casting Surf fishing Rock fishing Bank fishing Jet ski fishing Kayak fishing Centerpin fishing Coarse fishing Bottom fishing Urban fishing Tackle Techniques Land-based game fishing Ice fishing Indoor fishing Snagging Spin fishing Skishing Tailrace fishing Tenkara fishing Fish Bass Bait fish Carp Game fish Mahi-mahi Marlin Panfish Porgie (bream) Rough fish Shad Smelt whiting Striped bass Walleye Regulation and sustainability Fishing license Fisheries management Fisheries law Bag limits Catch and release Conservation officer Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Minimum landing size Tag and release Poaching Catch records Europe UK Wisconsin West Virginia Organisations Bass Anglers Sportsman Society Confédération Internationale de la Pêche Sportive International Game Fish Association Nippon Bass Club Prince Albert Angling Society Sport Fishing Association Literature Angler's Mail Angling Times Field & Stream Gray's Sporting Journal List of pseudonyms of angling authors Marlin Outdoor Life Rod and Line Book of the Black Bass Salt Water Sportsman Sports Afield The Secrets of Angling Other Angling at the 1900 Summer Olympics Ikejime Pain in fish Priest (tool) Tournaments Television series World Fishing Network v t e Articles about fly fishing and fly tying Fly fishing Bamboo fly rod Float tube Fly fishing tackle Fly line Fly rod building Furled leader Dry fly fishing Fly casting Fly Casting Analyzer Reach cast Spey casting Manufacturers of fly tying materials and tools Tenkara fishing Trout bum Waders Fly waters: Blue Ribbon fishery Class A Wild Trout Waters North America Europe Artificial flies Adams Alexandra BWO Bonefish flies Brown Bi-visible Bunyan Bug Clouser Deep Minnow Copper John Crazy Charlie Dave's Hopper Diawl bach Egg sucking leech Elk Hair Caddis Flesh Fly Fully dressed flies Grey Ghost Streamer Hare's Ear Humpy Jock Scott Klinkhammer Lefty's Deceiver Mallard and Claret Mickey Finn Muddler Minnow Parks' Salmonfly Partridge and Orange Pheasant Tail Nymph Prince Nymph Popper Red Tag Royal Coachman Royal Wulff Sakasa Kebari Salmon fly patterns Stimulator Surf Candy Terrestrials Tube fly Woolly Bugger Woolly Worm Wulff flies Organizations American Museum of Fly Fishing Anglers' Club of New York Catskill Fly Fishing Center and Museum Flyfishers' Club Fly Fishers International Fly Fishing Team USA Orvis Parks' Fly Shop Scientific Anglers Trout Unlimited World Fly Fishing Championships Literature Bibliography of fly fishing (species related) Bibliography of fly fishing Bibliography of fly fishing (fly tying, stories, fiction) Pseudonyms of notable angling authors The American Angler's Book Blacker's Art of Fly Making Dry-Fly Fishing in Theory and Practice Favorite Flies and Their Histories Floating Flies and How to Dress Them Fly Fishing (Grey book) Fly Fishing: Memories of Angling Days The Fly-fisher's Entomology Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream The Salmon Fly The Way of a Trout with the Fly People Dan Bailey A.K. Best Megan Boyd Drew Chicone James Deren Edward Fitzgibbon Jack Gartside George F. Grant Frederic M. Halford J. Richard Harris Lefty Kreh George Selwyn Marryat Don Martinez Louis Rhead Edwin Rist Alfred Ronalds Frank Sawyer Carrie G. Stevens Lee Wulff v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Recreational_boat_fishing&oldid=1284229385 " Category : Fishing techniques and methods Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 6 April 2025, at 09:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Recreational boat fishing 1 language Add topic

