Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Background 3 Acts of violence 4 Breach of the right to privacy 5 Freedom of expression, assembly and association 6 Yogyakarta principles 7 The United Nations 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Right to sexuality 14 languages العربية বাংলা Català Español فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Српски / srpski Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Right to enjoy one's sexuality without discrimination Far-right protestors recording LGBT rights activists at a pride parade.

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs to be updated . The reason given is: Most sources are from 2008–2012.

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( January 2024 ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article duplicates the scope of other articles , specifically LGBT rights and Sexual and reproductive health and rights .

Please discuss this issue and help introduce a summary style to the article.

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on LGBTQ people LGBTQ Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Queer Sexual orientation and gender Aromantic Asexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Biology Bisexual Pansexual Demographics Environment Fictosexual Gender fluid Gender identity Gender role Gender modality Gender nonconforming Homosexual Intersex Non-heterosexual Non-binary Queer Queer heterosexual Questioning Sexual identity Sex–gender distinction Trans man Trans woman Transgender Transsexual Two-spirit History General Timeline Same-sex marriage Homosexuality Movements Gay liberation Same-sex unions Stonewall riots Identities Lesbian Bisexual Transgender Intersex Culture Business Coming out Community African-American Dyke March Events Awareness periods Largest events Gay village Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals LGBTQ culture in New York City Pride Pride Month Parade Queer art QPR and QPP Same-sex relationship Cross-sex relationship Slang Polari Socialization Subcultures Transgender in NYC Symbols Flags Takatāpui Moe aikāne Tourism Rights Adoption Civil union Decriminalization Gender self-identification Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Military service Parenting Rights by country or territory Sexuality Trans rights Yogyakarta Principles Health MSM and Blood donation restrictions / HIV LGBTQ medical organizations Reproduction Mental health Transgender health care Gender-affirming hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery Gender transition Legal status of gender-affirming healthcare Misinformation Suicide Societal attitudes Allonormative amatonormative Cisnormative Heteronormative Comphet Opposition to LGBTQ rights 21st century UK anti-trans 2020s US anti-LGBTQ Grooming conspiracy theory Media portrayal Religion & LGBTQ Homosexuality Trans people Sexual diversity Stereotypes Issues Acephobia Arophobia AIDS stigma Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Biphobia Bullying Censorship Closeted Outing Criminalization Domestic violence Erasure Straightwashing Bisexual Lesbian Trans Gay bashing Gayphobia Heteropatriarchy Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal Intersex discrimination Legality of conversion therapy Lesbophobia Suicide Youth vulnerability Migration Mixed-orientation marriage Racism Sexualism Transphobia Non-binary people Trans men Trans women Violence Trans people Academic fields and discourse Communism & LGBTQ rights Gender studies Lesbian feminism Lavender linguistics LGBTQ conservatism In the US Queer anarchism Queer studies Queer theory Social construction of gender Socialism & LGBTQ rights Transfeminism Transgender studies Travesti LGBTQ portal v t e Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e The right to sexuality incorporates the right to express one's sexuality and to be free from discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation . Although it is equally applicable to heterosexuality , it also encompasses human rights of people of diverse sexual orientations, including lesbian , gay , asexual and bisexual people, and the protection of those rights. The inalienable nature of rights belonging to every person by virtue of being human .

[ 1 ] No right to sexuality exists explicitly in international human rights law ; rather, it is found in several international human rights instruments , including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights .

Definition [ edit ] The right to sexuality is difficult to define, as it comprises various rights within the international human rights law framework.

Sexual orientation is defined in the Cambridge dictionary as "The fact of someone being sexually or romantically attracted to people of a particular gender, or more than one gender".

[ 2 ] Pronouns are used to identify what an individual goes by. For a female, it is typically used as she/her. For a male, it is typically used as He/Him.

[ 3 ] The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) guarantee freedom from discrimination based on sexual orientation.

The UDHR provides for non-discrimination in Article 2, which states that: [ 4 ] "Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, color, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty." Sexual orientation can be read into Article 2 as "other status" or as falling under "sex".

In the ICCPR, Article 2 sets out a similar provision for non-discrimination: "Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to respect and to ensure to all individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in the present Covenant, without distinction of any kind, such as race, color, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status." In Toonen v Australia the United Nations Human Rights Committee (UNHRC) found that the reference to "sex" in Article 2 of the ICCPR included sexual orientation, thereby making sexual orientation prohibited grounds of distinction in respect of the enjoyment of rights under the ICCPR.

[ 5 ] The right to be free from discrimination is the basis of the right to sexuality, but it is closely related to exercising and protecting other fundamental human rights.

Background [ edit ] Individuals of diverse sexual orientations have been discriminated against historically and continue to be a "vulnerable" group in society today. Forms of discrimination experienced by people of diverse sexual orientations include the denial of the right to life , the right to work and the right to privacy , non-recognition of personal and family relationships, interference with human dignity , interference with security of the person , violations of the right to be free from torture , discrimination in access to economic, social and cultural rights, including housing, health and education, and pressure to remain silent and invisible.

[ 6 ] Sixty-seven countries maintain laws that make same-sex consensual sex between adults a criminal offence, and seven countries (or parts thereof) impose the death penalty for same-sex consensual sex. They are Iran, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Mauritania, the twelve northern states of Nigeria, and the southern parts of Somalia. Also, in Ghana there was an anti-LGBT bill proposed and passed by the parliament never became law.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] when passed, LGBT+ persons in Ghana shall be criminalized.

[ 9 ] Uganda already has passed this law.

[ 10 ] The right to sexuality has only relatively recently become the subject of international concern, with the regulation of sexuality traditionally falling within the jurisdiction of the nation state .

[ 11 ] Today numerous international non-governmental organizations and intergovernmental organizations are engaged in the protection of the rights of people of diverse sexual orientation as it is increasingly recognized that discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation is widespread and an unacceptable violation of human rights.

Acts of violence [ edit ] Acts of violence against LGBT people are often especially vicious compared to other bias-motivated crimes [ 12 ] and include killings, kidnappings, beatings, rape, and psychological violence, including threats, coercion and arbitrary depravations of liberty.

[ 13 ] Examples of violent acts against people of diverse sexual orientation are too numerous to account for here, and they occur in all parts of the world. A particularly distressing example is the sexual assault and murder of fifteen lesbians in Thailand in March 2012. In that example, two lesbian couples were killed by men who objected to their relationship and who were embarrassed when they were unable to convince the women to enter heterosexual relationships with them.

[ 14 ] In another disturbing case, which took place in 2017 in a church located in Brazil , a 13-year-old lesbian girl fell victim to sexual abuse after confessing to her bishop her sexual orientation. The bishop then proceeded to anoint the girl with oil under the pretext of "gay healing", to which the young girl was left traumatized and in need of psychological care.

[ 15 ] In another case, Nex Benedict , a 16-year-old teenager, was found dead inside their own home. Nex Benedict was a teenager who was using they/them pronouns , getting comfortable with their sexuality and expressing how they truly were. At school, many other teens bullied and picked on them due to their pronouns. It got to the point where Benedict was beaten; they died the following day.

[ 16 ] Often, acts of violence against people of diverse sexual orientations are perpetrated by the victim's own family. In the case of Zimbabwe , 18-year-old Tina Machida was raped multiple times as a lesbian which her own family organized in an attempt to "normalize" her from homosexuality.

[ 17 ] Lesbian pride flag In those cases, as in many other cases of violence against people of diverse sexual orientation, State law enforcement authorities are complicit in human rights abuses for failing to persecute violators of rights.

Breach of the right to privacy [ edit ] Main article: Right to Privacy The right to privacy is a protected freedom under the UDHR, [ 18 ] and the ICCPR [ 19 ] which reflects the "widespread, if not universal, human need to pursue certain activities within an intimate sphere, free of outside interference. The possibility to do so is fundamental to personhood." [ 20 ] Intimate relationships, whether between two people of the same sex or of different sexes, are among those activities that are subject to a right of privacy. The privacy rights extend much further than just the things you do in your home, but to your medical records, who your sexual partners are, and what your sexual status is.

It has been successfully argued in several cases that criminalization of homosexual relationships is an interference with the right to privacy, including decisions in the European Court of Human Rights and the UNHRC.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 5 ] The freedom to decide on one's consensual adult relationships, including the gender of that person, without the interference of the State, is a fundamental human right. To prohibit the relationships of people of diverse sexual orientations is a breach of the right to sexuality and the right to privacy.

Freedom of expression, assembly and association [ edit ] Main articles: Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Assembly Every person, by their individual autonomy , is free to express themselves, assemble, and join in association with others.

Freedom of expression is a protected human right under Article 19 of the UDHR and Article 19 of the ICCPR, as is the right to freedom of assembly under Article 20 of the UDHR and Article 21 of the ICCPR.

LGBT people are discriminated against in respect of their ability to defend and promote their rights. State governments often ban gay pride marches, peaceful demonstrations, and other events promoting LGBT rights.

[ 23 ] Germany Pride Parade In 2011 gay pride marches were banned in Serbia [ 24 ] and another march in Moscow was broken up by police, who arrested thirty leading gay rights activists.

[ 25 ] Many individuals use pronouns that they feel are comfortable with their sexuality. When it comes to a female, it is typically she/her, and when it comes to a male, they use he/him. Nowadays, people use they/them pronouns to show that is how they go as an individual. There are different pronouns that people are also coming up with to go by as.

[ 26 ] Yogyakarta principles [ edit ] In 2005, twenty-nine experts undertook the drafting of the Yogyakarta Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity.

[ 27 ] The document was intended to set out experiences of human rights violations against people of diverse sexual orientation and transgender people, the application of international human rights law to those experiences and the nature of obligations on States in respect of those experiences.

[ 6 ] The Principles can be broadly categorized into the following: Principles 1 to 3 set out the universality of human rights and their application to all persons.

Principles 4 to 11 address fundamental rights to life, freedom from violence and torture, privacy, access to justice, and freedom from arbitrary detention.

Principles 12 to 18 set out non-discrimination in relation to economic, social, and cultural rights, including employment, accommodation, social security, education, and health.

Principles 19 to 21 emphasized the importance of freedom of expression, identity, and sexuality, without State interference, including peaceful assembly.

Principles 22 and 23 set out the right to seek asylum from persecution based on sexual orientation.

Principles 24 to 26 set out the right to participate in family and cultural life and public affairs.

Principle 27 sets out the right to promote and defend human rights without discrimination based on sexual orientation.

Principles 28 and 29 emphasized the importance of holding those who violate human rights accountable, and ensuring redress for those who face rights violations.

The Yogyakarta Principles are an instrument of soft law and are, therefore, not binding. However, they do provide an important standard for States in their obligation to protect the rights of individuals of diverse sexual orientations.

The United Nations [ edit ] Main article: Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity at the United Nations On 17 June 2011 the United Nations Human Rights Council in a Resolution on Human Rights, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, adopted by a vote of 23 in favor, 19 against, and 3 abstentions, requested the commission of a study to document discriminatory laws and acts of violence against people based on their sexual orientation and gender identity.

[ 28 ] The 2011 Resolution was intended to shed light on how international human rights could be used to prevent acts of violence and discrimination against people of diverse sexual orientation.

On 15 December 2011 the first Report on human rights of LGBT people was released by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights .

[ 29 ] The Report made the following recommendations. To prevent such acts of violence occurring, United Nations Member States are recommended to: [ 30 ] Promptly investigate all reported killings and serious incidents of violence against LGBT people, regardless of whether carried out privately or publicly, by State or non-State actors, ensuring accountability for such violations and the establishment of reporting mechanisms for such incidents.

Take measures to prevent torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment , ensure accountability for such violations, and establish reporting mechanisms.

Repeal laws that criminalize homosexuality, same-sex sexual conduct, and other criminal laws that detain people based on their sexuality, and abolish the death penalty for offenses involving consensual sexual relations within same-sex relationships.

Enact comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation, ensuring that combating discrimination based on sexual orientation is a mandate of national human rights bodies.

Ensure that freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly can be exercised safely without discrimination on sexual orientation or gender identity.

Implement appropriate training programs for law enforcement personnel and support public information campaigns to counter homophobia and transphobia amongst the general public and in schools.

Facilitate legal recognition of the preferred gender of transgender persons.

The United Nations has yet to take further action, although a proposed declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity was brought before the United Nations General Assembly in 2008. The General Assembly has not officially adopted that declaration and remains open for signatories.

See also [ edit ] Antisexualism Bodily integrity Criminalization of homosexuality Decriminalization of sex work Disability and sexuality Homophobia LGBT rights by country or territory LGBT rights opposition LGBT social movements Religion and homosexuality Reproductive rights Sex-positive movement Sex workers' rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights Sexual Freedom Awards References [ edit ] ^ "Love is a human right" .

Amnesty International . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

^ "Sexual orientation" .

^ "Pronoun" .

^ Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 , Article 2.

^ a b "Toonen v Australia" (PDF) (PDF). United Nations Human Rights Committee. 4 April 1992. CCPR/C/50/D/488/1992.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 September 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ a b O'Flaherty, Michael ; Fisher, J. (1 January 2008). "Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and International Human Rights Law: Contextualising the Yogyakarta Principles".

Human Rights Law Review .

8 (2). Oxford University Press (OUP): 207– 248.

doi : 10.1093/hrlr/ngn009 .

ISSN 1461-7781 .

Reprinted in O'Flaherty, M.; Fisher, J. (4 July 2013).

"Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and International Human Rights Law: Contextualising the Yogyakarta Principles" . In Grodin, Michael; Tarantola, Daniel; Annas, George; Gruskin, Sofia (eds.).

Health and Human Rights in a Changing World . Routledge. pp.

356– 388.

ISBN 978-1-136-68856-0 .

OCLC 848918181 – via Internet Archive.

^ emmakd (29 February 2024).

"Ghana Parliament passes anti-LGBTQ+ Bill" .

Ghana Business News . Retrieved 26 July 2025 .

^ "The 'Big Three' bodies in Ghana 'opposed' to the anti-gay bill" .

GhanaWeb . 4 March 2024. Archived from the original on 22 December 2024 . Retrieved 26 July 2025 .

^ "How CNN, BBC reported Supreme Court's dismissal of suits against Ghana's anti-gay bill" .

GhanaWeb . 19 December 2024. Archived from the original on 9 January 2025 . Retrieved 26 July 2025 .

^ "Anti-LGBT+ Law: Ugandan court backs government's refusal to register LGBT organisation" .

GhanaWeb . 14 March 2024. Archived from the original on 22 December 2024 . Retrieved 26 July 2025 .

^ "Sexuality and Human Rights" (PDF) .

International Council on Human Rights Policy (PDF). 2009. p. 21. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2009.

^ UN Human Rights Council 2011 , p. 22.

^ UN Human Rights Council 2011 , p. 20.

^ "LGBT Human Rights Advocates Charge Thai Police Ignore Fifteen Killings of Lesbians and Toms, Dismiss as "Love Gone Sour" " .

iglhrc.org (Press release). 15 May 2012. Archived from the original on 6 March 2013 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ "Bispo evangélico que estuprou adolescente é condenado a 20 anos de prisão" .

Pragmatismo Político (in Brazilian Portuguese). 18 September 2020 . Retrieved 7 October 2023 .

^ Mandler, C (22 March 2024).

"What happened to nex Benedict?" .

What happened to Nex Benedict . Retrieved 22 March 2024 .

^ Coomaraswamy, Radhika (31 January 2002).

"Report of the Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women, Its Causes and Consequences, Radhika Coomaraswamy, submitted in accordance with Commission on Human Rights resolution 2001/49" . United Nations Commission on Human Rights. p. 102.

OCLC 50549496 . E/CN.4/2002/83.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 , Article 12.

^ "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" .

United Nations Treaty Collection . 23 March 1976. Article 17.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Heinze, Eric (1995).

"10.1 Aspects of the Right" .

Sexual Orientation: a Human Right . Dordrecht Boston: Kluwer Law International. pp.

172– 173.

ISBN 978-0-7923-3018-9 .

OCLC 1392112413 – via Internet Archive.

^ European Court of Human Rights (22 October 1981).

"DUDGEON v. THE UNITED KINGDOM" .

HUDOC . 001-57473.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2023 . Retrieved 18 September 2023 .

^ European Court of Human Rights (26 October 1988).

"NORRIS v. IRELAND" .

HUDOC . 001-57547.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2023 . Retrieved 18 September 2023 .

^ Diène, Doudou (27 March 2006).

"Racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and all forms of discrimination: report: addendum" . Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. Geneva: UN Commission on Human Rights N. p. 18 sec. 72.

OCLC 124514254 .

Archived from the original on 18 September 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ "Serbia bans gay pride parade citing violence fears" .

BBC News . 30 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2022 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Geen, Jessica (27 May 2011).

"Moscow police will break up banned gay Pride march" .

PinkNews .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ "Glossary of terms" . 31 March 2023.

^ "Yogyakarta Principles plus 10" .

yogyakartaprinciples.org . 30 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ UN Human Rights Council Archived 2011-06-24 at the Wayback Machine , 17 June 2011; see also UN rights body hits out against violence based on sexual orientation Archived 19 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , (2011) UN News Centre.

^ UN Human Rights Council 2011 .

^ UN Human Rights Council 2011 , p. 84.

Sources [ edit ] Human Rights Council (17 November 2011).

"Discriminatory laws and practices and acts of violence against individuals based on their sexual orientation and gender identity" (PDF) . Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. United Nations.

OCLC 769808039 . A/HRC/19/41. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 August 2023.

"Universal Declaration of Human Rights" . United Nations. 1948.

OCLC 1194848956 . Archived from the original on 15 September 2023.

External links [ edit ] Amnesty International USA: LGBT legal status around the world Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in International Human Rights Law International Commission of Jurists.

v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_sexuality&oldid=1302612438 " Categories : Discrimination Freedom of expression Freedom of speech Human rights Human sexuality LGBTQ Hidden categories: CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2023 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2024 All articles with style issues Duplicate articles Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 14:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to sexuality 14 languages Add topic

