Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Opposition to theism 3 Opposition to the idea of God 4 Other, similar terms 5 Different definitions of "antitheism" 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources Toggle the table of contents Antitheism 43 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Opposition to theism, and usually to religion See also: Antireligion and Irreligion Part of a series on Irreligion Irreligion Antireligion Anti-clericalism Criticism of religion Freethought Organized secularism Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Separation of church and state Atheism History Demographics Discrimination/Persecution Criticism Lists of atheists Forms and variations Implicit and explicit Negative and positive New State Aspects Antitheism Relationship between atheism and religion Existence of God Agnosticism Strong Weak Agnostic atheism Apatheism List of agnostics People Atheists Agnostics Humanists Books The Age of Reason Breaking the Spell The Demon-Haunted World The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great Letter to a Christian Nation The System of Nature Why I Am Not a Christian Why I Am Not a Muslim Why I Am an Atheist List of irreligious organizations American Atheists American Humanist Association Atheist Alliance International Center for Inquiry Freedom From Religion Foundation Humanists International Humanists UK Rational Response Squad Recovering from Religion Brazilian Association of Atheists and Agnostics Related topics Countries by irreligion Disestablishmentarianism Secular ethics }} Irreligion by country v t e Antitheism , also spelled anti-theism , is the philosophical position that theism should be opposed.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term has had a range of applications. In secular contexts, it typically refers to direct opposition to the belief in any deity . Unlike antireligion , antitheism is not against those religions that do not have deities, such as some sects of Buddhism and Jainism .

Etymology The word antitheism (or hyphenated anti-theism ) has been recorded in English since 1788.

[ 3 ] The etymological roots of the word are the Greek anti and theos .

The Oxford English Dictionary defines antitheist as "One opposed to belief in the existence of a god". The earliest citation given for this meaning dates from 1833.

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] The term was likely coined by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon .

[ 5 ] Opposition to theism Antitheism has been adopted as a label by those who regard theism as dangerous, destructive, or encouraging of harmful behavior.

Christopher Hitchens (2001) [ 6 ] wrote: I'm not even an atheist so much as I am an antitheist ; I not only maintain that all religions are versions of the same untruth, but I hold that the influence of churches, and the effect of religious belief, is positively harmful.

[ 6 ] Opposition to the idea of God Other definitions of antitheism include that of the French Catholic philosopher Jacques Maritain (1953), for whom it is "an active struggle against everything that reminds us of God".

[ 7 ] The definition of Robert Flint (1877), Professor of Divinity at the University of Edinburgh was similar. Flint's 1877 Baird Lecture was titled Anti-Theistic Theories .

[ 8 ] He used "antitheism" as a very general umbrella term for all opposition to his own form of theism, which he defined as: the "belief that the heavens and the earth and all that they contain owe their existence and continuance to the wisdom and will of a supreme, self-existent, omnipotent, omniscient, righteous, and benevolent Being, who is distinct from, and independent of, what He has created." [ 8 ] (p 1) However, Flint also acknowledged that antitheism is typically understood differently from how he defines it. In particular, he notes that it has been used as a subdivision of atheism , descriptive of the view that theism has been disproven, rather than as the more general term that Flint preferred. He rejected the alternative non-theistic : not merely because of its hybrid origin and character, but also because it is far too comprehensive. The theories of physical and mental science are non-theistic, even when in no degree, directly or indirectly, antagonistic to theism.

[ 8 ] (p 444–445) Other, similar terms Dystheism means "belief in a deity that is not benevolent".

Misotheism , means "hatred of God".

Examples of belief systems founded on the principle of opposition to the existence of a god or gods include some forms of Atheistic Satanism and maltheism .

Different definitions of "antitheism" See also: Misotheism § Terminology Christopher New (1993) [ 9 ] proposed an altered definition of the word antitheism as part of a thought experiment. He imagines what arguments for the existence of an evil god would look like, and writes: Antitheists, like theists, would have believed in an omnipotent, omniscient, eternal creator; but whereas theists in fact believe that the supreme being is also perfectly good, antitheists would have believed that he was perfectly evil.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] New's  changed definition has reappeared in the work of W.A. Murphree.

[ 11 ] See also Religion portal Antireligion Materialism Naturalism (philosophy) Negative and positive atheism New Atheism Post-theism Secular humanism References ^ Cline, Austin.

" Atheism and anti-theism : What's the difference? What is "anti-theism"?" .

About.com . Archived from the original on 2013-12-19 . Retrieved 2016-12-23 .

^ a b "antitheism" .

The Free Dictionary .

^ "antitheism" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ "antitheism".

The Shorter OED (reprint ed.). 1970. p. 78.

^ Noce, Augusto Del (5 January 2022).

The Problem of Atheism . McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP.

ISBN 9780228009382 .

^ a b Hitchens, C.

(2001).

"Letters to a Young Contrarian" (Book Excerpt). Archived from the original on 2009-09-15.

See also Wikipedia article Letters to a Young Contrarian ^ Maritain, J.

(1953).

The Range of Reason . London, UK: Geoffrey Bles. p. 104. Archived from the original on 2013-04-07.

^ a b c Flint, Robert (1894) [1877].

Anti-Theistic Theories: Being the Baird Lecture for 1877 (5th ed.). London, UK: William Blackwood and Sons.

^ a b New, C.

(June 1993). "Antitheism – a reflection".

Ratio .

6 (1): 36– 43.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9329.1993.tb00051.x .

^ Daniels, Charles B. (June 1997). "God, demon, good, evil".

The Journal of Value Inquiry .

31 (2): 177– 181.

doi : 10.1023/A:1004275010090 .

S2CID 169336704 .

^ Murphree, Wallace A. (March 1997). "Natural theology: Theism or antitheism".

Sophia .

36 (1): 75– 83.

doi : 10.1007/BF02786044 .

S2CID 170924107 .

Sources Barker, Dan (1993).

"Evangelistic atheism: Leading believers astray" .

Freethought Today . Archived from the original on 2005-11-26 . Retrieved 2005-11-26 .

Browne, Janet (2002).

The Power of Place , Volume 2 of the Biography of Charles Darwin . Alfred Knopf Hitchens, Christopher (2001).

Letters to a Young Contrarian ( ISBN 0-465-03032-7 ) . New York: Basic Books.

Maritain, Jacques (1953).

The Range of Reason.

London: Geoffrey Bles.

Electronic Text Note: Chapter 8, The Meaning of Contemporary Atheism (p. 103–117, Electronic Text ) is reprinted from Review of Politics , Vol. 11 (3) July 1949, p. 267–280 Electronic Text . A version also appears The Listener , Vol. 43 No.1102, 9 March 1950. pp. 427–429, 432.

Segal, David (26 October 2006).

"Atheist evangelist" .

The Washington Post (article). p. C01.

Witham, Larry (2003).

By Design , Encounter Books Wolff, Gary (November 2006).

"The new atheism: The church of the non-believers" .

Wired magazine (reprint).

Wright, N.T. (2005).

The Last Word , Harper San Francisco OHCHR (2024). Hatred based on religion or belief must be addressed holistically.

v t e God Deity Divinity Goddess List Conceptions of God Existence Gender of God Agnostic theism Animism Antitheism Apatheism Atheism Agnostic atheism Christian atheism Implicit and explicit atheism Jewish atheism Negative and positive atheism New Atheism Theological noncognitivism Binitarianism Classical theism Deism Ceremonial deism Christian deism Pandeism Polydeism Dipolar theism Dystheism Egotheism Misotheism Henotheism Ietsism Kathenotheism Liberal theism Monolatry Monotheism Ethical monotheism Post-monotheism Mysticism Nontheism Post-theism Nontrinitarianism Open theism Panentheism Pantheism Classical pantheism Hylotheism Naturalistic pantheism Philosophical theism Physitheism Euhemerism Polytheism Skeptical theism Spiritualism Theism Theistic finitism Transtheism Trinitarianism Tritheism Unitarianism Religion portal v t e Irreligion Irreligion Antireligion Anti-clericalism Criticism of religion Freethought Organized secularism Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Separation of church and state Atheism Demographics Religion History State New Criticism Discrimination/Persecution Implicit and explicit Negative and positive Existence of God Antitheism Agnosticism Strong Weak Agnostic atheism Apatheism People Atheists Agnostics Humanists Books The Age of Reason Breaking the Spell The Demon-Haunted World The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great Letter to a Christian Nation The System of Nature Why I Am Not a Christian Why I Am Not a Muslim Why I Am an Atheist Organizations American Atheists American Humanist Association Atheist Alliance International Center for Inquiry Freedom From Religion Foundation Humanists International Humanists UK Rational Response Squad Recovering from Religion Brazilian Association of Atheists and Agnostics Related topics Countries by irreligion Disestablishmentarianism Secular ethics v t e Criticism of religion By religion Baháˈí Faith Buddhism Christianity Catholic Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Protestantism Seventh-day Adventist Unification movement Unification Church in Japan Westboro Baptist Church Hinduism Swaminarayan sect Islam Islamism Twelver Shia Islam Wahhabism Jainism Judaism Monotheism New religious movement Neopaganism Scientology Sikhism Yazdânism Zoroastrianism Religious texts Bible Quran Hadith Mormon sacred texts Book of Mormon Talmud Religious figures Aisha Charles Taze Russell Ellen White Jesus Moses Muhammad Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Saul Religious discrimination Ahmadiyya Atheism Bahá'i Faith Buddhism Catholicism Catholic Church Christianity post–Cold War era Druze Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Islam Persecution Jehovah's Witness Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Mormonism Neopaganism Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Copts Protestantism Rastafari Sikhism Sunni Islam Shia Islam Sufism Zorostianism Religious violence Buddhism Christianity Mormonism Judaism Islam Terrorism Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Persecution Christian thought on persecution and tolerance War In Islam In Judaism Sectarian violence By country India Anti-Christian violence In Odisha Nigeria Pakistan Books Atheist Manifesto Breaking the Spell Christianity Unveiled God in the Age of Science?

God Is Not Great God: The Failed Hypothesis Letter to a Christian Nation The Age of Reason The Blind Watchmaker The Caged Virgin The End of Faith The God Delusion The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster Why I Am Not a Christian Why I Am Not a Muslim The Demon-Haunted World Books critical of Christianity Books critical of Islam Books critical of Judaism Books critical of Mormonism Books critical of Scientology Movements Agnosticism Antitheism Atheism Criticism Cārvāka New Atheism Nontheistic religions Parody religion Related topics Abuse Apostasy In Islam In Christianity Criticism of atheism Criticism of monotheism Sexuality Slavery Superstitions Muslim Jewish Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antitheism&oldid=1303674281 " Category : Antitheism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 11:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antitheism 43 languages Add topic

