Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Benefits of random assignment 2 Potential issues 3 Random sampling 4 History 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Random assignment 6 languages Català Español فارسی 한국어 Македонски Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process involving chance used in research for allocating experimental subjects to groups This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Random assignment" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Random assignment or random placement is an experimental technique for assigning human participants or animal subjects to different groups in an experiment (e.g., a treatment group versus a control group ) using randomization , such as by a chance procedure (e.g., flipping a coin ) or a random number generator .

[ 1 ] This ensures that each participant or subject has an equal chance of being placed in any group.

[ 1 ] Random assignment of participants helps to ensure that any differences between and within the groups are not systematic at the outset of the experiment.

[ 1 ] Thus, any differences between groups recorded at the end of the experiment can be more confidently attributed to the experimental procedures or treatment.

[ 1 ] Random assignment, blinding , and controlling are key aspects of the design of experiments because they help ensure that the results are not spurious or deceptive via confounding . This is why randomized controlled trials are vital in clinical research , especially ones that can be double-blinded and placebo-controlled .

Mathematically, there are distinctions between randomization, pseudorandomization , and quasirandomization , as well as between random number generators and pseudorandom number generators . How much these differences matter in experiments (such as clinical trials ) is a matter of trial design and statistical rigor, which affect evidence grading . Studies done with pseudo- or quasirandomization are usually given nearly the same weight as those with true randomization but are viewed with a bit more caution.

Benefits of random assignment [ edit ] Imagine an experiment in which the participants are not randomly assigned; perhaps the first 10 people to arrive are assigned to the Experimental group, and the last 10 people to arrive are assigned to the Control group. At the end of the experiment, the experimenter finds differences between the Experimental group and the Control group, and claims these differences are a result of the experimental procedure. However, they also may be due to some other preexisting attribute of the participants, e.g. people who arrive early versus people who arrive late.

Imagine the experimenter instead uses a coin flip to randomly assign participants. If the coin lands heads-up, the participant is assigned to the Experimental group. If the coin lands tails-up, the participant is assigned to the Control group. At the end of the experiment, the experimenter finds differences between the Experimental group and the Control group. Because each participant had an equal chance of being placed in any group, it is unlikely the differences could be attributable to some other preexisting attribute of the participant, e.g. those who arrived on time versus late.

Potential issues [ edit ] Random assignment does not guarantee that the groups are matched or equivalent. The groups may still differ on some preexisting attribute due to chance. The use of random assignment cannot eliminate this possibility, but it greatly reduces it.

To express this same idea statistically - If a randomly assigned group is compared to the mean it may be discovered that they differ, even though they were assigned from the same group. If a test of statistical significance is applied to randomly assigned groups to test the difference between sample means against the null hypothesis that they are equal to the same population mean (i.e., population mean of differences = 0), given the probability distribution, the null hypothesis will sometimes be "rejected," that is, deemed not plausible. That is, the groups will be sufficiently different on the variable tested to conclude statistically that they did not come from the same population, even though, procedurally, they were assigned from the same total group.  For example, using random assignment may create an assignment to groups that has 20 blue-eyed people and 5 brown-eyed people in one group. This is a rare event under random assignment, but it could happen, and when it does it might add some doubt to the causal agent in the experimental hypothesis.

Random sampling [ edit ] Random sampling is a related, but distinct, process.

[ 2 ] Random sampling is recruiting participants in a way that they represent a larger population.

[ 2 ] Because most basic statistical tests require the hypothesis of an independent randomly sampled population, random assignment is the desired assignment method because it provides control for all attributes of the members of the samples—in contrast to matching on only one or more variables—and provides the mathematical basis for estimating the likelihood of group equivalence for characteristics one is interested in, both for pretreatment checks on equivalence and the evaluation of post treatment results using inferential statistics.  More advanced statistical modeling can be used to adapt the inference to the sampling method.

History [ edit ] Randomization was emphasized in the theory of statistical inference of Charles S. Peirce in " Illustrations of the Logic of Science " (1877–1878) and " A Theory of Probable Inference " (1883). Peirce applied randomization in the Peirce- Jastrow experiment on weight perception.

Charles S. Peirce randomly assigned volunteers to a blinded , repeated-measures design to evaluate their ability to discriminate weights.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Peirce's experiment inspired other researchers in psychology and education, which developed a research tradition of randomized experiments in laboratories and specialized textbooks in the eighteen-hundreds.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Jerzy Neyman advocated randomization in survey sampling (1934) and in experiments (1923).

[ 7 ] Ronald A. Fisher advocated randomization in his book on experimental design ( 1935 ).

See also [ edit ] Asymptotic theory (statistics) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Witte, Robert S. (5 January 2017).

Statistics . Witte, John S. (11 ed.). Hoboken, NJ. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-119-25451-5 .

OCLC 956984834 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b "Social Research Methods - Knowledge Base - Random Selection & Assignment" .

^ a b Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow (1885).

"On Small Differences in Sensation" .

Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences .

3 : 73– 83.

^ a b Ian Hacking (September 1988). "Telepathy: Origins of Randomization in Experimental Design".

Isis .

79 (3): 427– 451.

doi : 10.1086/354775 .

S2CID 52201011 .

^ a b Stephen M. Stigler (November 1992). "A Historical View of Statistical Concepts in Psychology and Educational Research".

American Journal of Education .

101 (1): 60– 70.

doi : 10.1086/444032 .

S2CID 143685203 .

^ a b Trudy Dehue (December 1997).

"Deception, Efficiency, and Random Groups: Psychology and the Gradual Origination of the Random Group Design" (PDF) .

Isis .

88 (4): 653– 673.

doi : 10.1086/383850 .

PMID 9519574 .

S2CID 23526321 .

^ Neyman, Jerzy (1990) [1923], Dabrowska, Dorota M.

; Speed, Terence P.

(eds.), "On the application of probability theory to agricultural experiments: Essay on principles (Section 9)", Statistical Science , 5 (4) (Translated from (1923) Polish ed.): 465– 472, doi : 10.1214/ss/1177012031 , MR 1092986 Caliński, Tadeusz & Kageyama, Sanpei (2000).

Block designs: A Randomization approach, Volume I : Analysis . Lecture Notes in Statistics. Vol. 150. New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0-387-98578-6 .

Hinkelmann, Klaus and Kempthorne, Oscar (2008).

Design and Analysis of Experiments . Vol. I and II (Second ed.). Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-470-38551-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Hinkelmann, Klaus and Kempthorne, Oscar (2008).

Design and Analysis of Experiments, Volume I: Introduction to Experimental Design (Second ed.). Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-471-72756-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Hinkelmann, Klaus and Kempthorne, Oscar (2005).

Design and Analysis of Experiments, Volume 2: Advanced Assignment Experimental Design (First ed.). Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-471-55177-5 .

{{ cite book }} : External link in |title= ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Charles S. Peirce , " Illustrations of the Logic of Science " (1877–1878) Charles S. Peirce , " A Theory of Probable Inference " (1883) Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow (1885).

"On Small Differences in Sensation" .

Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences .

3 : 73– 83.

http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Peirce/small-diffs.htm Hacking, Ian (September 1988). "Telepathy: Origins of Randomization in Experimental Design".

Isis .

79 (3): 427– 451.

doi : 10.1086/354775 .

JSTOR 234674 .

MR 1013489 .

S2CID 52201011 .

Stephen M. Stigler (November 1992). "A Historical View of Statistical Concepts in Psychology and Educational Research".

American Journal of Education .

101 (1): 60– 70.

doi : 10.1086/444032 .

S2CID 143685203 .

Trudy Dehue (December 1997).

"Deception, Efficiency, and Random Groups: Psychology and the Gradual Origination of the Random Group Design" (PDF) .

Isis .

88 (4): 653– 673.

doi : 10.1086/383850 .

PMID 9519574 .

S2CID 23526321 .

Basic Psychology by Gleitman, Fridlund, and Reisberg.

"What statistical testing is, and what it is not," Journal of Experimental Education , 1993, vol 61, pp. 293–316 by Shaver.

External links [ edit ] Experimental Random Assignment Tool: Random assignment tool - Experimental [ usurped ] v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject v t e Design of experiments Scientific method Scientific experiment Statistical design Control Internal and external validity Experimental unit Blinding Optimal design : Bayesian Random assignment Randomization Restricted randomization Replication versus subsampling Sample size Treatment and blocking Treatment Effect size Contrast Interaction Confounding Orthogonality Blocking Covariate Nuisance variable Models and inference Linear regression Ordinary least squares Bayesian Random effect Mixed model Hierarchical model: Bayesian Analysis of variance (Anova) Cochran's theorem Manova ( multivariate ) Ancova ( covariance ) Compare means Multiple comparison Designs Completely randomized Factorial Fractional factorial Plackett–Burman Taguchi Response surface methodology Polynomial and rational modeling Box–Behnken Central composite Block Generalized randomized block design (GRBD) Latin square Graeco-Latin square Orthogonal array Latin hypercube Repeated measures design Crossover study Randomized controlled trial Sequential analysis Sequential probability ratio test Glossary Category Mathematics portal Statistical outline Statistical topics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Random_assignment&oldid=1301187378 " Categories : Causal inference Design of experiments Experiments Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from May 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: external links This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 14:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Random assignment 6 languages Add topic

