Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In mathematics 2 Extensionality principles 3 Example 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Extensionality 10 languages Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Polski Português Română Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Logic principle This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In logic , extensionality , or extensional equality , refers to principles that judge objects to be equal if they have the same external properties. It stands in contrast to the concept of intensionality , which is concerned with whether the internal definitions of objects are the same.

In mathematics [ edit ] The extensional definition of function equality, discussed above, is commonly used in mathematics.
A similar extensional definition is usually employed for relations : two relations are said to be equal if they have the same extensions .

In set theory , the axiom of extensionality states that two sets are equal if and only if they contain the same elements.  In mathematics formalized in set theory, it is common to identify relations—and, most importantly, functions —with their extension as stated above, so that it is impossible for two relations or functions with the same extension to be distinguished.

Other mathematical objects are also constructed in such a way that the intuitive notion of "equality" agrees with set-level extensional equality; thus, equal ordered pairs have equal elements, and elements of a set which are related by an equivalence relation belong to the same equivalence class .

Type-theoretical foundations of mathematics are generally not extensional in this sense, and setoids are commonly used to maintain a difference between intensional equality and a more general equivalence relation (which generally has poor constructibility or decidability properties).

Extensionality principles [ edit ] There are various extensionality principles in mathematics.

Propositional extensionality of predicates P , Q {\displaystyle P,Q} : if P ⟺ ⟺ Q {\displaystyle P\iff Q} then P = Q {\displaystyle P=Q} Functional extensionality of functions f , g {\displaystyle f,g} : if ∀ ∀ x , f x = g x {\displaystyle \forall x,fx=gx} then f = g {\displaystyle f=g} Univalence of types A {\displaystyle A} , B {\displaystyle B} : [ 1 ] : 2.10 if A ≃ ≃ B {\displaystyle A\simeq B} then A = B {\displaystyle A=B} , where ≃ ≃ {\displaystyle \simeq } denotes homotopy equivalence.

Depending on the chosen foundation, some extensionality principles may imply another. For example it is well known that in univalent foundations , the univalence axiom implies both propositional and functional extensionality. Extensionality principles are usually assumed as axioms, especially in type theories where computational content must be preserved. However, in set theory and other extensional foundations, functional extensionality can be proven to hold by default.

Example [ edit ] Consider the two functions f and g mapping from and to natural numbers , defined as follows: To find f ( n ), first add 5 to n , then multiply by 2.

To find g ( n ), first multiply n by  2, then add 10.

These functions are extensionally equal; given the same input, both functions always produce the same value. But the definitions of the functions are not equal, and in that intensional sense the functions are not the same.

Similarly, in natural language there are many predicates (relations) that are intensionally different but are extensionally identical. For example, suppose that a village has just one person named Joe, who is also the oldest person in the village. Then, the two predicates "being called Joe", and "being the oldest person" are intensionally distinct, but extensionally equal for the (current) population of this village.

See also [ edit ] Identity of indiscernibles Univalence axiom Type theory Notes [ edit ] ^ The Univalent Foundations Program (2013).

Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Foundations of Mathematics . Princeton, NJ: Institute for Advanced Study .

MR 3204653 .

References [ edit ] Marcus, Ruth Barcan (January 1960).

"Extensionality" .

Mind .

69 (273): 55– 62.

doi : 10.1093/mind/LXIX.273.55 .

ISSN 0026-4423 .

JSTOR 2251588 .

Sagi, Gil (29 May 2017).

"Extensionality and logicality" .

Synthese .

198 (5): 1095– 1119.

doi : 10.1007/s11229-017-1447-3 .

ISSN 1573-0964 . Archived from the original on 6 Dec 2017.

Carnap, Rudolf (1943).

Formalization of Logic . Studies in Semantics. Vol. II.

Harvard University Press .

Intensional Logic (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) equality in nLab v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Extensionality&oldid=1288864169 " Categories : Set theory Concepts in logic Equivalence (mathematics) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 03:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Extensionality 10 languages Add topic

