Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 History 3 People with bibliomania 4 Depictions in fiction 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bibliomania 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Obsessive–compulsive collection of books For the book by Thomas Frognall Dibdin, see Bibliomania (book) .

Engraving titled The Bibliomaniac from Navis Stultifera (The Ship of Fools) by Sebastian Brandt , 1497.

Not to be confused with Bibliophilia .

Bibliomania is the excessive collecting or even hoarding of books to the point where social relations or health are damaged, particularly as a symptom of obsessive–compulsive disorder .

Bibliomania is not to be confused with bibliophilia , which is the (psychologically healthy) love of books, and as such is not considered a clinical psychological disorder.

Description [ edit ] One of several unusual behaviors associated with books, bibliomania is characterized by the collecting of books which have no use to the collector nor any great intrinsic value to a genuine book collector. The purchase of multiple copies of the same book and edition and the accumulation of books beyond possible capacity of use or enjoyment are frequent symptoms of bibliomania.

[ 1 ] Bibliomania is a psychological disorder recognized by the American Psychiatric Association in its DSM-IV.

[ 2 ] Bibliomaniacs are characterized as those who are obsessed with books so much so that they will go to extreme measures to obtain the books they want. Often bibliomaniacs will have multiple copies of the same book in different editions and varying conditions. Bibliomaniacs affect the buying and selling of books with their obsessive nature and have greatly increased the price of buying rare books.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The term was coined by John Ferriar (1761–1815), a physician at the Manchester Royal Infirmary.

[ 4 ] Ferriar coined the term in 1809 in a poem he dedicated to his bibliomanic friend, Richard Heber (1773–1833).

[ 5 ] In the early nineteenth century, "bibliomania" was used in popular discourse (such as in periodical essays and poems) to describe obsessive book collectors.

In 1809, the Reverend Thomas Frognall Dibdin published Bibliomania; or Book Madness , a work described by literary critic Philip Connell as "a series of bizarre rambling dialogues which together comprised a kind of dramatized mock pathology, lavishly illustrated and, in the second edition, embellished with extensive footnotes on bibliography and the history of book collecting." The "symptoms" displayed by the bibliomaniacs in Dibdin's work include "an obsession with uncut copies, fine paper or vellum pages, unique copies, first editions , blackletter books, illustrated copies, association copies, and condemned or suppressed works".

[ 6 ] In the late nineteenth century, book collections and collectors of note were given regular coverage as curiosities.

[ 7 ] Holbrook Jackson was to follow the work of Ferriar and Dibdin later in the work The Anatomy of Bibliomania .

[ 8 ] Bibliomania became quite popular during the Regency era as the desire for first edition copies of books drove prices to unobtainable levels. Because of this, bibliomaniacs made a significant impact on the sales of rare or older books in such a way that it has never truly recovered.

[ 9 ] People with bibliomania [ edit ] Stephen Blumberg , who was convicted of stealing $5.3 million worth of books.

Sir Thomas Phillipps, 1st Baronet [ 10 ] (1792–1872) suffered from severe bibliomania. His collection, which at his death contained over 160,000 books and manuscripts, was still being auctioned off over 100 years after his death.

Rev. W.F. Whitcher [ 11 ] was a 19th-century Methodist pastor who, after having stolen and rebound rare books, would assert they were rare "finds" from local booksellers.

Lord Charles Spencer (1740–1820), a book collector who drove the bidding for a first edition copy of The Decameron to £2,260 at the auction of the family library of Roxburghe.

[ 3 ] Depictions in fiction [ edit ] Peter Kien, the protagonist in Auto-da-Fé by Elias Canetti .  Kien's obsession with his personal library leads to the destruction of his marriage, his happiness, and ultimately the library itself.

Yomiko Readman , the protagonist in Read or Die , is an introverted bibliomaniac, often preferring the company of books over people.

Don Vincente , a fictional Spanish monk who was suspected of stealing books from his monastery, and later murdered nine people so he could steal their books.

Leisel Meminger, the protagonist in The Book Thief , is a nine-year-old who steals a grave digger's handbook, beginning her obsession with books.

[ 12 ] The 2016 Psychological Horror manga Bibliomania , written by Orval (Oobaru) and illustrated by Macchiro, is about a young girl's obsession with books. She is trapped in a magical book and must traverse it in order to escape.

See also [ edit ] Tsundoku Book collecting Compulsive behavior Mania Book store shoplifting References [ edit ] ^ "Hooked and Booked" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved 2017-05-25 .

^ Agrawal, Mukta (2015-09-09).

"A Detailed Study About Bibliomania" .

InlifeHealthCare . Archived from the original on 2019-03-02 . Retrieved 2017-05-25 .

^ a b Connell, Philip (2000). "Bibliomania: Book Collecting, Cultural Politics, and the Rise of Literary Heritage in Romantic Britain".

Representations (71): 24– 47.

doi : 10.2307/2902924 .

JSTOR 2902924 .

^ Kendall, Joshua.

The man who made lists: love, death, madness, and the creation of Roget's Thesaurus , Penguin Group, USA, 2008, p. 154.

^ Ferriar, John (1809).

The Bibliomania, An Epistle to Richard Heber, Esq . London: T. Cadell and W. Davies, in the Strand; J. Haddock, Warrington. p.

1 .

The Bibliomania: An Epistle to Richard Heber.

^ Connell, Philip (Summer 2000). "Bibliomania: Book Collecting, Cultural Politics, and the Rise of Literary Heritage in Romantic Britain".

Representations .

71 : 24– 47.

doi : 10.1525/rep.2000.71.1.01p00764 (inactive 11 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ "LITERATURE" .

The Australasian . Vol. LIV, no. 1415. Victoria, Australia. 13 May 1893. p. 45 . Retrieved 18 November 2017 – via National Library of Australia.

^ Jackson, Halbrook (1930), The Anatomy of bibliomania (1st ed.), The Soncino Press , retrieved 18 November 2017 , also Jackson, Holbrook (1932), The anatomy of bibliomania (3rd ed., rev ed.), Soncino Press , retrieved 18 November 2017 ^ Ferris, INA (2009). "Book Fancy: Bibliomania and the Literary Word".

Keats-Shelley Journal .

58 : 33– 52.

JSTOR 25735166 .

^ Book Collecting: A.N.L. Munby: A Balanced View ^ "A Book Thief.; A Providence Preacher's Strange Transactions In Rare Volumes" .

The New York Times . 1881-07-28 . Retrieved 2010-04-26 .

^ Brannon, April (2006). "Reviewed work: The Book Thief, Markus Zusak".

Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy .

49 (8): 725– 726.

JSTOR 40014100 .

Further reading [ edit ] Dibdin, Thomas Frognall (1811).

Bibliomania: Or Book Madness .

( Dibdin's Bibliomania at Project Gutenberg ) External videos Booknotes interview with Nicholas Basbanes on A Gentle Madness , October 15, 1995 , C-SPAN Basbanes, Nicholas A.

(1995).

A Gentle Madness: Bibliophiles, Bibliomanes, and the Eternal Passion for Books . Henry Holt and Company, Inc.

Bartlett, Allison Hoover (2009).

The Man Who Loved Books Too Much: The True Story of a Thief, a Detective, and a World of Literary Obsession . New York: Riverhead Trade.

Richard de Bury (1902).

The Love of Books: " The Philobiblon " translated by E. C. Thomas . London: Alexander Moring Andrew Lang (1881).

The Library .London: Macmillan & Co.

McDade, Travis (2006).

The Book Thief . Westport, CT: Praeger.

ISBN 0-275-99331-0 .

External links [ edit ] Bibliomania: the strange history of compulsive book buying – The Guardian (by Lorraine Berry) v t e Book collecting Bibliophilia Bibliomania tsundoku Bookbreaking The Book Collector journal The Bookworm (painting) First edition Limited edition Marginalia Preservation slipcase solander box Used book conditions v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bibliomania&oldid=1300020644 " Categories : Book collecting Compulsive hoarding Mania Books Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 20:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bibliomania 25 languages Add topic

