Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of letter-writing Toggle History of letter-writing subsection 1.1 Greco-Roman theory 1.2 Latin Middle Ages 1.3 Early Modern Europe 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ars dictaminis 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina Nederlands Polski Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art of dictation Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Ars dictaminis (or ars dictandi ) is the art of letter-writing, which often intersects with the art of rhetoric .

History of letter-writing [ edit ] Greco-Roman theory [ edit ] Early examples of letter-writing theory can be found in C. Julius Victor 's Ars rhetorica and Cassiodorus Senator 's Variae epistolae.

[ 1 ] Other examples can be found in the Pseudo-Demetrius' Typoi epistolikoi, Pseudo-Libanius' Epistolimaioi kharacteres, Demetrius ' Peri hermeneias, Philostratus of Lemnos ' treatise, and Gregory of Nazianus ' Epistle 51.

[ 2 ] Latin Middle Ages [ edit ] During the Latin medieval period, the standing assumption was that these writings would be composed in Latin , and according to well worked-out models. This made the arts of composition a subfield of rhetoric .

Medieval letter writing developed for ecclesiastical, government, and business purposes.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Important figures in the early development of Latin letter writing and document composition include Alberic of Monte Cassino ( Dictaminum radii, Breviarium ), his critic Adalbert of Samaria ( Praecepta dictaminum , c. 1120), Hugh of Bologna ( Rationes dictandi prosaice, c.1120), Bernard of Bologna 's Introductiones prosaici dictaminis (1145) and Baldwin ( Liber de dictaminibus , c.1150).

[ 1 ] Early anonymous works include Aurea gemma (c.1119), Rationes dictandi (1135), Precepta prosaici dictaminis secundum Tullium (c. 1140) and Ad plenam scientiam dictaminum (c.1140).

Guido Faba ( Summa dictaminis , c.1228), Lawrence of Aquilegia ( Practica sive usus dictaminis , c.1300) and Quichilino da Spello ( Pomerium rethorice ,  1304) are later representatives of the genre.

[ 1 ] Letter conventions include some form of address (e.g., “Worshipful master”); salutation (“I greet you well”); notification (“May it please you to know”); exposition (“the wool was shipped”); disposition (“and I want my money”); and valediction (“May God keep you well, at least until my bill is paid”). Clerks and scribes wrote the letters based on those rules.

Early Modern Europe [ edit ] Renaissance letter writing, inspired by the rediscovery of Cicero's letters, broaden the scope of letter writing instruction.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Formulary (model documents) Victorian letter writing guides De conscribendis epistolis References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Murphy, James Jerome (1974).

Rhetoric in the Middle Ages : a history of rhetorical theory from Saint Augustine to the Renaissance . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-02439-7 .

OCLC 1176978 .

^ Poster, Carol (2007).

"A Conversation Halved: Epistolary Theory in Greco-Roman Antiquity," in Letter-writing manuals and instruction from antiquity to the present : historical and bibliographic studies . Eds. Carol Poster, Linda C. Mitchell. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press. pp.

21– 51.

ISBN 978-1-57003-651-4 .

OCLC 72353920 .

^ Richardson, Malcolm (2007).

"The Ars dictaminis, the Formulary, and Medieval Epistolary Practice," in Letter-writing manuals and instruction from antiquity to the present : historical and bibliographic studies . Carol Poster, Linda C. Mitchell. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press. pp.

52– 66.

ISBN 978-1-57003-651-4 .

OCLC 72353920 .

^ Burton, Gideon (2007).

"From Ars dictaminis to Ars conscribendis epistolis: Renaissance Letter-Writing Manuals i the Context of Humanism," in Letter-writing manuals and instruction from antiquity to the present : historical and bibliographic studies . Carol Poster, Linda C. Mitchell. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press. pp.

88– 101.

ISBN 978-1-57003-651-4 .

OCLC 72353920 .

Further reading [ edit ] Martin Camargo: Ars dictaminis, Ars dictandi . Turnhout: Brepols, 1991 (Typologie des sources du Moyen Âge occidental 60).

Martin Camargo: "Ars dictandi, dictaminis." In: Historisches Wörterbuch der Rhetorik I, Tübingen 1992, Sp. 1040–1046.

Janet Luehring and Richard Utz: "Letter Writing in the Late Middle Ages. An Introductory Bibliography of Critical Studies." In: Carol Poster and Richard Utz, eds., The Late Medieval Epistle . Evanston, IL: Northwestern UP, 1996. pp. 191–221.

Florian Hartman, Benoît Grèvin: "Ars dictaminis : Handbuch der mittelalterlichen Briefstillehre". Hiersemann, 2019, Sp. 720.

External links [ edit ] (in German) Timeline of the ars dictandi Makdisi - Scholasticism and Humanism in Classical Islam and the Christian West - page 7 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ars_dictaminis&oldid=1301268975 " Categories : Rhetoric Letters (message) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 00:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ars dictaminis 10 languages Add topic

