Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Usage 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 Bibliography 6 References Toggle the table of contents Sever Hall 2 languages Deutsch Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′27.7″N 71°06′55.7″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.374361°N 71.115472°W ﻿ / 42.374361; -71.115472 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United States historic place Sever Hall, Harvard University U.S. National Register of Historic Places U.S. National Historic Landmark U.S. Historic district Contributing property Sever Hall, east facade.

Location Cambridge, Massachusetts Coordinates 42°22′27.7″N 71°06′55.7″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.374361°N 71.115472°W ﻿ / 42.374361; -71.115472 Built 1878 Architect Henry Hobson Richardson Architectural style Romanesque Revival Part of Harvard Yard Historic District ( ID87002137 ) NRHP reference No.

70000732 [ 1 ] Significant dates Added to NRHP December 30, 1970 Designated NHL December 30, 1970 Designated CP December 14, 1987 Sever Hall is an academic building at Harvard University designed by the American architect H. H. Richardson and built in the late 1870s. It is located in Harvard Yard in Cambridge, Massachusetts . It was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1970, recognized as one of Richardson's mature masterpieces.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Sever Hall was built from 1878 to 1880 with a gift from Anne Sever in honor of her deceased husband, James Warren Sever. It was designed as an academic building with classrooms, lecture halls, rooms for professors, etc., in a style now known as Richardsonian Romanesque though in red brick rather than stone.

The building is 176 feet and 4 inches long, by 74 feet and 4 inches wide, with a height to cornice of about 50 feet, above which the hipped roof rises a further 30 feet. It is three stories tall, with a fourth story set within the roof. The main facade (west side) features two round bays set symmetrically about an entrance within a deeply recessed semi-circular archway. The east facade is similar but with a simpler, rectangular entrance. North and south facades are relatively austere expanses punctuated with windows.

About 1.3 million bricks were used in its construction. Of these, some 100,000 form the exterior facades, which feature 60 different varieties of red molded brick, as well as elaborate brick carvings.

Blood mortar was used as a joiner originally, though polybond compounds have been used in restoration efforts since 1967.

The archway admitting entrance into the west facade possesses an acoustical oddity. Whispering directly into the bricks of the archway, while standing very close to one side of the arch, can be heard clearly on the other side of the arch (approximately twelve feet away).

In recent years, there has been renewed interest in Sever Hall among architectural historians, [ citation needed ] due to Robert Venturi 's comment that it is his "favorite building in America." [ 3 ] He told Boston Globe critic Robert Campbell : "I have come to understand the validity of architecture as generic shelter rather than abstract-expressive sculpture, and as flexible loft for accommodating evolving functions. ... And then I love Sever Hall also for its aesthetic tension deriving from its vital details. I could stand and look at it all day. Thank you, H.H. Richardson." [ 4 ] Usage [ edit ] Sever has small classrooms and larger lecture halls, so it is mostly used as a general-purpose classroom building for humanities courses especially small sections, beginning language courses, and Harvard Extension School classes.

Grossman Library , a non-circulating library serving Extension School students, was located on the third floor until Extension School library services were integrated into Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences libraries in the late 2010s. The fourth floor of Sever, unnoticed by many of its students as the central stairwell does not lead to it, contains offices for Harvard's Visual and Environmental Studies department. In the evenings and on weekends student groups hold meetings or run annual events. One of Sever's notable annual events is Vericon , run during the break between semesters by the Harvard-Radcliffe Science-Fiction Association , though it has not been hosted since 2016.

Gallery [ edit ] East facade entrance.

West facade West facade entrance Sever Hall west facade Detail of west side entrance See also [ edit ] List of National Historic Landmarks in Massachusetts National Register of Historic Places listings in Cambridge, Massachusetts Bibliography [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sever Hall .

Moses King, The Harvard Register , Harvard University, 1880, page 35.

Roger H. Clark and Michael Pause, Precedents in Architecture , New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1985.

ISBN 0-442-21668-8 .

Jeffrey Karl Ochsner, H. H. Richardson, Complete Architectural Works , Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1982.

References [ edit ] ^ "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . January 23, 2007.

^ "NHL nomination for Sever Hall, Harvard University" . National Park Service . Retrieved February 28, 2015 .

^ Venturi, Robert; Denise Scott Brown (2004).

Architecture as Signs and Systems: For a Mannerist Time . Belknap Press. p. 36.

ISBN 0-674-01571-1 .

^ Campbell, Robert (November 28, 2004).

"Is Harvard hall the best US building?" .

Boston Globe .

v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in Massachusetts Topics Contributing property Keeper of the Register Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places National Park Service Property types Lists by county Barnstable Berkshire Bristol Dukes Essex Franklin Hampden Hampshire Middlesex Nantucket Norfolk Plymouth Suffolk Worcester ( northern ) Lists by city Barnstable County Barnstable Harwich Bristol County Fall River New Bedford Taunton Essex County Andover Gloucester Ipswich Lawrence Lynn Methuen Salem Hampden County Springfield Middlesex County Arlington Cambridge Concord Framingham Lexington Lowell Marlborough Medford Newton Reading Sherborn Somerville Stoneham Wakefield Waltham Weston Winchester Norfolk County Brookline Milton Quincy Suffolk County Boston northern southern Worcester County Southbridge Uxbridge Worcester eastern northwestern southwestern Other lists Bridges Cape Cod National Seashore National Historic Landmarks Boston Category National Register of Historic Places portal United States portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sever_Hall&oldid=1169456522 " Categories : Harvard University buildings National Historic Landmarks in Cambridge, Massachusetts Henry Hobson Richardson buildings Richardsonian Romanesque architecture in Massachusetts Harvard Square Historic district contributing properties in Massachusetts National Register of Historic Places in Cambridge, Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using NRISref without a reference number Use mdy dates from August 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata NRHP infobox with nocat All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2023, at 05:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sever Hall 2 languages Add topic

