Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In political conflict 2 Violence 3 Intolerance 4 State terrorism 5 Direct vs. indirect repression 6 Repressive success and monitoring 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Political repression 45 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски مصرى Мокшень 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act of state entity involving restrictive political freedom of citizens Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By country Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia v t e Political corruption Forms and concepts Abuse of power Bribery Censorship Banned politics Political repression Political violence Cronyism Economics of corruption Election interference Electoral fraud Elite capture Influence peddling Insider trading Iron triangle Judicial Kleptocracy In local government Mafia state Malfeasance Misfeasance Nepotism Politically exposed person Pyrrhic defeat theory Revolving door Political machine Political scandal Slush fund Simony Suspicious activity report State capture State-corporate crime Throffer Anti-corruption International Anti-Corruption Court Group of States Against Corruption International Anti-Corruption Academy International Anti-Corruption Day United Nations Convention against Corruption Corruption by country Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Burkina Faso Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Ethiopia Gambia Ghana Guinea-Bissau Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Kazakhstan Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Oman Palestine Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Northern Ireland Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom North America Canada Mexico United States Central America Costa  Rica Cuba El Salvador Haiti Honduras Nicaragua South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Micronesia New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa v t e Political repression is the act of a state entity controlling a citizenry by force for political reasons, particularly for the purpose of restricting or preventing the citizenry's ability to take part in the political life of a society , thereby reducing their standing among their fellow citizens.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Repression tactics target the citizenry who are most likely to challenge the political ideology of the state in order for the government to remain in control.

[ 3 ] In autocracies , the use of political repression is to prevent anti-regime support and mobilization.

[ 4 ] It is often manifested through policies such as human rights violations, surveillance abuse , police brutality , kangaroo courts , imprisonment , involuntary settlement , stripping of citizen's rights , lustration , and violent action or terror such as murder, summary executions , torture , forced disappearance , and other extrajudicial punishment of political activists , dissidents , or the general population.

[ 5 ] Direct repression tactics are those targeting specific actors who become aware of the harm done to them while covert tactics rely on the threat of citizenry being caught (wiretapping and monitoring).

[ 6 ] The effectiveness of the tactics differs: covert repression tactics cause dissidents to use less detectable opposition tactics [ 7 ] while direct repression allows the citizenry to witness and react to the repression.

[ 8 ] Political repression can also be reinforced by means outside of written policy, such as by public and private media ownership and by self-censorship within the public.

Where political repression is sanctioned and organised by the state, it may constitute state terrorism , genocide , politicide or crimes against humanity . Systemic and violent political repression is a typical feature of dictatorships , totalitarian states and similar regimes.

[ 9 ] While the use of political repression varies depending on the authoritarian regime, it is argued that repression is a defining feature and the foundation of autocracies by creating a power hierarchy between the leader and citizenry, contributing to the longevity of the regime.

[ 10 ] Repressive activities have also been found within democratic contexts as well.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] This can even include setting up situations where the death of the target of repression is the result.

[ 13 ] If political repression is not carried out with the approval of the state, a section of government may still be responsible. Some examples are the COINTELPRO operations by the FBI from 1956 to 1971 and the Palmer Raids from 1919 to 1920.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] In some states, "repression" can be an official term used in legislation or the names of government institutions. The Soviet Union had a legal policy of repression of political opposition defined in its penal code and Cuba under Fulgencio Batista had a secret police agency officially named the Bureau for the Repression of Communist Activities . According to Soviet and communist studies scholar Stephen Wheatcroft , in the case of the Soviet Union terms such as " the terror ", " the purges " and "repression" are used to refer to the same events. He believes the most neutral terms are repression and mass killings , although in Russian the broad concept of repression is commonly held to include mass killings and is sometimes assumed to be synonymous with it, which is not the case in other languages.

[ 17 ] In political conflict [ edit ] Political conflict strongly increases the likelihood of state repression. This is arguably the most robust finding in social science research on political repression.

Civil wars are a strong predictor of repressive activity, as are other forms of challenges from non-government actors.

[ 18 ] States so often engage in repressive behaviors in times of civil conflict that the relationship between these two phenomena has been termed the "Law of Coercive Responsiveness".

[ 19 ] When their authority or legitimacy is threatened, regimes respond by overtly or covertly suppressing dissidents to eliminate the behavioral threat. State repression subsequently affects dissident mobilization, though the direction of this effect is still an open question. Some strong evidence suggests that repression suppresses dissident mobilization by reducing the capacity of challengers to organize, yet it is also feasible that challengers can leverage state repressive behavior to spur mobilization among sympathizers by framing repression as a new grievance against the state.

[ 20 ] Violence [ edit ] Main article: Political violence Members of the right-wing Lapua Movement assault a former Red Guard officer and the publisher of the communist newspaper at the Vaasa riot on June 4, 1930, in Vaasa , Finland .

Political repression is often accompanied by violence, which might be legal or illegal according to domestic law.

[ 21 ] Violence can both eliminate political opposition directly by killing opposition members, or indirectly by instilling fear.

Intolerance [ edit ] See also: Infrahumanisation Political repression is sometimes accompanied by intolerance . This intolerance is manifested through discriminatory policies, human rights violations , police brutality , imprisonment , extermination , exile , extortion , terrorism , extrajudicial killing , summary execution , torture , forced disappearance and other punishments against political activists, dissidents, and populations in general.

State terrorism [ edit ] When political repression is sanctioned and organized by the state, situations of state terrorism , genocide and crimes against humanity can be reached. Systematic and violent political repression is a typical feature of dictatorships , totalitarian states and similar regimes. In these regimes, acts of political repression can be carried out by the police and secret police , the army, paramilitary groups and death squads. Sometimes regimes considered the democratic exercise political repression and state terrorism to other states as part of their security policy.

[ 22 ] Direct vs. indirect repression [ edit ] Direct repression is a form of repression where the state targets an opposing political actor by obvious violent action. The target is clearly aware of the harm that is caused to their life and livelihood. Direct repression does not exclusively occur within the boundaries of a state, but also across borders.

[ 23 ] In personalist dictatorships, initiating conflicts with other states and people outside their own borders is more common because of a lack of accountability via extremely limited or no competitive elections.

[ 24 ] Indirect repression relies on the threat of violence which constitutes harassment , intimidation , and administrative blockages. These tactics tend to be non-violent, yet still are built to control citizenry.

[ 25 ] Repressive success and monitoring [ edit ] Individuals indirectly exposed to repression self-report higher trust in the leader and the ruling party. This phenomenon was observed in Zimbabwe under Robert Mugabe , where the effects of repression increased approaching elections, even with deteriorating social and economic conditions.

[ 26 ] A large signifier of whether or not repression is successful in a state is evidence of preference falsification – where the preference expressed by an individual in public diverges from their private preference.

[ 27 ] In North Korea , accused of highly repressive activity in media and public culture, 100% of citizens vote in ‘no choice’ parliamentary elections so the state can identify defectors. Citizens are required to show complete devotion to North Korea's current leader and sacrifice their safety if they choose to speak out.

[ 28 ] Repressive measures including prison camps , torture , forced labor , and threats of execution are just some of the costs of defection.

[ 29 ] The Chinese Communist Party implements extensive surveillance measures in the People's Republic of China , including Internet censorship , camera monitoring , and other forms of mass surveillance . These practices involve technologies such as AI , facial recognition , fingerprint identification , voice and iris recognition , big data analysis, DNA testing , and are closely linked to the Social Credit System in mainland China.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] At the same time, many domestic Chinese technology companies are also involved in the country's large-scale surveillance programs. These primarily include companies such as Hikvision , Sensetime , Huawei , ZTE , and others.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] See also [ edit ] 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Abuse of process An unjust law is no law at all Anti-communist mass killings Arbitrary arrest and detention Censorship État légal Forced disappearance Ideological Judicial persecution List of banned political parties Mass killings under communist regimes Mass Surveillance Massacre Nanny State Persecution Political censorship Political repression in North Korea Political repression in the Islamic Republic of Iran Political repression in the Soviet Union Press censorship Red Terror Religious Persecution Restrictions on political parties State Terrorism White Terror References [ edit ] ^ Davenport, Christian (2007).

State Repression and the Domestic Democratic Peace New York: Cambridge University Press.

^ Davenport, Christian, Johnston, Hank and Mueller, Carol (2004).

Repression and Mobilization Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

^ Hassan, Mai; Mattingly, Daniel; Nugent, Elizabeth R (November 30, 2021). "Political Control". Annual Review of Political Science.

^ Wang, Y. (2021). The Political Legacy of Violence During China's Cultural Revolution. British Journal of Political Science, 51(2), 463-487. doi:10.1017/S0007123419000255 ^ Kittrie, Nicholas N. 1995.

The War Against Authority: From the Crisis of Legitimacy to a New Social Contract. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

^ Sullivan, Christopher M.

Resistance is Mobile: Dynamics of Repression, Challenger Adaptationm and Surveillance in US 'Red Squad' and Black Nationalist Archives . Volume 55, Issue 2.

^ Sullivan, Christopher M.

Resistance is Mobile: Dynamics of Repression, Challenger Adaptationm and Surveillance in US 'Red Squad' and Black Nationalist Archives . Volume 55, Issue 2.

^ Hassan, Mai; Mattingly, Daniel; Nugent, Elizabeth R (November 30, 2021). "Political Control". Annual Review of Political Science.

^ Serge, Victor, 1979, What Everyone Should Know About State Repression, London: New Park Publications.

^ Johannes Gerschewski (2013) The three pillars of stability: legitimation, repression, and co-optation in autocratic regimes, Democratization, 20:1, 13-38, DOI: 10.1080/13510347.2013.738860 ^ Donner, Frank J. (1980).

The Age of Surveillance: The Aims and Methods of America’s Political Intelligence System . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 0-394-40298-7 ^ Donner, Frank J. (1990).

Protectors of Privilege: Red Squads and Police Repression in Urban America.

Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-05951-4 ^ Haas, Jeffrey.

The Assassination of Fred Hampton: How the FBI and the Chicago Police Murdered a Black Panther.

Chicago, Ill.: Lawrence Hill /Chicago Review, 2010.

^ COINTELPRO: The FBI's Covert Action Programs Against American Citizens, Final Report of the Senate Committee to Study Governmental Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities.

^ Cunningham, D. 2004.

There’s something happening here: The New Left, the Klan, and FBI counterintelligence.

Berkeley: Univ. of California.

^ "Justice Department Campaign Against the IWW, 1917-1920" .

depts.washington.edu . Retrieved 2023-04-13 .

^ Wheatcroft, Stephen (1996).

"The Scale and Nature of German and Soviet Repression and Mass Killings, 1930–45" .

Europe-Asia Studies .

48 (8): 1319–1353.

doi : 10.1080/09668139608412415 .

^ Hill, Daniel W.; Jones, Zachary M. (2014). "An Empirical Evaluation of Explanations for State Repression".

American Political Science Review .

108 (3): 661– 687.

doi : 10.1017/s0003055414000306 .

S2CID 54908565 .

^ Davenport, Christian (2007).

"State Repression and Political Order" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

10 : 1– 23.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.10.101405.143216 .

^ Ritter, Emily Hencken (2014). "Policy Disputes, Political Survival, and the Onset and Severity of State Repression".

Journal of Conflict Resolution .

58 (1): 143– 168.

doi : 10.1177/0022002712468724 .

S2CID 145054180 .

^ "Los Derechos Humanos y la trata de personas" (PDF) .

www.ohchr.org . Retrieved 2017-05-14 .

^ Patricia., Scipioni, Estela (2000-01-01).

Torturadores, apropiadores y asesinos : el terrorismo de estado en la obra dramática de Eduardo Pavlovsky . Edition Reichenberger.

ISBN 9783931887919 .

OCLC 477299442 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Hassan, Mai; Mattingly, Daniel; Nugent, Elizabeth R (November 30, 2021). "Political Control".

Annual Review of Political Science .

^ Frantz, Erica (November 15, 2018).

Authoritarianism: What Everyone Needs to Know . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190880194 .

^ Hassan, Mai; Mattingly, Daniel; Nugent, Elizabeth R (November 30, 2021). "Political Control".

Annual Review of Political Science .

^ Garcîa-Ponce, Omar; Pasquale, Benjamin (2015). "How Political Repression Shapes Attitudes Toward the State".

^ Kuran, Timur (October 1991).

"Now Out of Never: The Element of Surprise in the East European Revolution of 1989" .

World Politics .

44 (1): 7– 48.

doi : 10.2307/2010422 .

JSTOR 2010422 .

S2CID 154090678 .

^ "North Koreans vote in 'no-choice' parliamentary elections" . BBC News. March 10, 2019.

^ "North Korea: Systematic Repression" .

Human Rights Watch . 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 .

^ 孟宝勒 (2018-07-17).

"中国的威权主义未来：人工智能与无孔不入的监控" (in Chinese). 纽约时报中文网.

Archived from the original on 2019-10-16 . Retrieved 2019-11-14 .

^ Vicky Xiuzhong Xu (2018-03-31).

"【聚焦】中国社会信用系统致力于为公民打分并改造社会行为" (in Chinese). ABC中文.

Archived from the original on 2018-09-29 . Retrieved 2019-11-14 .

^ "人臉識別 + 社會信用系統，一場重塑人類行為的社會實驗？" .

theinitium.com (in Traditional Chinese). 25 May 2018. Archived from the original on 2021-08-04 . Retrieved 2019-11-14 .

^ "打造平安城市精品视频监控网络" (PDF) . 华为.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-02-17.

^ 孟宝勒 (2019-04-15).

"单月50万次人脸识别：中国如何用AI监控维族人" (in Simplified Chinese). 纽约时报中文网.

Archived from the original on 2019-10-16 . Retrieved 2019-11-14 .

^ "中国天网工程背后有三大功臣：包括中兴与华为" . 多维新闻.

Archived from the original on 2019-04-10 . Retrieved 2019-11-14 .

Further reading [ edit ] Articles Understanding Covert Repressive Action: The Case of the U.S. Government against the Republic of New Africa ( 186kb PDF file ) by Christian Davenport, Professor, University of Maryland.

State Repression and Political Order by Christian Davenport, Professor, University of Maryland.

Journals Special issue of Interface: a journal for and about social movements on repression and social movements .

Bartusevičius, Henrikas; van Leeuwen, Florian; Petersen, Michael Bang (June 2023).

"Political repression motivates anti-government violence" .

Royal Society Open Science .

10 (6).

doi : 10.1098/rsos.221227 .

PMC 10265031 .

Books Davenport, Christian; Appel, Benjamin (2022).

The Death and Life of State Repression: Understanding Onset, Escalation, Termination, and Recurrence . Oxford University Press.

Goldstein, Robert Justin, Political Repression in Modern America ( University of Illinois Press , 1978, 2001) ISBN 0-8467-0301-7 .

Jensen, Joan M.

Army Surveillance in America, 1775 - 1980.

New Haven. Yale University Press. 1991.

ISBN 0-300-04668-5 .

Talbert Jr. Roy.

Negative Intelligence: The Army and the American Left, 1917 - 1941.

Jackson. University Press of Mississippi, 1991.

ISBN 0-87805-495-2 .

Irvin, Cynthia L.

Militant Nationalism between movement and party in Ireland and the Basque Country.

University of Minnesota Press, 1999.

Seigel, Micol. 2018.

Violence Work: State Power and the Limits of Police . Duke University Press.

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Political repression at Wikiquote v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_repression&oldid=1303734957 " Categories : Comparative politics Political repression Human rights abuses Persecution Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Traditional Chinese-language sources (zh-hant) CS1 Simplified Chinese-language sources (zh-hans) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 19:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Political repression 45 languages Add topic

