Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basics Toggle Basics subsection 1.1 Cardinal numbers 1.2 Ordinal numbers 1.3 Power sets 2 Paradoxes of the infinite sets Toggle Paradoxes of the infinite sets subsection 2.1 Paradoxes of enumeration 2.2 Je le vois, mais je ne crois pas 2.3 Paradoxes of well-ordering 3 Paradoxes of the Supertask Toggle Paradoxes of the Supertask subsection 3.1 The diary of Tristram Shandy 3.2 The Ross-Littlewood paradox 4 Paradoxes of proof and definability Toggle Paradoxes of proof and definability subsection 4.1 Early paradoxes: the set of all sets 4.2 Paradoxes by change of language 4.2.1 König's paradox 4.2.2 Richard's paradox 4.3 Paradox of Löwenheim and Skolem 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Paradoxes of set theory 5 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article contains a discussion of paradoxes of set theory . As with most mathematical paradoxes , they generally reveal surprising and counter-intuitive mathematical results, rather than actual logical contradictions within modern axiomatic set theory .

Basics [ edit ] Cardinal numbers [ edit ] Set theory as conceived by Georg Cantor assumes the existence of infinite sets. As this assumption cannot be proved from first principles it has been introduced into axiomatic set theory by the axiom of infinity , which asserts the existence of the set N of natural numbers. Every infinite set which can be enumerated by natural numbers is the same size (cardinality) as N , and is said to be countable. Examples of countably infinite sets are the natural numbers, the even numbers, the prime numbers , and also all the rational numbers , i.e., the fractions. These sets have in common the cardinal number | N | = ℵ ℵ 0 {\displaystyle \aleph _{0}} (aleph-nought), a number greater than every natural number.

Cardinal numbers can be defined as follows. Define two sets to have the same size by: there exists a bijection between the two sets (a one-to-one correspondence between the elements). Then a cardinal number is, by definition, a class consisting of all sets of the same size. To have the same size is an equivalence relation , and the cardinal numbers are the equivalence classes .

Ordinal numbers [ edit ] Besides the cardinality, which describes the size of a set, ordered sets also form a subject of set theory. The axiom of choice guarantees that every set can be well-ordered , which means that a total order can be imposed on its elements such that every nonempty subset has a first element with respect to that order. The order of a well-ordered set is described by an ordinal number . For instance, 3 is the ordinal number of the set {0, 1, 2} with the usual order 0 < 1 < 2; and ω is the ordinal number of the set of all natural numbers ordered the usual way. Neglecting the order, we are left with the cardinal number | N | = |ω| = ℵ ℵ 0 {\displaystyle \aleph _{0}} .

Ordinal numbers can be defined with the same method used for cardinal numbers. Define two well-ordered sets to have the same order type by: there exists a bijection between the two sets respecting the order: smaller elements are mapped to smaller elements. Then an ordinal number is, by definition, a class consisting of all well-ordered sets of the same order type. To have the same order type is an equivalence relation on the class of well-ordered sets, and the ordinal numbers are the equivalence classes.

Two sets of the same order type have the same cardinality. The converse is not true in general for infinite sets: it is possible to impose different well-orderings on the set of natural numbers that give rise to different ordinal numbers.

There is a natural ordering on the ordinals, which is itself a well-ordering. Given any ordinal α, one can consider the set of all ordinals less than α. This set turns out to have ordinal number α. This observation is used for a different way of introducing the ordinals, in which an ordinal is equated with the set of all smaller ordinals. This form of ordinal number is thus a canonical representative of the earlier form of equivalence class.

Power sets [ edit ] All subsets of a set S (all possible choices of its elements) form the power set P ( S ). Georg Cantor proved that the power set is always larger than the set, i.e., | P ( S )| > | S |. A special case of Cantor's theorem is that the set of all real numbers R cannot be enumerated by natural numbers, that is, R is uncountable: | R | > | N |.

Paradoxes of the infinite sets [ edit ] Instead of relying on ambiguous descriptions such as "that which cannot be enlarged" or "increasing without bound", set theory provides definitions for the term infinite set to give an unambiguous meaning to phrases such as "the set of all natural numbers is infinite". Just as for finite sets , the theory makes further definitions which allow us to consistently compare two infinite sets as regards whether one set is "larger than", "smaller than", or "the same size as" the other. But not every intuition regarding the size of finite sets applies to the size of infinite sets, leading to various apparently paradoxical results regarding enumeration, size, measure and order.

Paradoxes of enumeration [ edit ] Before set theory was introduced, the notion of the size of a set had been problematic. It had been discussed by Galileo Galilei and Bernard Bolzano , among others. Are there as many natural numbers as squares of natural numbers when measured by the method of enumeration?

The answer is yes, because for every natural number n there is a square number n 2 , and likewise the other way around.

The answer is no, because the squares are a proper subset of the naturals: every square is a natural number but there are natural numbers, like 2, which are not squares of natural numbers.

The issue can be settled by defining the size of a set in terms of its cardinality. Since a bijection exists between the two sets, they have the same cardinality by definition.

Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel illustrates more paradoxes of enumeration.

Je le vois, mais je ne crois pas [ edit ] "I see it but I don't believe," Cantor wrote to Richard Dedekind after proving that the set of points of a square has the same cardinality as that of the points on just an edge of the square: the cardinality of the continuum .

This demonstrates that the "size" of sets as defined by cardinality alone is not the only useful way of comparing sets.

Measure theory provides a more nuanced theory of size that conforms to our intuition that length and area are incompatible measures of size.

The evidence strongly suggests that Cantor was quite confident in the result itself and that his comment to Dedekind refers instead to his then-still-lingering concerns about the validity of his proof of it.

[ 1 ] Nevertheless, Cantor's remark would also serve nicely to express the surprise that so many mathematicians after him have experienced on first encountering a result that is so counter-intuitive.

Paradoxes of well-ordering [ edit ] In 1904 Ernst Zermelo proved by means of the axiom of choice (which was introduced for this reason) that every set can be well-ordered. In 1963 Paul J. Cohen showed that in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice  it is not possible to prove the existence of a well-ordering of the real numbers.

However, the ability to well order any set allows certain constructions to be performed that have been called paradoxical. One example is the Banach–Tarski paradox , a theorem widely considered to be nonintuitive.  It states that it is possible to decompose a ball of a fixed radius into a finite number of pieces and then move and reassemble those pieces by ordinary translations and rotations (with no scaling) to obtain two copies from the one original copy. The construction of these pieces requires the axiom of choice; the pieces are not simple regions of the ball, but complicated subsets .

Paradoxes of the Supertask [ edit ] Main article: Supertask In set theory, an infinite set is not considered to be created by some mathematical process such as "adding one element" that is then carried out "an infinite number of times". Instead, a particular infinite set (such as the set of all natural numbers ) is said to already exist, "by fiat", as an assumption or an axiom. Given this infinite set, other infinite sets are then proven to exist as well, as a logical consequence. But it is still a natural philosophical question to contemplate some physical action that actually completes after an infinite number of discrete steps; and the interpretation of this question using set theory gives rise to the paradoxes of the supertask.

The diary of Tristram Shandy [ edit ] Tristram Shandy , the hero of a novel by Laurence Sterne , writes his autobiography so conscientiously that it takes him one year to lay down the events of one day. If he is mortal he can never terminate; but if he lived forever then no part of his diary would remain unwritten, for to each day of his life a year devoted to that day's description would correspond.

The Ross-Littlewood paradox [ edit ] Main article: Ross–Littlewood paradox An increased version of this type of paradox shifts the infinitely remote finish to a finite time. Fill a huge reservoir with balls enumerated by numbers 1 to 10 and take off ball number 1. Then add the balls enumerated by numbers 11 to 20 and take off number 2. Continue to add balls enumerated by numbers 10 n - 9 to 10 n and to remove ball number n for all natural numbers n = 3, 4, 5, .... Let the first transaction last half an hour, let the second transaction last quarter an hour, and so on, so that all transactions are finished after one hour. Obviously the set of balls in the reservoir increases without bound. Nevertheless, after one hour the reservoir is empty because for every ball the time of removal is known.

The paradox is further increased by the significance of the removal sequence. If the balls are not removed in the sequence 1, 2, 3, ... but in the sequence 1, 11, 21, ... after one hour infinitely many balls populate the reservoir, although the same amount of material as before has been moved.

Paradoxes of proof and definability [ edit ] For all its usefulness in resolving questions regarding infinite sets, naive set theory has some fatal flaws. In particular, it is prey to logical paradoxes such as those exposed by Russell's paradox . The discovery of these paradoxes revealed that not all sets which can be described in the language of naive set theory can actually be said to exist without creating a contradiction. The 20th century saw a resolution to these paradoxes in the development of the various axiomatizations of set theories such as ZFC and NBG in common use today. However, the gap between the very formalized and symbolic language of these theories and our typical informal use of mathematical language results in various paradoxical situations, as well as the philosophical question of exactly what it is that such formal systems actually propose to be talking about.

Early paradoxes: the set of all sets [ edit ] Main article: Russell's paradox In 1897 the Italian mathematician Cesare Burali-Forti discovered that there is no set containing all ordinal numbers. As every ordinal number is defined by a set of smaller ordinal numbers, the well-ordered set Ω of all ordinal numbers (if it exists) fits the definition and is itself an ordinal. On the other hand, no ordinal number can contain itself, so Ω cannot be an ordinal. Therefore, the set of all ordinal numbers cannot exist.

By the end of the 19th century Cantor was aware of the non-existence of the set of all cardinal numbers and the set of all ordinal numbers. In letters to David Hilbert and Richard Dedekind he wrote about inconsistent sets, the elements of which cannot be thought of as being all together, and he used this result to prove that every consistent set has a cardinal number.

After all this, the version of the "set of all sets" paradox conceived by Bertrand Russell in 1903 led to a serious crisis in set theory. Russell recognized that the statement x = x is true for every set, and thus the set of all sets is defined by  { x | x = x }. In 1906 he constructed several paradox sets, the most famous of which is the set of all sets which do not contain themselves. Russell himself explained this abstract idea by means of some very concrete pictures. One example, known as the Barber paradox , states: The male barber who shaves all and only men who do not shave themselves has to shave himself only if he does not shave himself.

There are close similarities between Russell's paradox in set theory and the Grelling–Nelson paradox , which demonstrates a paradox in natural language.

Paradoxes by change of language [ edit ] König's paradox [ edit ] In 1905, the Hungarian mathematician Julius König published a paradox based on the fact that there are only countably many finite definitions. If we imagine the real numbers as a well-ordered set, those real numbers which can be finitely defined form a subset.  Hence in this well-order there should be a first real number that is not finitely definable. This is paradoxical, because this real number has just been finitely defined by the last sentence. This leads to a contradiction in naive set theory .

This paradox is avoided in axiomatic set theory.  Although it is possible to represent a proposition about a set as a set, by a system of codes known as Gödel numbers , there is no formula φ φ ( a , x ) {\displaystyle \varphi (a,x)} in the language of set theory which holds exactly when a {\displaystyle a} is a code for a finite proposition about a set, x {\displaystyle x} is a set, and a {\displaystyle a} holds for x {\displaystyle x} . This result is known as Tarski's indefinability theorem ; it applies to a wide class of formal systems including all commonly studied axiomatizations of set theory.

Richard's paradox [ edit ] Main article: Richard's paradox In the same year the French mathematician Jules Richard used a variant of Cantor's diagonal method to obtain another contradiction in naive set theory. Consider the set A of all finite agglomerations of words. The set E of all finite definitions of real numbers is a subset of A . As A is countable, so is E . Let p be the n th decimal of the n th real number defined by the set E ; we form a number N having zero for the integral part and p + 1 for the n th decimal if p is not equal either to 8 or 9, and unity if p is equal to 8 or 9. This number N is not defined by the set E because it differs from any finitely defined real number, namely from the n th number by the n th digit. But N has been defined by a finite number of words in this paragraph. It should therefore be in the set E . That is a contradiction.

As with König's paradox, this paradox cannot be formalized in axiomatic set theory because it requires the ability to tell whether a description applies to a particular set (or, equivalently, to tell whether a formula is actually the definition of a single set).

Paradox of Löwenheim and Skolem [ edit ] Main article: Skolem's paradox Based upon work of the German mathematician Leopold Löwenheim (1915) the Norwegian logician Thoralf Skolem showed in 1922 that every consistent theory of first-order predicate calculus , such as set theory, has an at most countable model . However, Cantor's theorem proves that there are uncountable sets. The root of this seeming paradox is that the countability or noncountability of a set is not always absolute , but can depend on the model in which the cardinality is measured. It is possible for a set to be uncountable in one model of set theory but countable in a larger model (because the bijections that establish countability are in the larger model but not the smaller one).

See also [ edit ] Proof of impossibility Berry paradox Notes [ edit ] ^ F. Q. Gouvêa , "Was Cantor Surprised?" , American Mathematical Monthly , 118 , March 2011, 198–209.

References [ edit ] G. Cantor: Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen Inhalts , E. Zermelo (Ed.), Olms, Hildesheim 1966.

H. Meschkowski, W. Nilson: Georg Cantor - Briefe , Springer, Berlin 1991.

A. Fraenkel: Einleitung in die Mengenlehre , Springer, Berlin 1923.

A. A. Fraenkel, A. Levy: Abstract Set Theory , North Holland, Amsterdam 1976.

F. Hausdorff: Grundzüge der Mengenlehre , Chelsea, New York 1965.

B. Russell: The principles of mathematics I , Cambridge 1903.

B. Russell: On some difficulties in the theory of transfinite numbers and order types , Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 4 (1907) 29-53.

P. J. Cohen: Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis , Benjamin, New York 1966.

S. Wagon: The Banach–Tarski Paradox , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1985.

A. N. Whitehead , B. Russell: Principia Mathematica I , Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 1910, p. 64.

E. Zermelo: Neuer Beweis für die Möglichkeit einer Wohlordnung , Math. Ann.

65 (1908) p. 107-128.

External links [ edit ] Principia Mathematica Definability paradoxes by Timothy Gowers "Russell's Paradox" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Russell-Myhill Paradox" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐bsrsf
Cached time: 20250812004806
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.373 seconds
Real time usage: 0.503 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1213/1000000
Revision size: 17702/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 87578/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 984/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 29579/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.212/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4871770/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  357.508      1 -total
 41.25%  147.476      5 Template:Navbox
 27.97%  100.010      2 Template:Cite_IEP
 27.08%   96.816      2 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 26.95%   96.337      1 Template:Set_theory
 22.01%   78.705      1 Template:Short_description
 12.31%   44.016      2 Template:Hlist
 11.19%   39.988      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.92%   39.023      1 Template:Mathematical_logic
  7.44%   26.616      5 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10409979:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004806 and revision id 1287945507. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paradoxes_of_set_theory&oldid=1287945507 " Categories : Mathematical paradoxes Paradoxes of set theory Set theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 12:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paradoxes of set theory 5 languages Add topic

