Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Philosophy 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Megarian school 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Socratic school Megara in Megaris , lying equidistant from Athens , Thebes , and Corinth The Megarian school of philosophy, which flourished in the 4th century BC, was founded by Euclides of Megara , one of the pupils of Socrates . Its ethical teachings were derived from Socrates, recognizing a single good , which was apparently combined with the Eleatic doctrine of Unity . Some of Euclides' successors developed logic to such an extent that they became a separate school, known as the Dialectical school . Their work on modal logic , logical conditionals , and propositional logic played an important role in the development of logic in antiquity.

History [ edit ] The Megarian school of philosophy was founded by Euclides of Megara , who had been one of the pupils of Socrates in the late 5th century BC.

[ 1 ] His successors, as head of the school in Megara , were said to have been Ichthyas (mid 4th century BC), and Stilpo (late 4th century BC).

[ 2 ] It is unlikely, however, that the Megarian school was a genuine institution, but more of a casual description of its geographic origin, like the Austrian school in economics. Nor did it have a unified philosophical position.

[ 3 ] It was said that the philosophers of the school were first called Megarians and that later they were called Eristics , and then Dialecticians , [ 4 ] but it is probable that these names designated splinter groups distinct from the Megarian school.

[ 5 ] Besides Ichthyas, Euclides' most important pupils were Eubulides of Miletus [ 6 ] and Clinomachus of Thurii .

[ 7 ] It seems to have been under Clinomachus that a separate Dialectical school was founded, [ 8 ] which placed great emphasis on logic and dialectic , and Clinomachus was said to have been "the first to write about propositions and predicates ." [ 7 ] However, Euclides himself taught logic, [ 9 ] and his pupil, Eubulides, who was famous for employing celebrated paradoxes , [ 6 ] was the teacher of several later dialecticians.

Via Stilpo, the Megarian school is said to have influenced the Eretrian school under Menedemus and Asclepiades ; Pyrrho , the founder of Pyrrhonism ; and Zeno of Citium , the founder of Stoicism . Zeno was said to have studied under Stilpo and Diodorus Cronus , [ 10 ] and to have disputed with Philo the Dialectician . It was perhaps the Dialecticians, Diodorus and Philo, who were the biggest influence on the development of Stoic logic, and that Zeno studied under Stilpo to learn his moral teachings, although Stilpo, too, is said to have excelled "in the invention of arguments and in sophistry." [ 2 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Euclides had been a pupil of Socrates, but ancient historians regarded him as a successor to the Eleatics , hence his philosophy was seen as a fusion of Eleatic and Socratic thought. Thus, the Eleatic idea of "The One" was identified with the Socratic " Form of the Good ," [ 11 ] and the opposite of Good was regarded by Euclides as non-existent.

[ 4 ] But the emphasis of his thought is not on being but on the good , and idea that what is opposite to the good does not exist arises from the understanding of the good's unity.

[ 12 ] This theme is typically Socratic; what matters is the moral good and the will of the good person to strive towards it. Stilpo is said to have continued the Eleatic tendency, by asserting a strict monism and denying all change and motion, [ 13 ] and he also rejected Plato 's Theory of Forms .

[ 14 ] In ethics , Stilpo taught freedom, self-control, and self-sufficiency, approaching the teachings of the Cynics , another Socratic school.

[ 15 ] Besides studying logical puzzles and paradoxes, the Dialecticians made two important logical innovations, by re-examining modal logic , and by starting an important debate on the nature of conditional statements .

[ 16 ] This was the work of Diodorus Cronus and Philo the Dialectician , the only two members of the Dialectical school we have detailed information about. Through their development of propositional logic , the Dialectical school played an important role in the development of logic, which was an important precursor of Stoic logic .

See also [ edit ] Eretrian school History of logic Problem of future contingents Megarian philosophers Notes [ edit ] ^ Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 47 ^ a b Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 113 ^ Gill & Pellegrin 2006 , p. 132 ^ a b Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 106 ^ O'Toole & Jennings 2004 , p. 406 ^ a b Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 108 ^ a b Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 112 ^ O'Toole & Jennings 2004 , p. 406 Although the name "Dialectical school" was apparently coined by Dionysius of Chalcedon , (Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 106) ^ Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 107 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 16 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 106; Cicero, Academica , ii. 42 ^ Gill & Pellegrin 2006 , p. 134 ^ Aristocles, in Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica xiv. 16. 1 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 119 ^ Goulet-Cazé 1996 , pp. 403–404 ^ Kneale & Kneale 1984 , p. 119 References [ edit ] Gill, Mary Louise; Pellegrin, Pierre (2006), A Companion to Ancient Philosophy , Blackwell Goulet-Cazé, Marie-Odile (1996), "A Comprehensive Catalogue of Known Cynic Philosophers", in Bracht Branham, R.; Goulet-Cazé, Marie-Odile (eds.), The Cynics: The Cynic Movement in Antiquity and Its Legacy , University of California Press Hartmann, Nicolai (2017), "The Megarian and the Aristotelian Concept of Possibility: A Contribution to the History of the Ontological Problem of Modality", Axiomathes , 27 (2), translated by Tremblay, Frederic; Peterson, Keith: 209– 223, doi : 10.1007/s10516-016-9315-1 , ISSN 1122-1151 , S2CID 171133275 Kneale, William ; Kneale, Martha (1984), The Development of Logic , Oxford University Press O'Toole, Robert R.; Jennings, Raymond E. (2004), "The Megarians and the Stoics", in Gabbay, Dov ; Woods, John (eds.), Handbook of the History of Logic: Greek, Indian, and Arabic logic , North Holland, ISBN 0444504664 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Megarian School of Philosophy ".

Bobzien, Susanne.

"Dialectical School" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Dialectical School and the Origin of Propositional Logic with an annotated bibliography Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Megarians" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

v t e Megarian philosophy Philosophers Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus Pasicles Clinomachus Stilpo Nicarete Bryson Simmias of Syracuse Eubulides Alexinus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Panthoides Aristotle the Dialectician Concepts Dialectic Eristic Future contingents Master argument Liar paradox Sorites paradox v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Megarian_school&oldid=1268189264 " Categories : Ancient Megara Ancient Greek logic Schools and traditions in classical Greek philosophy Schools and traditions in hellenistic philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 8 January 2025, at 14:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Megarian school 35 languages Add topic

