Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Orbit types Toggle Orbit types subsection 1.1 Low orbits 1.2 High and elliptical orbits 2 Deceleration 3 Acceleration 4 Alternatives to rockets 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Orbit insertion 6 languages Català Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spaceflight operation Part of a series on Astrodynamics Orbital mechanics Orbital elements Apsis Argument of periapsis Eccentricity Inclination Mean anomaly Orbital nodes Semi-major axis True anomaly Types of two-body orbits by eccentricity Circular orbit Elliptic orbit Transfer orbit ( Hohmann transfer orbit Bi-elliptic transfer orbit ) Parabolic orbit Hyperbolic orbit Radial orbit Decaying orbit Equations Dynamical friction Escape velocity Kepler's equation Kepler's laws of planetary motion Orbital period Orbital velocity Surface gravity Specific orbital energy Vis-viva equation Celestial mechanics Gravitational influences Barycenter Hill sphere Perturbations Sphere of influence N-body orbits Lagrangian points ( Halo orbits ) Lissajous orbits Lyapunov orbits Engineering and efficiency Preflight engineering Mass ratio Payload fraction Propellant mass fraction Tsiolkovsky rocket equation Efficiency measures Gravity assist Oberth effect Propulsive maneuvers Orbital maneuver Orbit insertion v t e In spaceflight an orbit insertion is an orbital maneuver which adjusts a spacecraft ’s trajectory, allowing entry into an orbit around a planet , moon , or other celestial body, [ 1 ] becoming an artificial satellite . An orbiter is a spacecraft designed for orbital insertion.

[ 2 ] An orbit insertion maneuver involves either deceleration from a speed in excess of the respective body's escape velocity , or acceleration to it from a lower speed.

When the result is a transfer orbit , e.g. a descent orbit insertion, the maneuver is an orbit injection .

Orbit types [ edit ] Orbits are periodic or quasi-periodic trajectories, usually around a central celestial body like the Earth or the Sun. They may also be trajectories around Lagrange point locations in a multi-body system like the Earth–Moon system . (For example, NASA used a halo orbit for the CAPSTONE mission.) Low orbits [ edit ] Low orbits are trajectories deep within the 'gravitational well' of a central body. Examples include low Earth orbit and low lunar orbit . Insertion into a low orbit can require substantial deceleration with respect to the central body or, for launch from a planetary surface, substantial acceleration to reach orbital speed .

High and elliptical orbits [ edit ] Higher energy orbits like geostationary orbit are often reached via elliptical transfer orbits .

Deceleration [ edit ] One type of orbit insertion is used when capturing into orbit around a celestial body.

Rocket propulsion Excess speed of an interplanetary transfer orbit is typically shed with a rocket firing known as an orbit insertion burn. For such a maneuver, the spacecraft's engine is used to slow its velocity relative to the target body.

[ 3 ] For example, each successful Apollo program lunar landing mission first used Apollo service module propulsion to enter low lunar orbit.

Low thrust insertion For some arrival trajectories, low thrust propulsion is sufficient to achieve orbit insertion. The Hiten spacecraft used this approach first, in 1991.

Other techniques Another technique, used when the destination body has a  tangible atmosphere, is called aerocapture , which can use the friction of the atmospheric drag to slow down a spacecraft enough to get into orbit. This is very risky, however, and it has never been tested for an orbit insertion. Generally the orbit insertion deceleration is performed with the main engine so that the spacecraft gets into a highly elliptical “capture orbit” and only later the apocenter can be lowered with further decelerations, or even using the atmospheric drag in a controlled way, called aerobraking , to lower the apocenter and circularize the orbit while minimizing the use of onboard fuel. To date, only a handful of NASA and ESA missions have performed aerobraking ( Magellan , Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter , Trace Gas Orbiter , Venus Express , ...).

[ 4 ] Acceleration [ edit ] The second type of orbit insertion is used for newly launched satellites and other spacecraft. The majority of space launch vehicles used today can only launch a payload into a very narrow range of orbits. The angle relative to the equator and maximum altitude of these orbits are constrained by the rocket and launch site used. Given this limitation, most payloads are first launched into a transfer orbit, where an additional thrust maneuver is required to circularize the elliptical orbit which results from the initial space launch. The key difference between this kind of maneuver and powered trans-planetary orbit insertion is the significantly lesser change in velocity required to raise or circularize an existing planetary orbit, versus canceling out the considerable velocity of interplanetary cruise.

Alternatives to rockets [ edit ] Although current orbit insertion maneuvers require precisely timed burns of conventional chemical rockets, some headway has been made towards the use of alternative means of stabilizing orbits, such as ion thrusters or plasma propulsion engines to achieve the same result using less fuel over a longer period of time. In addition, research into the use of electrically conducting space tethers to magnetically repel the Earth's magnetic field has shown some promise, which would virtually eliminate the need for fuel altogether.

See also [ edit ] Ballistic capture References [ edit ] ^ "Orbital Insertion" .

Thinkquest.org . Archived from the original on 2012-03-22.

^ "Definition of ORBITER" .

Merriam-Webster . 2024-08-05 . Retrieved 2025-03-05 .

^ "MESSENGER poised for Mercury orbit insertion" .

Astronomy.com .

^ "AEROBRAKING AT VENUS AND MARS: A COMPARISON OF THE MAGELLAN AND MARS GLOBAL SURVEYOR AEROBRAKING PHASES" (PDF) .

NASA JPL . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-08-07.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orbit_insertion&oldid=1278885570 " Categories : Spacecraft propulsion Spaceflight concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 March 2025, at 05:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orbit insertion 6 languages Add topic

