Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Modern references 3 See also 4 Footnotes 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Areopagus 55 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Wolof 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°58′20″N 23°43′25″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.97222°N 23.72361°E ﻿ / 37.97222; 23.72361 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Promontory in Athens, and the ancient council associated with it For other uses, see Areopagus (disambiguation) .

The Areopagus as viewed from the Acropolis .

Engraved plaque containing Apostle Paul 's Areopagus sermon .

The Areopagus ( / æ r i ˈ ɒ p ə ɡ ə s / ) is a prominent rock outcropping located northwest of the Acropolis in Athens, Greece . Its English name is the Late Latin composite form of the Greek name Areios Pagos , translated "Hill of Ares " ( Ancient Greek : Ἄρειος Πάγος ). The name Areopagus also referred, in classical times, to the Athenian governing council, later restricted to the Athenian judicial council or court that tried cases of deliberate homicide, wounding, and religious matters, as well as cases involving arson of olive trees, because they convened in this location.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The war god Ares was supposed to have been tried by the other gods on the Areopagus for the murder of Poseidon 's son Halirrhothius (a typical example of an aetiological myth).

History [ edit ] Picture of the Acropolis taken from the Areopagus Idealized reconstruction of the Areopagus (front) and the Acropolis, Leo von Klenze , 1846.

The exact origin of the Areopagus as an institution remains unclear. In pre-classical times (before the 5th century BC), the Areopagus may have been a council of elders for the city of Athens, with membership restricted by constitutional conventions to those who had held high public office, in this case that of Archon .

[ 3 ] Conversely, it may have also begun almost exclusively as a homicide court and judicial body.

[ 4 ] While there is no consensus, homicide trials seem to have been held by Athenians on the Areopagus hill as early as the 7th century BC and possibly as far back as the mid-8th century BC.

[ 5 ] In 594 BC, the Areopagus Council was heavily restructured by Solon , as was the rest of the Athenian state apparatus. Aristotle suggests that Solon confirmed its competence over cases of treason ( eisangelia , εἰσαγγελία) and its guardianship of the laws ( nomophylakia , νομοφυλακία).

[ 6 ] Solon's entrusting of the nomophylakia to the Areopagus Council may imply that the council was invested with maintaining the stability of his reforms after he left Athens.

[ 7 ] Under the reforms of Cleisthenes , enacted in 508/507 BC, the Boule (βουλή) or council was expanded from  400 to 500 men, and was formed of 50 men from each of the ten clans or phylai (φυλαί) of Attica . There is very little evidence to suggest that Cleisthenes may have altered the composition or the jurisdiction of the Areopagus Council, given that he himself was likely a council member.

[ 8 ] Cleisthenes significantly influenced the Areopagus by establishing the Council of Five Hundred and implementing ostracism , which reduced aristocratic power and encouraged citizen involvement in governance. These reforms transformed the Areopagus into a judicial body, emphasizing justice within the democratic framework. By organizing citizens into demes, Cleisthenes further ensured broader representation, solidifying the Areopagus's role in Athenian democracy .

[ 9 ] In 462/461 BC, Ephialtes may have put through reforms which deprived the Areopagus Council of almost all its functions — except that of a murder tribunal — in favour of the Heliaia . While this perception is corroborated by most ancient authors, it may have merely been a retrojection by those writing long after the 5th century BC. This is because there is little evidence to suggest that the Areopagus Council had done anything of note to warrant an attack on its powers by the time of Ephialtes.

[ 10 ] Nevertheless, over the course of the 5th century BC, the Areopagus Council did lose its competence over eisangelia and dokimasia (δοκιμασία), the initial examination of those elected into office, though it is unknown if this was because of Ephialtes.

[ 11 ] In The Eumenides of Aeschylus (458 BC), the Areopagus is the site of the trial of Orestes for killing his mother ( Clytemnestra ) and her lover ( Aegisthus ). While this is a dramatization of the trials that would have taken place at the Areopagus, it is the only surviving tragedy that most closely resembles what Athenian citizens would recognize as a judicial proceeding. Most general happenings are the same but with a unique twist, such as the presiding officer being the goddess Athena and all prosecutors being female and divine as well. Although, one notable inconsistency in this drama is that, in the fifth-century, Orestes would not have been tried at the Areopagus council since he was claiming to have killed his mother 'with justice' rather than asserting that he had not killed her. A case of this nature would instead come before the ephetai at the Delphinium.

[ 12 ] Phryne , a hetaera of the 4th century BC who was famed for her beauty, appeared before the Areopagus Court accused of profaning the Eleusinian mysteries . One story has her letting her cloak drop and so impressing the judges with her almost divine form that she was summarily acquitted.

[ 13 ] In the second half of the 4th century BC, the Areopagus Court grew in influence and political power, and contributed to the anti- Macedonian faction in Athens. It conducted an investigation on charges of treason and bribery ( apophasis , ἀπόφασις) against Demosthenes as a result of the Harpalus affair in 324 BC. At the same time, the Areopagus as an institution may have also regained power over the nomophylakia , which had been lost to reforms in the 5th century BC.

[ 14 ] The Areopagus Council continued to function as a body of former archons in Roman times. After Sulla's capture of Athens in 86/87 BC and subsequent restructuring of the city's political structure, it was elevated to one of the most prestigious and politically powerful institutions in Athens.

[ 15 ] The Roman statesman Cicero once said of the council, "when one says 'the Athenian state is ruled by the council,' the words 'of the Areopagus' are omitted." [ 16 ] Acts 17:16-34 prominently features the Areopagus as the setting for the Apostle Paul's Areopagus sermon during his visit to Athens, notably leading to the conversion of Dionysius the Areopagite .

[ 17 ] However, it is unclear whether Paul gave his speech before the Areopagus Council in the setting of a judicial investigation or trial, or on the physical location of the Areopagus hill as an informal speech. The Areopagus Council likely would not have met on the actual Areopagus hill by the time of Paul's visit, but rather in the agora or in the Stoa Basileios .

[ 18 ] The Areopagus had ceased operation as a political council by at least the early 5th century AD, according to Theodoret of Cyrus .

[ 19 ] After the closure [ when?

] of the Council, the Areopagus hill was occupied by various houses and dwellings while under Byzantine rule . Buildings of note on the hill during this time included a church and monastery, both dedicated to Dionysius the Areopagite .

[ 20 ] The term "Areopagus" also refers to the judicial body of aristocratic origin that subsequently formed the higher court of modern Greece .

Near the Areopagus was also constructed in the mid-19th century AD by the Roman Catholic Church the Cathedral Basilica of St. Dionysius the Areopagite .

Modern references [ edit ] The English poet John Milton titled his defence of freedom of the press " Areopagitica ", arguing that the censors of ancient Athens, based at the Areopagus, had not practiced the kind of prior restraint of publication being called for in the English Parliament of Milton's time.

The Areopagus Society, formed in 1893, is one of the oldest clubs at the preparatory Hotchkiss School , Connecticut, USA, and meets to debate on certain topics.

[ 21 ] "Areopagus" is the title of the second poem in Irish poet Louis MacNeice 's 1952 collection, Ten Burnt Offerings .

See also [ edit ] Areopagus sermon Areopagus of Eastern Continental Greece , a regional Greek administration during the Greek Revolution of 1821 , which was named after the Ancient Athenian institution.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ MacDowell, Douglas M. (1978).

The law in classical Athens . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 9780801493652 .

OCLC 20663324 .

^ Pseudo-Aristotle.

"Atheneion Politeia" .

Perseus . Perseus Tufts . Retrieved 8 February 2016 .

^ Aristotle, Constitution of the Athenians §3 ^ Wallace, Robert W. The Areopagos Council, to 307 B.C. First Edition. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989. 46.

^ Wallace, Robert W.

The Areopagos Council, to 307 B.C.

First Edition. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989. 30.

^ Arist. Ath. Pol. 8.4.

^ Irwin, Amber L. “The History of the Areopagos Council from Its Origins to Ephialtes.” M.A., McGill University (Canada), 2011. 57.

^ Wallace, Robert W.

The Areopagos Council, to 307 B.C.

First Edition. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989. 72-73.

^ Cartwright, Mark.

"Cleisthenes" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 2024-11-04 .

^ Rihll, T. E., "Democracy Denied: Why Ephialtes Attacked the Areiopagus".

The Journal of Hellenic Studies 115 (1995): 87–98.

^ Irwin, Amber L. "The History of the Areopagos Council from Its Origins to Ephialtes". M.A., McGill University (Canada), 2011. 52.

^ Harris, Edward M.; Leao, Delfim F. (2013).

Law and Drama in Ancient Greece . Bloomsbury Publishing.

^ (Athenaeus, Deipnosophistae , XIII.590) ^ Mossé, Claude.

Athens in Decline: 404-86 B.C.

Routledge, 2014. 78-79.

^ Phillips, David D. (2010), "Areopagus" (PDF) , The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195170726.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-517072-6 , retrieved 2021-08-24 ^ Cicero.

De Natura Deorum .

2.74 ^ Acts 17:16-34 ^ Bruce, F.F.

The Acts of the Apostles. The Greek Text with Introduction and Commentary . 2nd Ed. (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1952). 335.

^ Theodoret.

Theodoret of Cyrus: A Cure for Pagan Maladies.

Translated by Thomas P. Ancient Christian Writers; Halton. No. 67. New York: Newman Press, 2013. 9.18.

^ Bouras, Charalampos.

Byzantine Athens, 10th-12th Centuries . Routledge, 2017. 188.

^ "Hotchkiss Timeline" .

www.hotchkissmedia.org . Retrieved 2017-12-11 .

Further reading [ edit ] The Constitutional Antiquities of Sparta and Athens by Gustav Gilbert Pantologia by John Mason Good, Olinthus Gregory, Newton Bosworth. p. 565 The London Encyclopaedia, Volume 2. Edited by Thomas Curtis. p. 647 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Areopagus .

Acts 17:16-34 – The Areopagus sermon Athens Photo Guide [ usurped ] Botsford, George Willis (1911).

"Areopagus" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

453– 454.

37°58′20″N 23°43′25″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.97222°N 23.72361°E ﻿ / 37.97222; 23.72361 v t e Major landmarks of Athens Ancient Acropolis Ancient Agora Arch of Hadrian Areopagus Aristotle’s Lyceum Choragic Monument of Lysicrates Hadrian's Library Kerameikos Odeon of Herodes Atticus Panathenaic Stadium Philopappos Hill/Monument Platonic Academy Pnyx Remains of the Acharnian Road, Acharnian Gate and Cemetery Site Remains of the Long Walls Roman Agora Stoa of Attalos Temple of Hephaestus Temple of Olympian Zeus Theatre of Dionysus Tower of the Winds Byzantine Church of Panagia Kapnikarea Church of the Holy Apostles Church of the Holy Trinity Church of the Pantanassa Daphni Monastery Holy Archangels Church Kaisariani Monastery Little Metropolis Petraki Monastery Ottoman Fethiye Mosque House of Saint Philothei/Benizelos-Palaiologos mansion Tzistarakis Mosque Modern Hansen 's "Trilogy" Academy Kapodistrian University of Athens National Library of Greece Museums Acropolis Museum Benaki Museum Byzantine and Christian Museum Goulandris Museum of Cycladic Art Kerameikos Archaeological Museum National Archaeological Museum National Gallery National Historical Museum Numismatic Museum Churches Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens Cathedral Basilica of St. Dionysius the Areopagite Saint Irene church Gardens/Parks Mount Lycabettus funicular National Gardens Pedion tou Areos Squares and Neighbourhoods Anafiotika Kolonaki Square Kotzia Square Monastiraki Omonoia Square Plaka Syntagma Square Thiseio Athens Concert Hall Athens Olympic Sports Complex Athens Towers Gennadius Library National Observatory of Athens National Theatre of Greece Old Parliament House Old Royal Palace Presidential Mansion Stavros Niarchos Foundation Cultural Center Tomb of the Unknown Soldier Zappeion Marinas Agios Kosmas Marina Alimos Marina Athens Marina (formerly Faliro Marina) Glyfada Marina Olympic Marine Marina of Vouliagmeni Marina of Zea Others Dionysiou Areopagitou Street Ermou Street First Cemetery of Athens v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases : Geographic Pleiades Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Areopagus&oldid=1300868387 " Categories : Geography of ancient Greece Landmarks in Athens Greek courts of appeal Ancient Greek buildings and structures in Athens Ares Hills of Athens Ancient Greek law Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from June 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 20:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Areopagus 55 languages Add topic

