Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Geology 3 Oceanography 4 Ecology 5 Islands 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Alboran Sea 66 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Македонски मराठी მარგალური مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 36°0′N 3°0′W ﻿ / ﻿ 36.000°N 3.000°W ﻿ / 36.000; -3.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Westernmost portion of the Mediterranean Sea Alboran Sea Mar de Alborán Alboran Sea Show map of Mediterranean Alboran Sea Show map of Morocco Alboran Sea Show map of Spain Alboran Sea Show map of Algeria Location Southern Europe and North Africa Coordinates 36°0′N 3°0′W ﻿ / ﻿ 36.000°N 3.000°W ﻿ / 36.000; -3.000 River sources Guadalhorce River , Guadalfeo River , Adra River (Spain) and Nekor River (Morocco) Ocean/sea sources Atlantic Ocean Basin countries Algeria , Gibraltar ( UK ), Morocco , and Spain Average depth 445 metres (1,460 ft) Max. depth 1,500 metres (4,900 ft) Settlements Málaga , Marbella , Motril , Almería and Cartagena , Spain Alhucemas and Nador , Morocco, Gibraltar The Alboran Sea is the westernmost portion of the Mediterranean Sea , lying between the Iberian Peninsula and the north of Africa (Spain on the north and Morocco and Algeria on the south). The Strait of Gibraltar , which lies at the west end of the Alboran Sea, connects the Mediterranean with the Atlantic Ocean .

A satellite image centred on the Alboran Sea. To the left, the Iberian Peninsula, and to the right, the north of Africa.

Geography [ edit ] Its average depth is 445 metres (1,460 ft) and maximum depth is 1,500 metres (4,900 ft).

The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Alboran Sea as follows: [ 1 ] On the West.

The Eastern limit of the Strait of Gibraltar: A line joining from tip ( Europa Point ) of Cap Gibraltar in Europe ( 36°6.5′N 5°20.7′W ﻿ / ﻿ 36.1083°N 5.3450°W ﻿ / 36.1083; -5.3450 ) to the tip of the Península de Almina of Ceuta in Africa ( 35°54′N 5°18′W ﻿ / ﻿ 35.900°N 5.300°W ﻿ / 35.900; -5.300 ).

On the East.

A line joining from Cabo de Gata in Andalusia in Europe ( 36°43.3′N 2°11.6′W ﻿ / ﻿ 36.7217°N 2.1933°W ﻿ / 36.7217; -2.1933 ) to Cap Fegalo , near Oran, Algeria in Africa ( 35°36′N 1°12′W ﻿ / ﻿ 35.600°N 1.200°W ﻿ / 35.600; -1.200 ).

Several small islands dot the sea, including the eponymous Isla de Alborán . Most, even those close to the African shore, belong to Spain.

Geology [ edit ] The Alboran domain, the seafloor beneath the Alboran Sea (known as the internal zones) together with the surrounding mountains (known as the external zones; the Gibraltar Arc and Atlas Mountains ), is mostly made of continental crust and marks the westernmost terminus of the terranes that were subducted between the African and Eurasian Plates when the Tethys Ocean closed.  Reoccurring earthquakes at a depth of about 600 km (370 mi) indicate that this subduction is ongoing and that complex interactions between the lithosphere and mantle are forming the region.

[ 2 ] The internal zones are made of Late Paleozoic to Triassic rocks that were piled up during the Tertiary and has been extended since the Early Miocene .

[ 3 ] The seafloor is morphologically complex with several sub-basins, including three main sub-basins named West, East, and South Alboran Basins, ridges, and seamounts. The most prominent structure in the Alboran Sea is the 180 km long (110 mi) Alboran Ridge which stretches southwest from the volcanic Alborán Island.

[ 4 ] Oceanography [ edit ] Surface currents in the Alboran Sea, influenced by the prevailing winds, flow eastward, bringing water from the Atlantic into the Mediterranean; deeper subsurface currents flow westward, carrying saltier Mediterranean water over the Gibraltar sill into the Atlantic. Thus there is typically a vertical rotary circulation, also known as a gyre , in the Alboran Sea as a result of this exchange of water.

[ 5 ] Ecology [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Alboran Sea" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Map of the Alboran Sea The Alboran Sea is a transition zone between ocean and sea, containing a mix of Mediterranean and Atlantic species. The Alboran Sea is habitat for the largest population of bottlenose dolphins and the last population of harbour porpoises in the western Mediterranean, and is the most important feeding grounds for loggerhead sea turtles in Europe. The Alboran sea also hosts important commercial fisheries , including sardines and swordfish . In 2003, the World Wildlife Fund raised concerns about the widespread drift net fishing endangering populations of dolphins, turtles, as well as other marine animals.

[ 6 ] In 2023, the European Union, Morocco, and Algeria agreed to ban bottom fishing practices around Cabliers Bank, protecting the only cold-water coral reef known to be growing in the Mediterranean.

[ 7 ] An arc of mountains, known as the Gibraltar Arc , wraps around the northern, western and southern sides of the Alboran Sea. The Gibraltar Arc is made up of the Baetic Cordillera of Southern Spain and the Rif Mountains of Morocco. These mountains, known to ecologists as the Baetic-Rifan complex, comprise one of the Mediterranean's biodiversity hotspots ; like the Alboran Sea, the Baetic-Rifan complex represents a transition between the Mediterranean and Atlantic ( Macaronesian ) ecological zones. The moderating influence of the Atlantic has allowed many relict species in the Baetic and Rif mountains to survive the climatic fluctuations of the last few million years that have caused them to become extinct elsewhere around the Mediterranean basin.

[ 8 ] Islands [ edit ] There are some small islands in the sea: [ 9 ] Isla de Alborán [ 10 ] Islas Chafarinas Peñón de Alhucemas Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 October 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ Alpert et al. 2013 , Introduction, pp. 4265–4266.

^ Iribarren et al. 2007 , Introduction, p. 98.

^ Comas et al. 1999 , p. 559.

^ C. Michael Hogan. 2011.

"Alboran Sea" in. eds. P. Saundry & C. J. Cleveland.

Encyclopedia of Earth . (National Council for Science and the Environment) Washington DC ^ "Alboran Sea" .

animalia.bio . Retrieved 2025-06-26 .

^ "Mediterranean countries unite to protect unique deep-sea coral from fishing impacts" .

Oceana Europe . Retrieved 2025-06-26 .

^ "Alboran Sea" .

animalia.bio . Retrieved 2025-06-26 .

^ "Map of Alboran Sea - Alboran Sea Map, World Seas, Alboran Location - World Atlas" .

www.worldatlas.com . Retrieved 2017-10-12 .

^ "Alboran Sea - a sea in Atlantic Ocean" .

www.deepseawaters.com . Retrieved 2017-10-12 .

Sources [ edit ] Alpert, L. A.; Miller, M. S.; Becker, T. W.; Allam, A. A. (2013).

"Structure beneath the Alboran from geodynamic flow models and seismic anisotropy" (PDF) .

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .

118 (8): 4265– 4277.

doi : 10.1002/jgrb.50309 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

Comas, M. C.; Platt, J. P.; Soto, J. I.; Watts, A. B. (1999).

"44. The origin and tectonic history of the Alboran Basin: insights from Leg 161 results" .

Proceedings of the Ocean Drilling Program Scientific Results . Vol. 161. pp.

555– 580 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

Iribarren, L.; Vergés, J.; Camurri, F.; Fullea, J.; Fernandez, M. (2007).

"The structure of the Atlantic–Mediterranean transition zone from the Alboran Sea to the Horseshoe Abyssal Plain (Iberia–Africa plate boundary)" .

Marine Geology .

243 (1): 97– 119.

doi : 10.1016/j.margeo.2007.05.011 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e African seas Oceans and seas Alboran Sea Atlantic Ocean Indian Ocean Levantine Sea Mediterranean Sea Red Sea Southern Ocean Gulfs and bays Abu Qir Bay Acheïl Dakhlet Al Hoceima Bay Algiers Bay Algoa Bay Ambas Bay Ana Chaves Bay Angra de Cintra Antongil Bay Antsiranana Bay Arab's Gulf Baía Almeida Baía da Condúcia Baía da Corimba Baía de Mocambo Baía de Mossuril Baía de Namibe Baia de Porto Amboim Baía de Santa Marta Baía de Sucujaque Baía de Tombua Baía do Ambriz Baía do Bengo Baía do Dande Baía do Govuro Baía do Lúrio Baía do Nzeto Baía do Suto Baie de Gorée Baie de Sangareya Bandombaai Bay of Anfile Bay of Arguin Bay of Arzew Bay of Aseb Bay of Beylul Bay of Edd Bay of Hawakil Bay of Langarano Bay of Saint-Augustin Bay of Tangier Benguela Bay Bera’esoli Betty’s Bay Bight of Benin Bight of Biafra Bocock’s Bay Bombetoka Bay Bootbaai Bosluisbaai Cabinda Bay Cape Cross Bay Cape Negro Bay Chake-Chake Bay Chameis Bay Chwaka Bay Conception Bay Cuio Bay Dakhlet Nouadhibou Dalwakteah Bay Deurloopbaai Doringbaai Dungonab Bay Durissa Bay Elands Bay Enseada das Pombas Enseada de São Braz Enseada do Catumbo Enseada do Chalungo Enseada do Quicombo Enseada do Quitungo Enseada dos Três Irmãos Equimina Bay False Bay Farta Bay Fernao Veloso Bay Foul Bay Frederik se Baai Ghoubbet-el-Kharab Grosse Bucht Gulf of Aden Gulf of 'Agig Gulf of Gabès Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Hammamet Gulf of Sidra Gulf of Suez Gulf of Tadjoura Gulf of Tunis Gulf of Zula Hafun Bay South Hann Bay Harrison Cove Henties Bay Hirghīgo Bahir Selat’ē Horingbaai Hottentotsbaai Hurdiyo Hydra Bay Inhambane Bay Jammer Bucht John Owen Bay Kalawy Bay Kiwaiyu Bay Lambert Bay Lamu Bay Langbaai Loango Bay Lobito Bay Luanda Bay Lüderitz Bay McDougall Bay Manza Bay Maputo Bay Markusbaai Memba Bay Menai Bay Meob Bay Mietjie Frans se Baai Moraha Bahir Selat’ē Mossel Bay Möwebaai Noopbaai Oran Gulf Pemba Bay Pipas Bay Plaatjieskraalbaai Platbaai Plettenbergbaai Pointe-Noire Bay Porto Alexandre, Angola Prinzen Bucht Río de Oro Bay Rock Bay Roode Bay Rooiwalbaai Saint Francis Bay Saint Francis Bay (Eastern Cape) St Helena Bay Saint Sebastian Bay Saldanha Bay Sandwich Harbour Sierra Bay Skoonbergbaai Skurfbaai Slangbaai Sodwana Bay Sofala Bay Somnaasbaai Spencer Bay Spoegrivierbaai Struisbaai Swartstraat Table Bay Thysbaai Tietiesbaai Ungama Bay Walker Bay Walvis Bay (bay) Yawri Bay Yof Bay Straits Bab-el-Mandeb Bab Iskender Canal de Bolama Canal de Bolola Canal de Caió Canal de São Vicente Canal do Meio Guardafui Channel Mafia Channel Massawa Channel Mozambique Channel‎ Pemba Channel Shubuk Channel Strait of Gibraltar Strait of Sicily Straits of Tiran Tigres Strait Zanzibar Channel Historical seas Aethiopian Sea Erythraean Sea Sea of Zanj Africa portal Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alboran_Sea&oldid=1297555299 " Categories : Marginal seas of the Mediterranean Seas of Spain Bodies of water of Morocco Bodies of water of Algeria Morocco–Spain border Gibraltar–Spain border Algeria–Morocco border European seas Seas of Africa Back-arc basins Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles needing additional references from December 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 23:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alboran Sea 66 languages Add topic

