Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Citations 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Victor Prosper Considerant 13 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano مصرى Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French utopian Socialist (1808–1893) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Victor Prosper Considerant Born ( 1808-10-12 ) 12 October 1808 Salins-les-Bains , France Died 27 December 1893 (1893-12-27) (aged 85) Paris, France Philosophical work Era 19th century philosophy Region French philosophy School Humanism Notable ideas Feminism, socialism Victor Prosper Considerant (12 October 1808 – 27 December 1893) was a French utopian socialist philosopher and economist who was a disciple of Charles Fourier .

Biography [ edit ] Considerant was born in Salins-les-Bains , Jura and studied at the École Polytechnique (1826 diploma). He entered the French Army as an engineer, rising to the rank of captain. However, he resigned his commission in 1831, in order to devote himself to advancing the doctrines of Fourier.

[ 1 ] Subsequently, working as a musician, he collaborated with Fourier on newspapers. He edited the journals La Phalanstère and La Phalange .

[ citation needed ] On the death of Fourier in 1837, Considerant became the acknowledged head of the movement, and took charge of La Phalange .

[ 1 ] His mother-in-law, Clarisse Vigoureux , introduced Considerant to the principles of Fourierism.

[ citation needed ] Considerant wrote much in advocacy of his principles, of which the most important is La Destinée Sociale . He authored Democracy Manifesto , which preceded by five years the similar Communist Manifesto by Marx and Engels . Considerant defined the notion of a "right to (have) work", which would be one of the main ideas of French socialists in the 1848 Revolutions . He is also known for having devised the proportional representation system. He also advocated such measures of " direct democracy " (a term he coined) as referendum and recall.

The failure of an insurrection against Louis Napoléon obliged Considerant to go into exile in Belgium in June 1849.

[ citation needed ] While exiled, Considerant visited the United States in 1853 on an invitation from Albert Brisbane ; following his travels, he wrote a book titled Au Texas advocating for a socialist colony based in Texas.

[ 2 ] In collaboration with Jean-Baptiste Godin and others, Considerant was a founder and first director of the La Réunion colony established in 1855 near Dallas , Texas .

After the failure of La Reunion, Considerant retreated to a farm in San Antonio where he advocated for a new colony in Uvalde Canyon .

[ 2 ] Considerant would live in Texas throughout the American Civil War , finally returning permanently to France with his wife Julie in 1869.

[ 3 ] He was a member of the First International , founded in 1864, and took part in the 1871 Paris Commune .

[ citation needed ] He died in Paris in 1893.

Contrary to a common error, his name is not written Considérant as he explained: "... there is no acute accent on my e. I have fought in vain for more than sixty years ever since my name was printed to defend it [from the accent]!" [ 4 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Considérant, Victor Prosper ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 978.

^ a b Beecher, Jonathan (2001).

Victor Considerant and the Rise and Fall of French Romantic Socialism . University of California Press.

^ Davidson, Rondel V.

"Victor Prosper Considerant" . TSHA Handbook of Texas Online . Retrieved 2024-10-30 .

^ Louis Bertrand, Histoire de la démocratie et du socialisme en Belgique depuis 1830 , Brussels, éd. Dechenne, t. 1, p. 280, 1906 Further reading [ edit ] Jonathan Beecher, Victor Considérant and the Rise and Fall of French Romantic Socialism . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2000.

Carl J. Guarneri, The Utopian Alternative: Fourierism in Nineteenth-Century America . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991.

External links [ edit ] Works by Victor Prosper Considerant at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Principles of Socialism: Manifesto of Nineteenth Century Democracy by Considerant in PDF format Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Argentina Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Artists ULAN RKD Artists FID People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Victor_Prosper_Considerant&oldid=1254375209 " Categories : 1808 births 1893 deaths Forty-Eighters Fourierists French socialists Members of the 1848 Constituent Assembly Members of the International Workingmen's Association Members of the National Legislative Assembly of the French Second Republic People from Jura (department) Politicians from Bourgogne-Franche-Comté Utopian socialists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 30 October 2024, at 18:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Victor Prosper Considerant 13 languages Add topic

