Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 Markets 3 Biodiversity and EGS 4 Policy tools 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecological goods and services 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic benefits associated with ecosystems Ecological goods and services ( EG&S ) are the economical benefits ( goods and services ) arising from the ecological functions of ecosystems . Such benefits accrue to all living organisms , including animals and plants, rather than to humans alone. However, there is a growing recognition of the importance to society that ecological goods and services provide for health, social, cultural, and economic needs.

Introduction [ edit ] Examples of ecological goods include clean air , and abundant fresh water . Examples of ecological services include purification of air and water, maintenance of biodiversity, decomposition of wastes, soil and vegetation generation and renewal, pollination of crops and natural vegetation, groundwater recharge through wetlands, seed dispersal , greenhouse gas mitigation, and aesthetically pleasing landscapes. The products and processes of ecological goods and services are complex and occur over long periods of time. They are a sub-category of public goods .

The concern over ecological goods and services arises because we are losing them at an unsustainable rate, and therefore land use managers must devise a host of tools to encourage the provision of more ecological goods and services. Rural and suburban settings are especially important, as lands that are developed and converted from their natural state lose their ecological functions. Therefore, ecological goods and services provided by privately held lands become increasingly important.

Markets [ edit ] A market may be created wherein ecological goods and services are demanded by society and supplied by public and private landowners.  Some believe that public lands alone are not adequate to supply this market, and that privately held lands are needed to close this gap. What has emerged is the notion that rural landowners who provide ecological goods and services to society through good stewardship practices on their land should be duly compensated. The main tool to accomplish this to date has been to pay farmers directly to set-aside portions of their land that would otherwise be in production. This exemplifies a shift in thinking from the "polluter pays" to the "beneficiary pays".

Financial incentives to landowners is one approach, but provision of EG&S can also be achieved through regulation, stewardship incentives under existing programs such Environmental Farm Plans, market-based instruments , and tax rebates.

Biodiversity and EGS [ edit ] According to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment [ 1 ] project, biodiversity is a necessary underlying component of ecological goods and services.  Biodiversity supports ecological goods and services such as biological control and genetic resources.

[ 2 ] Biodiversity is also sometimes referred to as an actual ecological good or service in its own right.

Policy tools [ edit ] The following policy tools can be used to ensure production of ecological goods and services: [ 3 ] (in French) Regulations Cross compliance programs Environmental marketing schemes (e.g.

eco-labeling ) Voluntary participation programs Market based approaches (e.g. offset credits [ clarification needed ] ) One time direct payments Ongoing direct payments See also [ edit ] Ecosystem services Ecosystem valuation Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS) References [ edit ] ^ "Millennium Ecosystem Assessment" .

www.maweb.org . Archived from the original on 23 April 2011 . Retrieved 15 January 2022 .

^ Costanza, R.

, d'Arge, R., de Groot, R., Farber, S., Grasso, M., Hannon, B., Limburg, K., Naeem, S., O'Neill, R., Paruelo, J., Raskin, R.G., Sutton, P. & van den Belt, M. (1997). The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital.

Nature 387 :253-260 ^ Agriculture, Pêcheries et Alimentation , Quebec. (2005). Remuneration for ecological goods and services produced by agriculture: Elements for a Quebec analysis.

[ clarification needed ] External links [ edit ] Diversitas Archived 2006-06-24 at the Wayback Machine , Diversitas Millennium Ecosystem Assessment National Survey on Ecological Goods and Services Carbon Credit News and Reviews COHAB Initiative, ecosystems and human well-being Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecological_goods_and_services&oldid=1303270700 " Categories : Economics of sustainability Sustainable development Biodiversity Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2012 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 01:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecological goods and services 2 languages Add topic

