Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Influence of Confucianism 2 Ideology 3 Morality 4 Development 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Ho Chi Minh Thought 14 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ລາວ 日本語 Português Русский ไทย Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political philosophy named after Ho Chi Minh A Vietnamese poster promoting Ho Chi Minh's morals Part of a series on Ho Chi Minh Thought Concepts Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Land reform Marxism–Leninism Self-criticism Vanguardism Social morality Buddhist ideas Christian ideas Traditions Socialist patriotism Proletarian internationalism National liberation Left-wing nationalism Vietnamese nationalism (Vietnam) Đổi Mới (Vietnam) Socialist-oriented market economy (Vietnam) New Economic Mechanism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought (Laos) Vietnamese people Hồ Chí Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Lê Duẩn Nguyễn Văn Linh Đỗ Mười Nông Đức Mạnh Nguyễn Phú Trọng Trần Đại Quang Nguyễn Minh Triết Tôn Đức Thắng Văn Tiến Dũng Trường Chinh Phạm Văn Đồng Nguyễn Xuân Phúc Nguyễn Thị Kim Ngân Trương Tấn Sang Vương Đình Huệ Vũ Đức Đam Nguyễn Tấn Dũng Lê Đức Thọ Trần Đức Lương Nguyễn Hữu Thọ Ngô Xuân Lịch Huỳnh Tấn Phát Lê Khả Phiêu Laotian people Kaysone Phomvihane Khamtai Siphandon Choummaly Sayasone Bounnhang Vorachit Souphanouvong Thongloun Sisoulith Phoumi Vongvichit Nouhak Phoumsavanh Theoretical works Declaration of independence The Path Which Led Me To Leninism President Ho Chi Minh's Testament The Vietnamese Revolution Renewal in Việt Nam History Communism in Vietnam History of the Communist Party of Vietnam Five-Year Plans 6th National Congress Việt Minh Vietnam War North Vietnam Viet Cong Organizations Indochinese Communist Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Communist Party of Vietnam Vietnamese Fatherland Front Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union People's Army of Vietnam Vietnam People's Public Security Vietnam General Confederation of Labour States Democratic Republic of Vietnam Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam Socialist Republic of Vietnam Lao People's Democratic Republic Vietnam portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Ho Chi Minh Thought ( Vietnamese : Tư tưởng Hồ Chí Minh ) is a political philosophy that builds upon Marxism–Leninism and the ideology of Vietnamese revolutionary Ho Chi Minh . It was developed and codified by the Communist Party of Vietnam and formalised in 1991.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term is used to cover political theories and policies considered as representing a form of Marxism–Leninism that has been adapted to Vietnamese circumstances and history . The ideology includes views on the basic issues of the Vietnamese Revolution , specifically the development and application of Marxism–Leninism to the material conditions of Vietnam .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Whilst the ideology is named after the Vietnamese revolutionary and President, it does not necessarily reflect the personal ideologies of Ho Chi Minh but rather the official ideology of the Communist Party of Vietnam.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Origins [ edit ] This article is part of a series about Ho Chi Minh Personal The Drayton Court Presidential Palace Historical Site Works The Path Which Led Me To Leninism President Ho Chi Minh's Testament Revolutionary movement Indochinese Communist Party French Indochina in World War II Viet Minh OSS Deer Team August Revolution Declaration of independence 1st President of Vietnam Ho–Sainteny Agreement Fontainebleau Agreements First Indochina War Battle of Dien Bien Phu 1954 Geneva Conference Land reform Ho Chi Minh trail Vietnam War Invasion of Laos Viet Cong terror Tet Offensive Five-Year Plans Elections 1946 1960 1964 Legacy Ho Chi Minh Thought Ho Chi Minh City Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum Ho Chi Minh Museum Monument in Moscow v t e As with Mao Zedong Thought , the core of Ho Chi Minh Thought is the belief that the peasantry is the revolutionary vanguard in pre-industrial societies rather than the proletariat .

[ 9 ] Ho Chi Minh Thought is rooted in: [ 10 ] Marxism-Leninism [ 11 ] Traditional Vietnamese ideology and culture [ citation needed ] Religions origin thought: Confucianism , Buddhism and Christianity [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Western ideologies, specifically French and American political philosophy [ citation needed ] Ho Chi Minh's personal morality Influence of Confucianism [ edit ] Ho Chi Minh, the son of Confucian scholar Nguyễn Sinh Sắc who used to be a minor official of the Nguyễn dynasty , studied Confucianism throughout his life and was a strong critic of Confucian ethics and ideals.

[ 12 ] Despite this public criticism, scholars have argued that Confucianism remained part of both the personal ideology of Ho Chi Minh, and Ho Chi Minh Thought. In particular it was observed that Confucian morality and the principle of self-cultivation are a central part of the party's platform and the ideology of Ho Chi Minh Thought.

[ 12 ] The Communist Party of Vietnam rejects this, arguing that this interpretation is a distortion of the historical record of both Ho Chi Minh and the Communist Party of Vietnam.

[ 14 ] Summarizing 30 years of studying Confucianism, Ho Chi Minh concluded: [ 15 ] Học thuyết của Khổng Tử có ưu điểm của nó là sự tu dưỡng đạo đức cá nhân. Tôn giáo Giêsu có ưu điểm của nó là lòng nhân ái cao cả. Chủ nghĩa Mác có ưu điểm của nó là phương pháp làm việc biện chứng. Chủ nghĩa Tôn Dật Tiên có ưu điểm của nó, chính sách của nó phù hợp với điều kiện nước ta. Khổng Tử, Giêsu, Mác, Tôn Dật Tiên chẳng có những ưu điểm chung đó sao? Họ đều muốn mưu hạnh phúc cho mọi người, mưu phúc lợi cho xã hội. Nếu hôm nay họ còn sống trên cõi đời này, nếu họ hợp lại một chỗ, tôi tin rằng họ nhất định chung sống với nhau rất hoàn mỹ như những người bạn thân thiết. Tôi cố gắng làm người học trò nhỏ của các vị ấy.

The good side of Confucianism is the cultivation of personal ethics. The good side of Christianity is noble benevolence. The good side of Marxism is the dialectical method. The good side of Sun Yat-sen is that his thinking is suitable to the conditions in Vietnam. Do Confucius , Jesus , Marx and Sun Yat-sen not all have the same good side? They all sought the happiness for the people, and prosperity for the society. If today, they were still alive, if they were gathered in the same place, I believe they would certainly be living together in perfect harmony, as good friends. I strive to be their little student.

Ideology [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The following is described as the core of the Ho Chi Minh Thought ideological system, as codified by the Communist Party of Vietnam: [ 16 ] [ 17 ] National liberation, class liberation, human liberation National independence National unity People's ownership; building the true state of the people, by the people, for the people National defense of all people, the building of the people's armed forces Economic and cultural development, constantly improving the material and spiritual life of the people Revolutionary ethics, diligence, thriftiness, integrity, righteousness, and impartiality Take care of fostering revolutionary generations for the next life Building a clean, strong party, cadres and party members who are both leaders and loyal servants of the people Central to Ho Chi Minh Thought is the importance of the Communist Party as the center of a national liberation movement.

[ 8 ] Ho Chi Minh Thought argues that revolutionary violence and humanitarian peace are dialectically opposed to one another. However, the synthesis of their conflict would inevitably be the preservation of peace, independence, and national liberation.

[ 10 ] Ho Chi Minh Thought cites the following concerning the construction and characteristics of a socialist society and economy: [ 10 ] Socialism is a society with a highly developed production force, associated with the progressive development of science — technology, and culture, rich people, and a strong country.

[ 18 ] Implementation of workers ownership of the means of production and implementing the principle of labour distribution.

A dictatorship of the proletariat based on the unity of industrial, agricultural, and intellectual workers under the leadership of the Communist Party.

A socialist society has a system of social relations that is healthy, fair, and equal, with no opposition between intellectual and manual labour, nor between urban and rural areas.

We must develop the state-owned economic sector to create the material basis for socialism and promote socialist reform.

[ 19 ] — Ho Chi Minh Ho Chi Minh Thought emphasizes a gradual transition to socialism.

[ 20 ] [ 18 ] Similar to Socialism with Chinese characteristics , it places emphasis on the role of the development of the productive forces . According to Ho Chi Minh, when entering the period of transition to socialism, the Vietnamese economy was a largely outdated agricultural economy that had not yet undergone capitalist development. In particular, he paid special attention to the fundamental contradiction of the transition period, which is the conflict between the country's high development needs and the socio-economic situation of the working class.

[ 18 ] Ho Chi Minh Thought also stresses learning from the experiences of other socialist countries in building socialism and making use of international aid and cooperation.

[ 21 ] Although Ho Chí Minh believed that Vietnam had entered the stage of transition to socialism in 1954, he also thought that Vietnam was still "a democratic regime in which people are the masters" and not a socialist state.

[ 22 ] According to him, to reach the socialist stage of development, the development of the state sector was of utmost importance, as its absence would lead to failure.

[ 22 ] This discussion over the transition to socialism continued in the 21st century. The platform of the 11th National Congress held in January 2011 stated: "This is a profound and thorough revolutionary process and a complicated struggle between the old and the new for qualitative changes in all aspects of social life. It is essential to undergo a long period of transition with several steps of development and several mixed social and economic structures".

[ 23 ] According to Nguyễn Phú Trọng , who became the party's General Secretary in 2011, socialist factors of development compete with non-socialist factors, which includes the features of capitalism, during the transition to socialism. Trọng said: "Along with positive aspects, there will always be negative aspects and challenges that need to be considered wisely and dealt with timely and effectively. It is a difficult struggle that requires spirit, fresh vision, and creativity. The path to socialism is a process of constantly consolidating and strengthening socialist factors to make them more dominant and irreversible. Success will depend on correct policies, political spirit, leadership capacity, and the fighting strength of the Party".

[ 24 ] Morality [ edit ] A particular aspect of Ho Chi Minh thought is the emphasis on personal morality and ethics.

[ 25 ] The personal values of Ho Chi Minh are regularly upheld by the Party, and party members are taught to exemplify Ho Chi Minh's personal values: practicing the standard of industriousness, thrift, integrity, uprightness, public-spiritedness and selflessness in serving the country and the people .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Central to Ho Chi Minh morality is living a modest lifestyle, free from material worries, whilst devoting oneself to the collective good and the advancement of socialism and self-determination.

[ 28 ] [ 27 ] Ho Chi Minh wrote about morality throughout his life, and often criticized individualism, such as in his short essay Raise up Revolutionary Ethics, Eliminate Individuals .

[ 28 ] The personal values of Ho Chi Minh are a mandatory part of the school curriculum throughout Vietnam.

[ 29 ] Development [ edit ] At the Seventh National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam , held in Hanoi in 1991, it was determined that Marxism–Leninism and Ho Chi Minh Thought were the basis of the ideology of the Party.

[ 8 ] Since this congress, it has been taught in all universities as a compulsory subject for students of all disciplines.

[ 30 ] The first instance of Ho Chi Minh Thought as a subject of formal training and critical discussion was at Hanoi University in 1997.

[ 31 ] Domestic researchers and Ho Chi Minh's comrades have written many works on Ho Chi Minh Thought such as: Understanding some issues in Ho Chi Minh's thought (1982) by Le Mau Han; Ho Chi Minh Thought Research (1993) by the Ho Chi Minh Institute's authors; The world has changed but Ho Chi Minh thought (1991), Ho Chi Minh thought (1993), Ho Chi Minh thought process of formation and development (1993), Ho Chi Minh thought and the way Vietnamese revolution (1997) by Vo Nguyen Giap; Basic perceptions about Ho Chi Minh thought (1998) of Pham Van Dong; The formation of Ho Chi Minh ideology (1997) by Tran Van Giau; From traditional thinking to Ho Chi Minh thought (1998) by Hoang Tung.

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Communism in Vietnam Juche Maoism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Angkar Primary stage of socialism Socialist-oriented market economy Vietnamese nationalism References [ edit ] ^ Tuong, Vu (January 2012).

"The Persistence of Single-Party Dictatorships: The Case of Vietnam" (PDF) . SEARC Working Paper Series. Southeast Asia Research Centre, City University of Hong Kong. p. 14.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "The Organization of the Practice of the Ho Chi Minh Movement and the Learning of its Moral Codes" .

Vietnam Communist Party . Archived from the original on 20 March 2011 . Retrieved 24 March 2011 .

^ Communist Party of Vietnam ,  (in Vietnamese), Đảng Cộng sản Việt Nam xác định lấy Chủ nghĩa Mác-Lênin và tư tưởng Hồ Chí Minh là kim chỉ nam cho mọi hành động và thắng lợi của cách mạng Việt Nam .

[The Communist Party of Vietnam determines that Marxism-Leninism and Ho Chi Minh's thought are the guideline for all actions and victories of the Vietnamese revolution .] {{ citation }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "Điều lệ Đảng Cộng sản Việt Nam, thông qua ngày 19 tháng 01 năm 2011" [Charter of the Communist Party of Vietnam, adopted on January 19, 2011] (in Vietnamese). Archived from the original on 25 January 2013 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ "Chủ nghĩa Mác – Lênin và tư tưởng Hồ Chí Minh là kim chỉ nam cho mọi hành động và thắng lợi của cách mạng Việt Nam, Trần Viết Dương, Trường Chính trị tỉnh Vĩnh Phúc" . Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ "Ho Chi Minh Thought".

Encyclopedia of Modern Political Thought . 2013.

doi : 10.4135/9781452234168.n150 .

ISBN 9780872899100 .

^ Gillespie, John Stanley (2006).

Transplanting Commercial Law Reform: Developing a 'Rule of Law' in Vietnam . Ashgate Publishing.

ISBN 9780754647041 .

^ a b c Thayer, Carlyle A. (8 June 2010). "Political Legitimacy in Vietnam: Challenge and Response".

Politics & Policy .

38 (3): 423– 444.

doi : 10.1111/j.1747-1346.2010.00242.x .

^ Hồ Chí Minh Toàn tập [ The Complete Ho Chi Minh ] (in Vietnamese). Vol. 3 tập 3. Nhà xuất bản Chính trị Quốc gia. p. 3.

^ a b c Curriculum of Ho Chi Minh Thought (Second ed.). Nhà xuất bản Chính trị Quốc gia. 2006. pp. 48, 29, 50.

^ "Undeniable values of Ho Chi Minh Thought" .

hcma.vn . 18 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ a b c Son, Bui Ngoc (2013). "The Confucian Foundations of Hổ Chí Minh's Vision of Government / 胡志明政治思想中的儒學基礎".

Journal of Oriental Studies .

46 (1): 35– 59.

JSTOR 43498666 .

^ Yến, Cao Phi (2 September 2009).

"Phải biết chắt lọc cái hay, cái tốt quanh ta" [The need to know how to filter the good, the good that is around us].

Trang tin Điện tử Đảng bộ Thành phố Hồ Chí Minh (in Vietnamese).

Ho Chi Minh City : Ho Chi Minh City Municipal Party Committee . Retrieved 21 November 2020 .

^ Hoa, Nguyen Sy.

"A bold distortion of Ho Chi Minh's thought" . Ho Chi Minh National Academy of Politics. Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 23 December 2019 .

^ Yến, Cao Phi (2 September 2009).

"Phải biết chắt lọc cái hay, cái tốt quanh ta" [The need to know how to filter the good, the good that is around us].

Trang tin Điện tử Đảng bộ Thành phố Hồ Chí Minh (in Vietnamese).

Ho Chi Minh City : Ho Chi Minh City Municipal Party Committee . Retrieved 21 November 2020 .

^ Văn kiện Đại hội đại biểu toàn quốc lần thứ IX, Nhà xuất bản. Document of the 9th National Congress, National Political Publishing House, Hanoi, 2001, p. 83.

^ Giáo trình tư tưởng Hồ Chí Minh. Nhà xuất bản chính trị quốc gia. Tái bản lần thứ hai, 2006, trang 22.

^ a b c "Undeniable values of Ho Chi Minh Thought" .

Ho Chi Minh National Academy of Politics . Communist Party of Vietnam. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

^ Hồ Chí Minh Toàn tập, Tập 9, Nhà xuất bản Chính trị Quốc gia, Hà Nội, 2001, trang 598.

^ "The pathway in the transition to socialism in Vietnam" .

^ Ho Chi Minh: Complete, National Political Publishing House, Hanoi, 2000, volume 7, p. 249, quoted "The Soviet Union is advancing towards communism. China and Eastern European countries are fast quickly implementing socialism, The countries you lead us to experience and support us We have the determination: determination to study, determination to resist, determination to work, determination to overcome. all difficulties, we will definitely win." ^ a b Khanh, Le Quoc (28 December 2010).

"A philosophy perspective on people's democratic regime from Ho Chi Minh's ideology" .

Tạp chí Cộng Sản . Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam . Retrieved 4 November 2012 .

^ Trong Phuc, Nguyen (4 November 2011).

"Party's awareness on socialism in Viet Nam from the Platform of 1930 to the Platform on national construction in the period of transition to socialism (revised and supplemented in 2011)" .

Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam . Retrieved 4 November 2012 .

^ Nguyễn, Phú Trọng (7 November 2012).

"Socialism and the path to Socialism-Vietnam's Perspective" .

Tạp chí Cộng Sản . Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam. Archived from the original on 26 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2012 .

^ "Vietnamese uphold Ho Chi Minh's thought, morality, and lifestyle" .

People's Army Newspaper .

^ "PSF promoting studying and following President Ho Chi Minh's ideology, morality and style" .

Public Security Force .

^ a b "Ho Chi Minh – A shining moral example" .

National Defence Journal . Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 16 December 2019 .

^ a b Malarney, Shaun Kingsley (2002).

Culture, Ritual and Revolution in Vietnam . University of Hawaii Press. p.

56 .

ISBN 0824826604 .

ho chi minh morality.

^ Hoa, Lai (19 May 2017).

"Home/Current Affairs Fundamental values of Ho Chi Minh's ideology, morality and lifestyle" .

Voice of Vietnam .

^ Phan, Tai Huu (6 August 2019). "Experiences of Integrating Presentation Skills and Teamwork Skills in Teaching the Ho Chi Minh Thought Subject at Tra Vinh University".

Scientific Journal of Tra Vinh University .

1 (2): 194– 202.

doi : 10.35382/18594816.1.2.2019.171 (inactive 12 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Cương lĩnh xây dựng đất nước trong thời kì quá độ lên Chủ nghĩa Xã hội Archived 27 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Đảng Cộng sản Việt Nam.

^ Thư mục chuyên đề: Nghiên cứu tổng quát về Hồ Chí Minh , Bảo Tàng Hồ Chí Minh - Chi Nhánh Thành phố Hồ Chí Minh v t e Ho Chi Minh Thought Basic concepts Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Marxism–Leninism Social Morality Land Reform Self-criticism Socialist-oriented market economy Key figures Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Le Duan Nguyễn Văn Linh Đỗ Mười Nông Đức Mạnh Nguyễn Phú Trọng Organizations Communist Party of Vietnam Vietnamese Fatherland Front Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union Key works Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam The Path Which Led Me To Leninism The Last Testament of Ho Chi Minh The Vietnamese Revolution: Fundamental Problems, Essential Tasks Renewal in Việt Nam: Theory and Reality Related topics Politics of Vietnam Communism in Vietnam History of the Communist Party of Vietnam Five-Year Plans of Vietnam 6th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam Việt Minh Vietnam War North Vietnam Viet Cong Vietnam Communism Socialism Politics v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Vietnam articles History Capitals Dynasties Economic Military Monarchs Names Naval Timeline Prehistoric Ancient Chinese dominated Monarchical French colonial Modern North Vietnam State of Vietnam South Vietnam PRG Geography Borders Climate Climate change Ecoregions Environmental issues Protected areas National parks Wildlife Mammals Birds Molluscs Endangered species World Heritage Sites Divisions Provinces Municipalities Cities District-level Commune-level Electoral units Regions Northern Red River Delta Northeast Northwest Central North Central South Central Central Highlands Southern Southeast Mekong Delta Politics Censorship Constitution Fatherland Front Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law Law enforcement Communist Party Central Committee General Secretary Permanent Member of the Secretariat History of central officeholders National Congress Politburo Central Secretariat Central Inspection Commission Central Military Commission Executive President Vice President Government Prime Minister Deputy Prime Ministers Ministers Legislative National Assembly Standing Committee Chairman Elections Judiciary Supreme People's Court Chief Justice Supreme People's Procuracy Procurator-General Military Courts Military Central Military Commission National Defense and Security Council Defense industry Armed forces Army Navy Air Force Border Guard Coast Guard Security and militia Public Security Militia and Self-Defence Force Economy Agriculture Banking Đổi Mới ("Renovation") Đồng (currency) Energy Renewable energy Nuclear power Power stations Foreign aid Foreign trade Five-Year Plans Manufacturing Standards Automotive Poverty Science and Technology Traditional medicine Measurement Inventions Telecommunications Internet Censorship Tourism Visa policy Water supply Transport Air transport Airports Rail transport Expressways Society Education Universities Health HIV/AIDS COVID-19 Crime Gambling Prostitution Sex trafficking Human trafficking Corruption Public holidays Time Women Demographics People Eunuchs Overseas community Language Alphabet Phonology Language and computers Ethnic groups Name Racism Religion Folk religions Buddhism Taoism Christianity Islam Culture Anthem Architecture Art Awards Cinema Animation Clothing Cuisine Dishes Ingredients Dance Emblem Festivals Flag Literature Poetry Mass media Television News Agency Voice Newspapers Music V-pop Traditional musical instruments Philosophy Anarchism Communism Nationalism Socialism Trotskyism Ho Chi Minh Thought Person Dignity Theory Sports Traditional games Martial arts Symbols Theater Vietnamese studies Outline Index Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐7ftrk
Cached time: 20250818131455
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.813 seconds
Real time usage: 1.003 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4661/1000000
Revision size: 23793/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 285320/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39623/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 160947/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.446/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28565452/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  753.460      1 -total
 29.13%  219.514      1 Template:Reflist
 18.66%  140.613     17 Template:Cite_web
 16.33%  123.038      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.34%  108.053      1 Template:Ho_Chi_Minh_Thought_sidebar
 12.93%   97.437      1 Template:Langx
 12.23%   92.149      1 Template:Vietnam_topics
 12.01%   90.474      1 Template:Country_topics
  7.96%   59.982      1 Template:Short_description
  4.82%   36.327      7 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38689441:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818131455 and revision id 1300927609. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ho_Chi_Minh_Thought&oldid=1300927609 " Categories : Communism in Vietnam Communist Party of Vietnam Eponymous political ideologies Ho Chi Minh Marxism–Leninism State ideologies Types of socialism Vietnamese nationalism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: missing title CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Articles containing Vietnamese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 04:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ho Chi Minh Thought 14 languages Add topic

