Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Positional phenomena 2 Ancient structures associated with positional astronomy include 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Spherical astronomy 34 languages العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Lëtzebuergesch Македонски 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of astronomy about the celestial sphere Diagram of several terms in positional astronomy Spherical astronomy , or positional astronomy , is a branch of observational astronomy used to locate astronomical objects on the celestial sphere , as seen at a particular date, time, and location on Earth . It relies on the mathematical methods of spherical trigonometry and the measurements of astrometry .

This is the oldest branch of astronomy and dates back to antiquity . Observations of celestial objects have been, and continue to be, important for religious and astrological purposes, as well as for timekeeping and navigation . The science of actually measuring positions of celestial objects in the sky is known as astrometry.

The primary elements of spherical astronomy are celestial coordinate systems and time. The coordinates of objects on the sky are listed using the equatorial coordinate system , which is based on the projection of Earth's equator onto the celestial sphere. The position of an object in this system is given in terms of right ascension (α) and declination (δ). The latitude and local time can then be used to derive the position of the object in the horizontal coordinate system , consisting of the altitude and azimuth .

The coordinates of celestial objects such as stars and galaxies are tabulated in a star catalog , which gives the position for a particular year. However, the combined effects of axial precession and nutation will cause the coordinates to change slightly over time. The effects of these changes in Earth's motion are compensated by the periodic publication of revised catalogs.

To determine the position of the Sun and planets , an astronomical ephemeris (a table of values that gives the positions of astronomical objects in the sky at a given time) is used, which can then be converted into suitable real-world coordinates.

The unaided human eye can perceive about 6,000 stars, of which about half are below the horizon at any one time. On modern star charts , the celestial sphere is divided into 88 constellations . Every star lies within a constellation . Constellations are useful for navigation.

Polaris lies nearly due north to an observer in the Northern Hemisphere . This pole star is always at a position nearly directly above the North Pole .

Positional phenomena [ edit ] Planets which are in conjunction form a line which passes through the center of the Solar System .

The ecliptic is the plane which contains the orbit of a planet, usually in reference to Earth .

Elongation refers to the angle formed by a planet, with respect to the system's center and a viewing point .

A quadrature occurs when the position of a body (moon or planet) is such that its elongation is 90° or 270°; i.e. the body-earth-sun angle is 90° Superior planets have a larger orbit than Earth's, while the inferior planets (Mercury and Venus) orbit the Sun inside Earth's orbit.

A transit may occur when an inferior planet passes through a point of conjunction.

Ancient structures associated with positional astronomy include [ edit ] Main article: Archaeoastronomy Arkaim Chichen Itza The Medicine Wheel The Pyramids Stonehenge The Temple of the Sun See also [ edit ] Astrological aspects Astrogeodesy Astrometry Celestial coordinate system Celestial mechanics Celestial navigation Diurnal motion Eclipse Ecliptic Elongation Epoch Equinox Halley, Edmond History of Astronomy Jyotish Kepler's laws of planetary motion Occultation Parallax Retrograde and prograde motion Sidereal time Solstice References [ edit ] Robin M. Green, Spherical Astronomy , 1985 , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-31779-7 William M. Smart, edited by Robin M. Green, Textbook on Spherical Astronomy , 1977 , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-29180-1 . (This classic text has been re-issued) External links [ edit ] Software NOVAS is an integrated package of subroutines for the computation of a wide variety of common astrometric quantities and transformations, in Fortran and C, from the U.S. Naval Observatory.

jNOVAS is a java wrapper for library developed and distributed by The United States Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command (NMOC) with included JPL planetary and lunar ephemeris DE421 binary file published by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

Course notes and tutorials Professor Vincent's course notes at the University of St. Andrews From Stephen Tonkin's Astronomy tutorials From Professor Kirkman's tutorials at College of Saint Benedict + Saint John's University v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spherical_astronomy&oldid=1181370598 " Categories : Spherical astronomy Astrometry Astrological aspects Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 October 2023, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spherical astronomy 34 languages Add topic

