Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin of the phrase 2 Application 3 Criticism 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs 29 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Slogan popularised by Karl Marx Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e " From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs " ( German : Jeder nach seinen Fähigkeiten, jedem nach seinen Bedürfnissen ) is a slogan popularised by Karl Marx in his 1875 Critique of the Gotha Programme .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The principle refers to free access to and distribution of goods, capital and services.

[ 3 ] In the Marxist view , such an arrangement will be made possible by the abundance of goods and services that a developed communist system will be capable to produce; the idea is that, with the full development of socialism and unfettered productive forces, there will be enough to satisfy everyone's needs.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Origin of the phrase [ edit ] The complete paragraph containing Marx's statement of the creed in the Critique of the Gotha Programme is as follows: In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination of the individual to the division of labor, and therewith also the antithesis between mental and physical labor, has vanished; after labor has become not only a means of life but life's prime want; after the productive forces have also increased with the all-around development of the individual, and all the springs of co-operative wealth flow more abundantly—only then can the narrow horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and society inscribe on its banners: From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs !

[ 6 ] Although Marx is popularly thought of as the originator of the phrase, the slogan was common within the socialist movement. The origin of this phrasing has also been attributed to the French utopian Étienne-Gabriel Morelly , [ 7 ] [ 8 ] who proposed in his 1755 Code of Nature Sacred and Fundamental Laws that would tear out the roots of vice and of all the evils of a society , including: [ 9 ] I. Nothing in society will belong to anyone, either as a personal possession or as capital goods, except the things for which the person has immediate use, for either his needs, his pleasures, or his daily work.

II. Every citizen will be a public man, sustained by, supported by, and occupied at the public expense.

III. Every citizen will make his particular contribution to the activities of the community according to his capacity, his talent and his age; it is on this basis that his duties will be determined, in conformity with the distributive laws.

A similar phrase can be found in the Guilford Covenant in 1639: We whose names are here underwritten, intending by God's gracious permission to plant ourselves in New England, and if it may be, in the southerly part about Quinnipiack, do faithfully promise each, for ourselves and our families and those that belong to us, that we will, the Lord assisting us, sit down and join ourselves together in one entire plantation, and be helpful each to the other in any common work, according to every man's ability, and as need shall require, and we promise not to desert or leave each other or the plantation, but with the consent of the rest, or the greater part of the company who have entered into this engagement.

[ 10 ] Some scholars trace the phrase to the New Testament.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] In Acts of the Apostles the lifestyle of the community of believers in Jerusalem is described as communal (without individual possession), and uses the phrase distribution was made unto every man according as he had need ( διεδίδετο δὲ ἑκάστῳ καθότι ἄν τις χρείαν εἶχεν ): Acts 4:32–35 (KJV): 32 And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.

33 And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them all.

34 Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, 35 And laid them down at the apostles' feet: and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need.

Later in Acts 11, the phrase every man according to his ability ( καθὼς ηὐπορεῖτό ... ἕκαστος αὐτῶν ) is used in a context of financial aid: Acts 11:27–30 (KJV): 27 And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch.

28 And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius Cæsar.

29 Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judæa: 30 which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

Other scholars find its origins in the Roman legal concept of obligation in solidum , [ 14 ] in which everyone assumes responsibility for anyone who cannot pay his debt, and he is conversely responsible for everyone else .

[ 15 ] James Furner argues: [ 14 ] If x = a disadvantage, and y = action to redress that disadvantage, the principle of solidarity is: if any member of a group acquires x , each member has a duty to perform y (if they can assist). All we then need to add, to get to the fundamental principle of developed communism, is to assume that non-satisfaction of a need is a disadvantage. The corresponding principle of solidarity in respect of need says: if any member of society has an unsatisfied need, each member has a duty to produce its object (if they can). But that is precisely what the principle 'from each according to their abilities, to each according to their needs!' dictates. In Marx's vision, the basic principle of developed communism is a principle of solidarity in respect of need.

Application [ edit ] Marx delineated the specific conditions under which such a creed would be applicable—a society where technology and social organization had substantially eliminated the need for physical labor in the production of things, where labor has become not only a means of life but life's prime want .

[ 1 ] Marx explained his belief that, in such a society, each person would be motivated to work for the good of society despite the absence of a social mechanism compelling them to work, because work would have become a pleasurable and creative activity. Marx intended the initial part of his slogan, "from each according to his ability" to suggest not merely that each person should work as hard as they can, but that each person should best develop their particular talents.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Claiming themselves to be at a "lower stage of communism" (i.e. "socialism", in line with Vladimir Lenin ’s terminology), [ 18 ] the Soviet Union adapted the formula as: "From each according to his ability, to each according to his work (labour investment)".

[ 19 ] This was incorporated in Article 12 of the 1936 Constitution of the Soviet Union , but described by Leon Trotsky as an inwardly contradictory, not to say nonsensical, formula .

[ 20 ] Criticism [ edit ] As early as in 1900, Frederick Charles Hicks criticized the concept "according to his needs" as follows. There are no issues with this principle as long as there is enough of everything for everybody. But this is not the case and probably never will be, because man's wants tend always to outstrip his ability to supply them.... [Therefore] it will be necessary to have an agency for determining relative amounts of men's needs.

Which will eventually lead to absolutism and slavery .

[ 21 ] In popular culture [ edit ] In Ayn Rand 's 1957 pro-capitalist novel Atlas Shrugged , a large and profitable motor company adopted this slogan as its method for determining employee compensation. The system quickly fell prey to corruption and greed, forcing the most capable employees to work overtime in order to satisfy the needs of the least competent and to funnel money to the owners. As a result, the company went bankrupt within four years.

In Margaret Atwood 's 1985 novel The Handmaid's Tale , members of a dystopian society recited the phrase thrice daily.

[ 22 ] Notably the phrase is altered to read "From each according to her ability; to each according to his need", demonstrating a perversion of the phrase's original intention by Atwood's fictional society.

Mirroring the sentiment of Frederick C. Hicks, in Vladimir Voinovich 's 1986 novel Moscow 2042 , the slogan was parodied in the context of " communism in one city ". In Moscorep (Moscow Communist Republic) Voinovich portrays various hilarious absurdities related to the implementation of the concept of "needs". The concept was introduced as follows: 'I see,' I said. 'But who defines his needs? He himself?' – 'But this would be metaphysics , Hegelianism and Kantianism !' exclaimed Propaganda Paramonovna.

Further, the protagonist was explained that a man is insufficiently qualified to determine his needs and special committees, "Pentagrams", do this.

In Tim Winton 's 2024 post-climate-collapse novel Juice , the phrase is used several times as part of the teachings of a resistance group.

See also [ edit ] Politics portal Communism portal Philosophy portal Society portal Anarchist communism Acts 2:44 Acts 4:32 Communism Distributive justice Equality of outcome He who does not work, neither shall he eat Jedem das Seine Justice Omnia sunt communia Post-scarcity economy Parasitism (social offense) Supply and demand Suum cuique To each according to his contribution Use value Workers of the world, unite!

References [ edit ] ^ a b Marx 1875 .

^ Fernbach 2010 , p. 347.

^ Busky 2000 , p. 4.

^ Schaff 2001 , p. 224.

^ Walicki 1995 , p. 95.

^ Marx (1875) ; Fernbach (2010) , p. 347; Schaff (2001) , p. 224; Walicki (1995) , p. 95 ^ Graeber 2013 , pp. 293–294.

^ Bowie 1971 , p. 82.

^ Titelman 1996 , p. 108.

^ "The Guilford Covenant" .

Bushnell Homestead .

^ Baird 1989 , p. 32.

^ Berman 2000 , p. 151.

^ Bovens, Luc (4 September 2020).

" 'From each according to ability; to each according to need' – tracing the biblical roots of socialism's enduring slogan" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 18 August 2025 .

^ a b Furner 2018 , p. 113.

^ Brunkhorst 2005 , p. 2.

^ Bli︠a︡khman & Shkaratan 1977 , p. 155.

^ Johnson 1968 .

^ Post & Wright 1989 , p. 11.

^ Jukes 1973 , p. 225.

^ Trotsky 1936 .

^ Hicks 1900 , p. 449.

^ Atwood 1985 , p. 135.

Works cited [ edit ] Atwood, Margaret (1985). "Chapter Twenty".

The Handmaid's Tale . McClelland & Stewart. p.

135 .

ISBN 0-7710-0855-4 .

Baird, Joseph Arthur (1989).

The Greed Syndrome: An Ethical Sickness in American Capitalism . Hampshire Books. p. 32.

ISBN 978-1877674020 .

Berman, Marshall (2000).

Adventures in Marxism .

Verso Books . p. 151.

ISBN 978-1859843093 .

Bli︠a︡khman, Leonid Solomonovich; Shkaratan, Ovseĭ Irmovich (1977).

Man at Work: The Scientific and Technological Revolution, the Soviet Working Class and Intelligentsia . Progress. p. 155.

ISBN 978-0-8285-0242-9 . Retrieved 24 June 2014 .

Bowie, Norman E.

(1971).

Towards a new theory of distributive justice .

University of Massachusetts Press . p. 82.

ISBN 978-0870230851 .

Brunkhorst, Hauke (2005).

Solidarity: From Civic Friendship to a Global Legal Community .

MIT Press . p. 2.

ISBN 978-0262025829 .

Busky, Donald F. (20 July 2000).

Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey . Praeger. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0275968861 .

Communism would mean free distribution of goods and services. The communist slogan, 'From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs' (as opposed to 'work') would then rule Fernbach, David, ed. (2010).

Marx: The First International and After .

Verso Books . p. 347.

Furner, James (2018).

Marx on Capitalism: The Interaction-Recognition-Antinomy Thesis . Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill . p. 113.

ISBN 978-90-04-38480-4 .

Graeber, David (2013).

The Democracy Project: A History, a Crisis, a Movement . New York: Spiegel & Grau . pp.

293–294 .

ISBN 9780812993561 .

OCLC 810859541 .

Hicks, Frederick Charles (1900).

Distribution of wealth . p. 449.

Johnson, Hewlett (1968).

Searching for light: an autobiography . Joseph . Retrieved 24 June 2014 .

Jukes, Geoffrey (1973).

The Soviet Union in Asia .

University of California Press . p.

225 .

ISBN 978-0-520-02393-2 – via Google Books .

Marx, Karl (1875).

"Part I" .

Critique of the Gotha Program . Retrieved 15 July 2008 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Post, Ken; Wright, Phil (1989).

Socialism and underdevelopment .

Routledge . p.

11 .

ISBN 978-0-415-01628-5 – via Google Books .

Schaff, Kory (2001).

Philosophy and the problems of work: a reader . Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

224 .

ISBN 978-0-7425-0795-1 .

Titelman, Gregory, ed. (1996).

Random House dictionary of popular proverbs & sayings .

Random House . p. 108.

ISBN 978-0679445548 .

Trotsky, Leon (1936). "Chapter 10 The Soviet Union in the Mirror of the New Constitution (section 1)".

The Revolution Betrayed – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Walicki, Andrzej (1995).

Marxism and the leap to the kingdom of freedom: the rise and fall of the Communist utopia . Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press . p. 95.

ISBN 978-0-8047-2384-8 .

Further reading [ edit ] Carens, Joseph (2003).

"An Interpretation of the Socialist Principle of Distribution" .

Social Philosophy & Policy .

20 (1): 145– 77.

doi : 10.1017/S0265052503201072 .

S2CID 145468454 .

Cohen, G. A.

(1995). "Self-ownership, communism, and equality: against the Marxist technological fix".

Self-ownership, freedom, and equality . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-47751-2 .

Gilabert, Pablo (2015).

"The Socialist Principle 'From Each According To Their Abilities, To Each According To Their Needs' " .

Journal of Social Philosophy .

46 (2): 197– 225.

doi : 10.1111/josp.12096 .

Marx, Karl ; Engels, Friedrich .

Marx/Engels Selected Works . Vol. Three. pp.

13– 30.

External links [ edit ] "Critique of the Gotha Programme" .

(includes Marx's original use of the slogan) "Encountering Communism: The Theories of Karl Marx" .

"Marxism and Ethics" .

v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Anarchist communism Concepts Anarchy Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Class consciousness Class struggle Classless society Common ownership Common resources Commons Commune Consensus decision-making Co-operative economics Egalitarian community Free association " From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs " Give-away shop General strike Gift economy Market abolitionism Mutual aid Prefigurative politics Primitive communism Proletarian internationalism Stateless society Worker cooperative Workers' control Workers' council Wage slavery People Alexander Berkman Murray Bookchin Carlo Cafiero Emilio Covelli Joseph Déjacque Clarissa Dixon Buenaventura Durruti Sébastien Faure Iosif Bleikhman Luigi Galleani Emma Goldman Peter Kropotkin Ricardo Flores Magón Nestor Makhno Errico Malatesta Albert Meltzer Sergey Nechayev Volin Organizational forms Insurrectionary anarchism Platformism Synthesis federations Theoretical works Anarchism and Other Essays The Conquest of Bread Fields, Factories, and Workshops Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution Now and After Post-Scarcity Anarchism Catechism of a Revolutionary Related topics Anarchism Autonomism Communization Council communism Left communism Libertarian socialism Social anarchism Anarchism Communism Socialism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=From_each_according_to_his_ability,_to_each_according_to_his_needs&oldid=1306564005 " Categories : 1870s neologisms Marxism Communism Political catchphrases Acts of the Apostles Ethical principles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2024 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 12:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs 29 languages Add topic

