Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mass emergency shelters 2 Sustainable design 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Emergency shelter 8 languages العربية Deutsch 한국어 Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of temporary shelter See also: Transitional shelter and Refugee shelter This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Emergency shelter" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Two hundred rolls of heavy-duty plastic sheeting were given to earthquake-affected households in Nepal's Kathmandu District's Sankhu village and surrounding areas on May 1st 2015. An additional 500 rolls of this critical emergency shelter material were dispatched to Gorkha, Kathmandu, and Sindhupalchowk. The sheeting was provided by USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance and distributed by the nongovernmental organizations Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development and Save the Children An emergency shelter is a place for people to live temporarily when they cannot live in their previous residence, similar to homeless shelters . The main difference is that an emergency shelter typically specializes in people fleeing a specific type of situation, such as natural or man-made disasters , domestic violence , or victims of sexual abuse [ citation needed ] . A more minor difference is that people staying in emergency shelters are more likely to stay all day, except for work, school, or errands, while homeless shelters usually expect people to stay elsewhere during the day, returning only to sleep or eat. Emergency shelters sometimes facilitate support groups , and/or provide meals.

Post-disaster emergency shelter is often provided by organizations or governmental emergency management departments, in response to natural disasters, such as a flood or earthquake. They tend to use tents or other temporary structures, or buildings normally used for another purpose, such as a church or school. These settlements may be inhabited for the entire duration of the reconstruction process and should be thought of more as settlements than shelter, and need to be planned with respect to water / sanitation, livelihoods.

A newer category of emergency shelter is the warming center . Warming centers typically open during particularly cold or rainy nights. They are available to persons who decline to accept homeless shelters, are not allowed to use homeless shelters, or are not homeless, but have inadequate or malfunctioning heat in their homes.

Mass emergency shelters [ edit ] One example of a mass emergency shelter is the Louisiana Superdome , which was used as a hurricane shelter during Hurricane Katrina . More than 20,000 storm refugees crowded into the arena seeking sanctuary from the winds and waters of Katrina, filling seats, ramps, corridors, and the artificial turf field. The refugees were met with a variety of new challenges, including stifling heat, stench, filth, unsanitary facilities, and a shortage of food and drinking water. Violent assaults and rapes were reported, as well as one unconfirmed suicide.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Sustainable design [ edit ] Sustainable design is often employed in response to global environmental crises, the rapid growth of economic activity and human population, depletion of natural resources, damage to ecosystems , and loss of biodiversity .

[ 3 ] In 2013, eco architecture writer Bridgette Meinhold surveyed emergency and long-term sustainable housing projects that were developed in response to these crises in her book Urgent Architecture: 40 Sustainable Housing Solutions for a Changing World .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Featured projects focus on green building , sustainable design, eco-friendly materials, affordability , material reuse , and humanitarian relief . Construction methods and materials include repurposed shipping containers , straw bale construction , sandbag homes, and floating homes .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Civil defense Emergency management Homeless shelter Homelessness List of human habitation forms Natural disaster Warming center References [ edit ] ^ Treaster, Joseph B. (September 2005).

"Superdome: Haven Quickly Becomes an Ordeal" .

New York Times . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ Associated Press (September 2005).

"Superdome evacuation disrupted after shots fired" . ESPN . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ Fan Shu-Yang, Bill Freedman, and Raymond Cote (2004). "Principles and practice of ecological design". Environmental Reviews. 12: 97–112.

link Archived 2004-08-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ Meinhold, Bridgette (2013).

Urgent Architecture: 40 Sustainable Housing Solutions for a Changing World . W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.

ISBN 9780393733587 . Retrieved 26 May 2014 .

^ Vidal, John (2013-05-07).

"Humanitarian intent: Urgent Architecture from ecohomes to shelters – in pictures" .

The Guardian . theguardian.com . Retrieved 26 May 2014 .

^ "URGENT ARCHITECTURE: Inhabitat Interviews Author Bridgette Meinhold About Her New Book" . YouTube.com.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 26 May 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Build A Kit advice from the Department of Homeland Security Emergency Shelter Records New-York Historical Society Shelter Centre NGO supporting the emergency shelter sector Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emergency_shelter&oldid=1283057575 " Categories : Disaster preparedness Emergency services Temporary populated places Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 05:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emergency shelter 8 languages Add topic

