Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 19th-century teleological use 2 Modern use by creationists 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Evolutionism 23 languages Azərbaycanca Dansk Eesti Esperanto فارسی Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Кыргызча Magyar Македонски मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский संस्कृतम् Српски / srpski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Derogatory term for the theory of evolution This article is about the term. For the field/s of study, see Evolutionary biology § Subfields .

Charles Darwin, whose On the Origin of Species introduced the theory of evolution to society at large, photographed in 1881 Evolutionism is a term used (often derogatorily) to denote the theory of evolution . Its exact meaning has changed over time as the study of evolution has progressed. In the 19th century, it was used to describe the belief that organisms deliberately improved themselves through progressive inherited change ( orthogenesis ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The teleological belief went on to include cultural evolution and social evolution .

[ 1 ] In the 1970s, the term "Neo-Evolutionism" was used to describe the idea that "human beings sought to preserve a familiar style of life unless change was forced on them by factors that were beyond their control." [ 3 ] The term is most often used by creationists to describe adherence to the scientific consensus on evolution as equivalent to a secular religion .

[ 4 ] The term is very seldom used within the scientific community, since the scientific position on evolution is accepted by the overwhelming majority of scientists.

[ 5 ] Because evolutionary biology is the default scientific position, it is assumed that "scientists" or "biologists" are "evolutionists" unless specifically noted otherwise.

[ 6 ] In the creation–evolution controversy , creationists often call those who accept the validity of the modern evolutionary synthesis "evolutionists" and the theory itself "evolutionism".

19th-century teleological use [ edit ] Before its use to describe biological evolution, the term "evolution" was originally used to refer to any orderly sequence of events with the outcome somehow contained at the start.

[ 7 ] The first five editions of Darwin's in Origin of Species used the word "evolved", but the word "evolution" was only used in its sixth edition in 1872.

[ 8 ] By then, Herbert Spencer had developed the concept theory that organisms strive to evolve due to an internal "driving force" ( orthogenesis ) in 1862.

[ 7 ] Edward B. Tylor and Lewis H Morgan brought the term "evolution" to anthropology though they tended toward the older pre-Spencerian definition helping to form the concept of unilineal (social) evolution used during the later part of what Trigger calls the Antiquarianism-Imperial Synthesis period (c1770-c1900).

[ 9 ] The term evolutionism subsequently came to be used for the now discredited theory that evolution contained a deliberate component, rather than the selection of beneficial traits from random variation by differential survival .

Modern use by creationists [ edit ] The term evolution is widely used, but the term evolutionism is not used in the scientific community to refer to evolutionary biology as it is redundant and anachronistic.

[ 6 ] However, the term has been used by creationists in discussing the creation–evolution controversy .

[ 6 ] For example, the Institute for Creation Research , in order to imply placement of evolution in the category of 'religions', including atheism , fascism , humanism and occultism , commonly uses the words evolutionism and evolutionist to describe the consensus of mainstream science and the scientists subscribing to it, thus implying through language that the issue is a matter of religious belief.

[ 10 ] The BioLogos Foundation , an organization that promotes the idea of theistic evolution , uses the term "evolutionism" to describe "the atheistic worldview that so often accompanies the acceptance of biological evolution in public discourse." It views this as a subset of scientism .

[ 11 ] [ non-primary source needed ] See also [ edit ] Alternatives to evolution by natural selection Darwinism Evolution as fact and theory Evidence of common descent Social Darwinism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Allen, R. T.; Allen, Robert W. (1994).

Chambers encyclopedic English dictionary . Edinburgh: Chambers. p. 438.

ISBN 978-0-550-11000-8 .

a widely held 19c belief that organisms were intrinsically bound to improve themselves, that changes were progressive, and that acquired characters could be transmitted genetically. The belief was also extended to cultures and societies, and to living organisms.

^ Carneiro, Robert, L. (2003).

Evolutionism in cultural anthropology : a critical history . Cambridge, MA: Westview Press. pp.

2– 3.

ISBN 978-0-8133-3766-1 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Trigger, Bruce (1986) A History of Archeological Thought Cambridge University Press pg 290 ^ Ruse, Michael (March 2003).

"Perceptions in science: Is Evolution a Secular Religion? -- Ruse" .

Science .

299 (5612): 299 (5612): 1523.

doi : 10.1126/science.1082968 .

PMID 12624249 . Retrieved 2008-12-05 .

A major complaint of the Creationists, those who are committed to a Genesis-based story of origins, is that evolution--and Darwinism in particular--is more than just a scientific theory. They object that too often evolution operates as a kind of secular religion, pushing norms and proposals for proper (or, in their opinion, improper) action.

^ "Nearly all scientists (97%) say humans and other living things have evolved over time", Public Praises Science; Scientists Fault Public, Media Archived 2009-11-08 at the Wayback Machine , Pew Research Center , 9 July 2009 ^ a b c Gough, J. B. (1983).

"The Supposed Dichotomy between Creationism and Evolution" .

NCSE .

National Center for Science Education . Retrieved 2009-09-24 .

"...to say a person is a scientist encompasses the fact that he or she is an evolutionist." ^ a b Carneiro, Robert L.(Léonard) (2003) Evolutionism in cultural anthropology: a critical history Westview Press pg 1-3 ^ Darwin, Charles (1986). Burrow, JW (ed.).

The Origin of Species (reprint of 1st ed.). Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin Classics. p. 460.

ISBN 978-0-14-043205-3 .

...from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved (italics not in original) ^ Trigger, Bruce (1986) A History of Archaeological Thought Cambridge University Press pg 102 ^ Linke, Steven (August 28, 1992).

"A Visit to the ICR Museum" .

TalkOrigins Archive . Retrieved 2008-12-05 .

In fact, true science supports the Biblical worldview... However, science does not support false religions (e.g. atheism, evolutionism, pantheism, humanism, etc.) ^ "How is BioLogos different from Evolutionism, Intelligent Design, and Creationism" . The BioLogos Foundation . Retrieved 2012-01-19 .

While BioLogos accepts evolution, it emphatically rejects evolutionism, the atheistic worldview that so often accompanies the acceptance of biological evolution in public discourse. Proponents of evolutionism believe every aspect of life will one day be explained with evolutionary theory. In this way it is a subset of scientism, the broader view that the only real truth is that which can be discovered by science. These positions are commonly held by materialists (also called philosophical naturalists) who deny the existence of the supernatural.

References [ edit ] Carneiro, Robert, Evolutionism in Cultural Anthropology: A Critical History ISBN 0-8133-3766-6 Korotayev, Andrey (2004).

World Religions and Social Evolution of the Old World Oikumene Civilizations: A Cross-cultural Perspective (First ed.).

Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press .

ISBN 978-0-7734-6310-3 .

(on the applicability of this notion to the study of social evolution ) Review of Buckland's Bridgewater Treatise , The Times Tuesday, November 15, 1836; pg. 3; Issue 16261; col E. ("annihilates the doctrine of spontaneous and progressive evolution of life, and its impious corollary, chance") Review of Charles Darwin 's The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals The Times Friday, December 13, 1872; pg. 4; Issue 27559; col A. ("His [Darwin's] thorough-going 'evolutionism' tends to eliminate...") Ruse, Michael. 2003.

Is Evolution a Secular Religion?

Science 299:1523-1524 (concluding that evolutionary biology is not a religion in any sense but noting that several evolutionary biologists, such as Edward O. Wilson , in their roles as citizens concerned about getting the public to deal with reality, have made statements like "evolution is a myth that is now ready to take over Christianity ").

Singh, Manvir (2011).

The Evolutionist's Doodlebook . New Jersey: Fuss Klas Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-9832930-0-2 .

Trigger, Bruce (2006).

A History of Archaeological Thought . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-84076-7 .

v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolutionism&oldid=1292227430 " Categories : Biological evolution Biology theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2020 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 21:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolutionism 23 languages Add topic

