Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Purpose 3 Archives 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornell Chronicle 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Weekly newspaper published by Cornell University This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( December 2021 ) The Cornell Chronicle is the in-house weekly newspaper published by Cornell University .

History [ edit ] Prior to the founding of the Chronicle in 1969, campus news was reported by the Cornell Era and then by The Cornell Daily Sun .  During the Willard Straight Hall takeover in April 1969, the campus learned of unfolding events through the student-edited Sun , the student radio station WVBR , and the independently owned Cornell Alumni News.

However, Cornell's administration, most notably then-Vice President for Public Affairs Steven Muller , was dissatisfied because those media reported events in a manner that was somewhat critical of the administration.  Over the summer, plans for the Chronicle were put in place and it debuted on September 25, 1969.

[ 1 ] The Chronicle ' s first office was in the basement of the Edmund Ezra Day Hall administration building, and Kal Lindenburg, a Sun alumnus, was hired as its first Managing Editor.  It was printed every Wednesday during the school year as a newsprint broadside on the presses of the Ithaca Journal .

The early issues are filled with university press releases, as well as pages generated by the Dean of the Faculty, University Senate and various employee groups.  The Chronicle would also print the full text of various University reports. However, the Chronicle was careful to reflect the administration's perspective on the news.  For example, in 1970, when the Board of Trustees considered an important proposal to restructure its membership and to establish a University Senate, the Chronicle headline stated "Cornell Trustees Approve the Formation of Senate", [ 2 ] while the Sun headline read, "Committee Delays Senate Election After Trustees Modify Constitution".

[ 3 ] From its start, the Chronicle was available for free at locations throughout Cornell's campus, and subsequently paid mail subscriptions were sold to off-campus readers. Subsequently, the Cornell News Service and the Chronicle relocated off campus to offices in downtown Ithaca, New York . The issues are currently formatted for 8.5" by 11" pages, and can be purchased printed on 11" by 17" paper, folded.

[ 4 ] Purpose [ edit ] The first issue of the Chronicle featured a "Statement of Purpose", which stated in part: The purpose of the Chronicle is to provide official information, important to its readers as members of the University, but not readily available through existing communications channels.

Each issue of the Chronicle will include at least one page devoted to the activities of the University faculty. Responsibility for the contents of the faculty section has been delegated to the Secretary of the Faculty.

The Chronicle is not intended to compete with local communications media reporting on University activities. It is intended to supplement their efforts by providing more comprehensive information than the media can devote to University matters due to limitations of space and time.

[ 5 ] Archives [ edit ] Archives of the Chronicle are available from 1969, which are scanned from bound volumes and available in PDF form in the university's online repository, eCommons, [ 6 ] with post 1996 issues available on the Cornell website.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Cornell Chronicle Vol. 01, No. 01 (September 25, 1969)".

ECommons@Cornell . September 25, 1969.

hdl : 1813/24574 .

^ "Cornell Trustees Approve the Formation of Senate" (PDF) .

Cornell Chronicle . Vol. 1, no. 22. March 18, 1970. p. 1 . Retrieved February 29, 2012 .

^ Stevenson, E.J. (March 18, 1970).

"Committee Delays Senate Election After Trustees Modify Constitution" .

Cornell Daily Sun . Vol. 86, no. 104. p. 1 . Retrieved February 29, 2012 .

^ "About the Cornell Chronicle" .

Cornell Chronicle Online . Retrieved February 29, 2012 .

^ "Cornell Chronicle Statement of Purpose" (PDF) .

Cornell Chronicle . Vol. 1, no. 1. September 25, 1969. p. 1 . Retrieved February 29, 2012 .

^ "Cornell Chronicle".

ECommons@Cornell .

hdl : 1813/5328 .

^ "Cornell Chronicle Archive" .

Cornell Chronicle Online . Retrieved February 29, 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornell_Chronicle&oldid=1277277846 " Categories : 1969 establishments in New York (state) Newspapers established in 1969 Cornell University Newspapers published in New York (state) Weekly newspapers published in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from December 2021 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use mdy dates from February 2025 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 23 February 2025, at 18:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornell Chronicle 1 language Add topic

