Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Health effects Toggle Health effects subsection 1.1 Medical application 1.2 Mental health 1.3 Weight loss 1.3.1 Intermittent fasting 1.3.2 Prolonged fasting 1.4 Longevity 2 Adverse effects Toggle Adverse effects subsection 2.1 Refeeding syndrome 2.2 Gallstones 3 Political application 4 Religious views 5 In alternative medicine 6 Types of fasting Toggle Types of fasting subsection 6.1 Type by religion 6.2 Type by method 6.3 Type by schedule 6.4 Type by motivation 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Fasting 103 languages العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ پنجابی Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Willing abstinence from, or reduced consumption of, food and/or drink A glass of water on an empty plate Fasting is the act of refraining from eating , and sometimes drinking . However, from a purely physiological context, "fasting" may refer to the metabolic status of a person who has not eaten overnight (before " breakfast "), or to the metabolic state achieved after complete digestion and absorption of a meal.

[ 1 ] Metabolic changes in the fasting state begin after absorption of a meal (typically 3–5 hours after eating).

A diagnostic fast refers to prolonged fasting from 1–100 hours (depending on age), conducted under observation, to facilitate the investigation of a health complication (usually hypoglycemia ). Many people may also fast as part of a medical procedure or a check-up , such as preceding a colonoscopy or surgery , or before certain medical tests.

Intermittent fasting is a technique sometimes used for weight loss or other health benefits that incorporates regular fasting into a person's dietary schedule. Fasting may also be part of a religious ritual , often associated with specific scheduled fast days, as determined by the religion , or be applied as a public demonstration for a given cause, in a practice known as a hunger strike .

Health effects [ edit ] See also: Starvation response , Intermittent fasting , Autophagy , and Fasting and longevity Alternate-day fasting (alternating between a 24-hour "fast day" when the person eats less than 25% of usual energy needs, followed by a 24-hour non-fasting "feast day" period) has been shown to improve cardiovascular and metabolic biomarkers similarly to a calorie restriction diet in people who are overweight , obese or have metabolic syndrome .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] A 2021 review found that moderate alternate-day fasting for two to six months was associated with reductions of body weight, body mass index , and cardiometabolic risk factors in overweight or obese adults.

[ 6 ] Medical application [ edit ] See also: Preoperative fasting , Body cleansing , and Nothing by mouth Fasting is almost always practiced prior to surgery or other procedures that require general anesthesia because of the risk of pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents after induction of anesthesia (i.e., vomiting and inhaling the vomit, causing life-threatening aspiration pneumonia ).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Additionally, certain medical tests, such as cholesterol testing ( lipid panel ) or certain blood glucose measurements require fasting for several hours so that a baseline can be established.

Mental health [ edit ] In one review, fasting improved alertness , mood , and subjective feelings of well-being, possibly improving overall symptoms of depression , and boosting cognitive performance.

[ 10 ] Weight loss [ edit ] Intermittent fasting [ edit ] Main article: Intermittent fasting There is little evidence to suggest that intermittent fasting for periods shorter than 24 hours is effective for sustained weight loss in obese adults.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Prolonged fasting [ edit ] Prolonged fasting (also called extended fasting or water fasting) involves periods of fasting above 24 hours, typically in the range of 5–20 days.

[ 13 ] In early fasting, the body operates under a relatively high level of gluconeogenesis , though this eventually decreases as the body's metabolism switches into ketosis , causing ketones to replace glucose as the primary energy source in the central nervous system .

[ 14 ] As prolonged fasting continues, drastic decreases in sodium , potassium , magnesium , and other minerals are noted, which can lead to hyponatremia .

[ 14 ] In some diet systems, these losses are offset with non-caloric electrolyte supplements, such as electrolyte beverages.

[ 15 ] Typical observed weight loss under prolonged fasting averages at 0.9 kg per day during the first week and 0.3 kg per day by the third week.

[ 14 ] In early fasting, during periods of high gluconeogenesis, roughly two-thirds of weight lost is lean muscle mass as opposed to fat.

[ 13 ] [ 16 ] After the gluconeogenic phase, however, the ratio of body fat lost to lean tissue lost becomes roughly 7:6.

[ 16 ] Longevity [ edit ] There is no sound clinical evidence that fasting can promote longevity in humans.

[ 17 ] Adverse effects [ edit ] Refeeding syndrome [ edit ] Main article: Refeeding syndrome Refeeding syndrome is a metabolic disturbance which occurs as a result of reinstitution of nutrition in people and animals who are starved , severely malnourished , or metabolically stressed because of severe illness. When too much food or liquid nutrition supplement is eaten during the initial four to seven days following a malnutrition event, the production of glycogen , fat and protein in cells may cause low serum concentrations of potassium , magnesium and phosphate .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The electrolyte imbalance may cause neurologic, pulmonary, cardiac, neuromuscular, and hematologic symptoms—many of which, if severe enough, may result in death.

Refeeding syndrome can occur when someone does not eat for several days at a time usually beginning after 4–5 days with no food.

[ 20 ] Gallstones [ edit ] Main article: Gallstone Fasting can increase the risk of developing gallstones for some people. This is thought to occur due to decreased gallbladder movement with no food to be digested, which can cause the bile to become over-concentrated with cholesterol, combined with the liver secreting extra cholesterol into bile as the body metabolizes fat during rapid weight loss, further exacerbating the situation.

[ 21 ] Political application [ edit ] Fasting is often used to make a political statement, to protest , or to bring awareness to a cause. A hunger strike is a method of non-violent resistance in which participants fast as an act of political protest, or to provoke feelings of guilt, or to achieve a goal such as a policy change. A spiritual fast incorporates personal spiritual beliefs with the desire to express personal principles, sometimes in the context of social injustice.

[ 22 ] The political leader Gandhi undertook several long fasts as political and social protests. Gandhi's fasts had a significant impact on the British Raj and the Indian population generally.

[ 23 ] In Northern Ireland in 1981, a prisoner, Bobby Sands , was part of the 1981 Irish hunger strike , protesting for better rights in prison.

[ 24 ] Sands had just been elected to the British Parliament and died after 66 days of not eating. 100,000 people attended his funeral, and the strike ended only after nine other men died. In all, ten men survived without food for 46 to 73 days.

The American civil rights activist César Chávez undertook several spiritual fasts, including a 25-day fast in 1968 promoting the principle of nonviolence and a fast of 'thanksgiving and hope' to prepare for pre-arranged civil disobedience by farm workers.

[ 22 ] [ 25 ] Chávez regarded a spiritual fast as "a personal spiritual transformation".

[ 26 ] Other progressive campaigns have adopted the tactic.

[ 27 ] Religious views [ edit ] Main article: Fasting in religion Fasting is practiced in various religions, and details of fasting practices differ.

Yom Kippur , Tisha B'av , Fast of Esther , Tzom Gedalia , the Seventeenth of Tamuz , the Tenth of Tevet , and Fast of the Firstborn are examples of fasting in Judaism .

[ 28 ] Yom Kippur and Tisha B'Av are 25-hour fasts in which observers abstain from consuming any food or liquid from sunset until nightfall the next day and include other restrictions. The fasts of Esther, Gedalia, Tamuz, and Tevet all last from dawn until nightfall and therefore length varies depending on the time of the year. The Fast of the Firstborn is not biblically mandated and can therefore be ended early in the case of a seudat mitzvah .

Lent is a common period of fasting in Christianity . In the Catholic Church, the current practice of fast and abstinence is regulated by Canons 1250–1253 of the 1983 code.

[ 29 ] They specify that all Fridays throughout the year, and the time of Lent are penitential times throughout the entire Church. All persons who have completed their fourteenth year are bound by the law of abstinence on all Fridays unless they are solemnities, and again on Ash Wednesday  and Good Friday. Fasting must be observed by those who have attained their majority, until the beginning of their sixtieth year. The precept to both fast and abstinence must be observed on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday . Certain communities of Lutheran Churches advocate fasting during designated times such as Lent, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] especially on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday.

[ 30 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] The rogation days are traditional days of fasting, as well as abstinence of meat, in Lutheranism.

[ 34 ] A Handbook for the Discipline of Lent delineates the following Lutheran fasting guidelines: [ 35 ] Fast on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday with only one simple meal during the day, usually without meat.

Refrain from eating meat (bloody foods) on all Fridays in Lent, substituting fish for example.

Eliminate a food or food group for the entire season. Especially consider saving rich and fatty foods for Easter.

Consider not eating before receiving Communion in Lent.

Abstain from or limit a favorite activity (television, movies, etc.) for the entire season, and spend more time in prayer, Bible study, and reading devotional material.

[ 35 ] In addition to the fasts mentioned above, Catholics must also observe the Eucharistic Fast, which in the Latin Church involves taking nothing but water or medicine into the body for one hour before receiving the Eucharist [ 36 ] . In Lutheranism, the Small Catechism , with regard to the Eucharistic Fast, states: "Fasting and bodily preparation are indeed a fine outward training".

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Though voluntary in Lutheranism, the Eucharistic Fast is kept from midnight until the reception of the Eucharist. Theologically, the "Eucharistic Fast is always in anticipation for the Eucharistic Feast, a reminder of the Last Day when all poverty is abolished, the necessity of fasting has ceased and every prayer answered as all of God's people celebrate the marriage supper of the Lamb." [ 39 ] Eastern Orthodox Christians fast during specified fasting seasons of the year, which include not only the better-known Great Lent , but also fasts on every Wednesday and Friday (except on special holidays), together with extended fasting periods before Christmas (the Nativity Fast ), after Easter (the Apostles' Fast ) and in early August (the Dormition Fast ).

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints generally abstain from food and drink for two consecutive meals in a 24-hour period, on the first Sunday of each month, and members are invited to donate the money they would have used for those meals to assist others in need (called a fast offering ).

[ 40 ] Muslims fast during the month of Ramadan each year. The fast includes refraining from consuming any food or liquid from dawn until sunset. It is a religious obligation for all Muslims unless they are children or are physically unable to fast.

Fasting is a feature of ascetic traditions in religions such as Hinduism and Buddhism .

Mahayana traditions that follow the Brahma's Net Sutra may recommend that the laity fast "during the six days of fasting each month and the three months of fasting each year".

[ 41 ] Members of the Baháʼí Faith observe a Nineteen Day Fast from sunrise to sunset during March each year.

In alternative medicine [ edit ] Although practitioners of alternative medicine promote " cleansing the body " through fasting, [ 42 ] (as though it were a diagnostic fast) the concept of "detoxification“ is a marketing myth with little scientific basis for its rationale or efficacy.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] During the early 20th century, fasting was promoted by alternative health writers such as Hereward Carrington , Edward H. Dewey , Bernarr Macfadden , Frank McCoy , Edward Earle Purinton , Upton Sinclair and Wallace Wattles .

[ 45 ] All of these writers were either involved in the natural hygiene or New Thought movement.

[ 45 ] Arnold Ehret 's pseudoscientific Mucusless Diet Healing System espoused fasting.

[ 46 ] Linda Hazzard , put her patients on such strict fasts that some of them died of starvation . She was responsible for the death of more than 40 patients under her care.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] In 1911, Upton Sinclair authored The Fasting Cure , which made sensational claims of fasting curing practically all diseases, including cancer and syphilis .

[ 49 ] Sinclair states he recommended fasting for all diseases except tuberculosis .

[ 50 ] Sinclair has been described as "the most credulous of faddists. In 1932, physician Morris Fishbein listed fasting as a fad diet and commented that "prolonged fasting is never necessary and invariably does harm".

[ 51 ] Types of fasting [ edit ] Type by religion [ edit ] Main article: Religious fasting Lent Great Lent Tenth of Tevet Seventeenth of Tamuz Fast of Gedalia Vrata Fast of Esther Tisha B'Av Yom Kippur Fast of the Firstborn Ramadan Nativity Fast Apostles Fast Dormition Fast Fasting in Buddhism Nineteen Day Fast Daniel Fast Black Fast Fasting in Jainism Type by method [ edit ] Electrolyte supplemented water fasting Dry fasting Juice fasting Water fasting Type by schedule [ edit ] Source: [ 52 ] Alternate day Eat: stop: eat Intermittent fasting One Meal A Day (OMAD)/Warrior diet Prolonged fasting The 16/8 or 14/10 The 40-days and 40-nights The 5:2 Type by motivation [ edit ] Autophagy Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder Calorie restriction Drunkorexia Hunger strike Inedia Insulin resistance management Longevity Sallekhana Weight loss See also [ edit ] Science portal Medicine portal Food portal Religion portal Asceticism Autophagy Black Fast Calorie restriction Fasting and longevity Fasting in Jainism Force-feeding Inedia Santhara Weight loss References [ edit ] ^ "fasting | Definition, Description, Types, Benefits, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 28 October 2021 .

^ Cioffi I, Evangelista A, Ponzo V, Ciccone G, Soldati L, Santarpia L, et al. (December 2018).

"Intermittent versus continuous energy restriction on weight loss and cardiometabolic outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials" .

Journal of Translational Medicine (Systematic review).

16 (1) 371.

doi : 10.1186/s12967-018-1748-4 .

PMC 6304782 .

PMID 30583725 .

^ Harris L, Hamilton S, Azevedo LB, Olajide J, De Brún C, Waller G, et al. (February 2018).

"Intermittent fasting interventions for treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis" (PDF) .

JBI Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports .

16 (2): 507– 547.

doi : 10.11124/JBISRIR-2016-003248 .

PMID 29419624 .

S2CID 46780578 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 October 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2019 .

^ Mattson MP, Longo VD, Harvie M (October 2017).

"Impact of intermittent fasting on health and disease processes" .

Ageing Research Reviews .

39 : 46– 58.

doi : 10.1016/j.arr.2016.10.005 .

PMC 5411330 .

PMID 27810402 .

^ Papamichou D, Panagiotakos DB, Itsiopoulos C (June 2019). "Dietary patterns and management of type 2 diabetes: A systematic review of randomised clinical trials".

Nutrition, Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Diseases (Systematic review).

29 (6): 531– 543.

doi : 10.1016/j.numecd.2019.02.004 .

PMID 30952576 .

S2CID 86497236 .

^ Patikorn, Chanthawat; Roubal, Kiera; Veettil, Sajesh K.; Chandran, Viji; Pham, Tuan; Lee, Yeong Yeh; Giovannucci, Edward L.; Varady, Krista A.; Chaiyakunapruk, Nathorn (17 December 2021).

"Intermittent fasting and obesity-related health outcomes: An umbrella review of meta-analyses of randomized clinical trials" .

JAMA Network Open .

4 (12): e2139558.

doi : 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.39558 .

ISSN 2574-3805 .

PMC 8683964 .

PMID 34919135 .

^ "Do You Need to Starve Before Surgery?" . Abcnews.go.com. 25 March 2009.

Archived from the original on 8 February 2011 . Retrieved 18 October 2010 .

^ Norman, Dr (17 April 2003).

"Fasting before surgery – Health & Wellbeing" . Abc.net.au.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2010 . Retrieved 18 October 2010 .

^ "Anesthesia Information (full edition) | From Yes They're Fake!" . Yestheyrefake.net. 1 January 1994. Archived from the original on 12 November 2010 . Retrieved 18 October 2010 .

^ Fond, G; MacGregor, A; Leboyer, M; Michalsen, A (2013).

"Fasting in mood disorders: Neurobiology and effectiveness. A review of the literature" .

Psychiatry Research .

209 (3): 253– 258.

doi : 10.1016/j.psychres.2012.12.018 .

PMID 23332541 .

S2CID 39700065 .

Archived from the original on 17 June 2018 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ Whitney, Eleanor Noss; Rolfes, Sharon Rady (2012).

Understanding Nutrition . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-1133587521 .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .

^ Anton, Stephen D; Moehl, Keelin; Donahoo, William T; et al. (2017).

"Flipping the Metabolic Switch: Understanding and Applying the Health Benefits of Fasting" .

Obesity .

26 (2): 254– 268.

doi : 10.1002/oby.22065 .

PMC 5783752 .

PMID 29086496 .

^ a b Ezpeleta, Mark; Cienfuegos, Sofia; Lin, Shuhao; Pavlou, Vasiliki; Gabel, Kelsey; Varady, Krista A. (12 April 2024).

"Efficacy and safety of prolonged water fasting: a narrative review of human trials" .

Nutrition Reviews .

82 (5): 664– 675.

doi : 10.1093/nutrit/nuad081 .

ISSN 1753-4887 .

PMC 11494232 .

PMID 37377031 .

^ a b c Kerndt, Peter R.; Naughton, James L.; Driscoll, Charles E.; Loxterkamp, David A. (November 1982).

"Fasting: The History, Pathophysiology and Complications" .

Western Journal of Medicine .

137 (5): 379– 399.

ISSN 0093-0415 .

PMC 1274154 .

PMID 6758355 .

^ "Snake Diet—What It Is and Why It's Dangerous" .

Health . Retrieved 29 September 2024 .

^ a b Cahill, G. F. (1983).

"President's address. Starvation" .

Transactions of the American Clinical and Climatological Association .

94 : 1– 21.

ISSN 0065-7778 .

PMC 2279566 .

PMID 6764569 .

^ Lee MB, Hill CM, Bitto A, Kaeberlein M (November 2021).

"Antiaging diets: Separating fact from fiction" .

Science .

374 (6570): eabe7365.

doi : 10.1126/science.abe7365 .

PMC 8841109 .

PMID 34793210 .

^ Mehanna HM, Moledina J, Travis J (June 2008).

"Refeeding syndrome: what it is, and how to prevent and treat it" .

BMJ .

336 (7659): 1495– 8.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.a301 .

PMC 2440847 .

PMID 18583681 .

^ Doig, GS; Simpson, F; Heighes; Bellomo, R; Chesher, D; Caterson, ID; Reade, MC; Harrigan, PWJ (1 December 2015). "Restricted versus continued standard caloric intake during the management of refeeding syndrome in critically ill adults: a randomised, parallel-group, multicentre, single-blind controlled trial".

The Lancet Respiratory Medicine .

3 (12): 943– 952.

doi : 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00418-X .

ISSN 2213-2619 .

PMID 26597128 .

^ Webb GJ, Smith K, Thursby-Pelham F, Smith T, Stroud MA, Da Silva AN (2011).

"Complications of emergency refeeding in anorexia nervosa: case series and review" .

Acute Medicine .

10 (2): 69– 76.

doi : 10.52964/AMJA.0470 .

PMID 22041604 .

^ "Dietary advice for patients with gallstones" .

Cambridge University Hospitals . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ a b Garcia, M. (2007) The Gospel of Cesar Chavez: My Faith in Action Sheed & Ward Publishing p. 103 ^ Harinarayanan, A. (1986).

"GANDHI'S FASTS : AN ANALYSIS (Summary)" .

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress .

47 : 696– 698.

ISSN 2249-1937 .

JSTOR 44141630 .

^ ON THIS DAY 1981: Violence erupts at Irish hunger strike protest Archived 17 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News ^ Shaw, R. (2008) Beyond the Fields: Cesar Chavez, the UFW, and the struggle for justice in the 21st century University of California Press, p.92 ^ Espinosa, G. Garcia, M Mexican American Religions:Spirituality activism and culture (2008) Duke University Press, p 108 ^ Shaw, R. (2008) Beyond the Fields: Cesar Chavez, the UFW, and the struggle for justice in the 21st century University of California Press, p.93 ^ "History of the Fast" . Archived from the original on 27 December 2014 . Retrieved 14 February 2016 .

^ "1983 Code of Canon Law" .

The Holy See . Archived from the original on 15 November 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2011 .

^ a b Gassmann, Günther; Oldenburg, Mark W. (10 October 2011).

Historical Dictionary of Lutheranism . Scarecrow Press. p. 229.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7482-4 .

In many Lutheran churches, the Sundays during the Lenten season are called by the first word of their respective Latin Introitus (with the exception of Palm/Passion Sunday): Invocavit, Reminiscere, Oculi, Laetare, and Judica. Many Lutheran church orders of the 16th century retained the observation of the Lenten fast, and Lutherans have observed this season with a serene, earnest attitude. Special days of eucharistic communion were set aside on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday.

^ What is the holiest season of the Church Year?

Archived 9 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 3 February 2010.

Archived copy at the Internet Archive ^ Pfatteicher, Philip H. (1990).

Commentary on the Lutheran Book of Worship: Lutheran Liturgy in Its Ecumenical Context . Augsburg Fortress Publishers. pp.

223– 244, 260.

ISBN 978-0-8006-0392-2 .

The Good Friday fast became the principal fast in the calendar, and even after the Reformation in Germany many Lutherans who observed no other fast scrupulously kept Good Friday with strict fasting.

^ Jacobs, Henry Eyster; Haas, John Augustus William (1899).

The Lutheran Cyclopedia . Scribner. p.

110 .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2010 . Retrieved 14 November 2019 .

By many Lutherans Good Friday is observed as a strict fast. The lessons on Ash Wednesday emphasize the proper idea of the fast. The Sundays in Lent receive their names from the first words of their Introits in the Latin service, Invocavit, Reminiscere, Oculi, Lcetare, Judica.

^ "Fasting Guidelines" (PDF) . Grace Evangelical Lutheran Church. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 June 2020 . Retrieved 5 July 2025 .

^ a b Weitzel, Thomas L. (1978).

"A Handbook for the Discipline of Lent" (PDF) . Evangelical Lutheran Church in America.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 March 2018 . Retrieved 17 March 2018 .

^ CIC 1983 , c. 919 .

^ Martin Luther .

"The Small Catechism" (PDF) .

Evangelical Lutheran Synod . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Preus, Klemet (8 January 2015).

"Communion Every Sunday: Surprise, Surprise" . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Ristau, Harold (2020).

"Tempted to fast? Fasting and feasting as the Body of Christ" . Lutheran Mission Australia . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ "The Law of the Fast" (PDF) .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Retrieved 7 October 2023 .

^ Brahma's Net Sutra, minor precept 30 ^ Russell, Sharman Apt; Russell, Sharman (1 August 2008).

Hunger: An Unnatural History . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0786722396 .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .

^ Porter, Sian (May 2016).

"Detox diets" (PDF) . British Dietetic Association.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 October 2016 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 .

The whole idea of detox is nonsense. The body is a well-developed system that has its own built-in mechanisms to detoxify and remove waste and toxins. Our body constantly filters out, breaks down and excretes toxins and waste products like alcohol, medications, products of digestion, dead cells, chemicals from pollution and bacteria ^ David Gorski (23 May 2011).

"Fashionably toxic" .

Science-Based Medicine .

Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 .

^ a b Griffith, R. Marie. (2000).

Apostles of Abstinence: Fasting and Masculinity during the Progressive Era .

American Quarterly 52 (4): 599-638.

^ Kuske, Terrence T. (1983).

Quackery and Fad Diets Archived 20 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine . In Elaine B. Feldman.

Nutrition in the Middle and Later Years . John Wright & Sons. pp. 291-303.

ISBN 0-7236-7046-3 ^ Hall, Harriett. (2016).

"Natural Medicine, Starvation, and Murder: The Story of Linda Hazzard" Archived 1 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Science-Based Medicine. Retrieved 1 May 2019.

^ "Linda Hazzard: The “Starvation Doctor”" Archived 1 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 1 May 2019.

^ Upton Sinclair, The Fasting Cure (New York: Mitchell Kennerley, 1911), p. 44.

^ Sinclair, The Fasting Cure , p. 44.

^ Fishbein, Morris. (1932).

Fads and Quackery in Healing: An Analysis of the Foibles of the Healing Cults . New York: Covici Friede. p. 253 ^ "Intermittent Fasting: How It Works" .

Cleveland Clinic . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] Code of Canon Law (CIC) , Rome: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 4 November 2003 [1983] .

Further reading [ edit ] Francis Gano Benedict . (1915).

A Study of Prolonged Fasting . Carnegie Institution of Washington.

Bossuet, Jacques-Bénigne (1900).

"Day 28: Of Fasting" .

The Sermon on the Mount . Longmans, Green, and Co.

Joan Jacobs Brumberg . (1988).

Fasting Girls: The Emergence of Anorexia Nervosa As a Modern Disease . Harvard University Press.

Caroline Walker Bynum . (1987).

Holy Feast and Holy Fast: The Religious Significance of Food to Medieval Women . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-06329-7 John Arthur Glaze. (1928).

Psychological Effects of Fasting .

American Journal of Psychology 40 (2): 236–253.

A. M. Johnstone. (2007).

Fasting – the ultimate diet?

.

Obesity Reviews 8 (3): 211–222.

Walter Vandereycken, Ron Van Deth. (2001).

From Fasting Saints to Anorexic Girls: The History of Self-Starvation . Bloomsbury Academic.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fasting .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Fasting .

"Fasting" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

193– 198.

"Fast" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

O'Neill, James David (1909).

"Fast" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 5.

v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Synagogal Judaism Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Zionism Population Assimilation Atheists Buddhists Israeli Jews Karaites Samaritans Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Xueta Christianity Zionism, race and genetics Gentile Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites Diaspora Ashkenazim Afrikaner-Jode Chuts Galitzianers Lita'im Oberlander Jews Ostjuden Udmurt and Tatar Jews Unterlander Jews Yekkes Beta Israel Beta Abraham Falash Mura Desi Jews Bene Israel Kochinim Dönmeh Gruzínim Italkim Neofiti Kaifeng Jews Karaites Constantinopolitan Karaites Crimean Karaites Kurdish Jews Krymchaks Lemba Maghrebi Berber Jews Mizrahi Afghan Jews Alexandrian Jews Baghdadi Bukharan Jews Egyptian Jews Mountain Jews Palestinian Jews Persian Jews Urfalim Teimanim Adeni Jews Ḥabbanim Hadhrami Jews Saada Jews Mustaʿravim Jewish tribes of Arabia Romaniote Sephardim Eastern Sephardim Livornese Jews North African Sephardim Paradesi Meshuchrarim Sephardic Bnei Anusim Xuetes Languages ( Diasporic ) Hebrew Modern Ashkenazi Sephardi Mizrahi Yemenite Tiberian Samaritan Signed Medieval Mishnaic Biblical Babylonian Palestinian Catalanic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Yahudic Judeo-Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Judeo-Yemeni Judaeo-Aramaic Targum Barzani Betanure Hulaulá Lishana Deni Lishán Didán Lishanid Noshan Biblical Talmudic Palestinian Galilean Judeo-Aragonese Jewish English Yeshivish Yinglish Heblish Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Greek Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Judeo-Latin Judeo-Malay Judeo-Malayalam Judeo-Marathi Judaeo-Occitan Judeo-Persian Bukhori Judeo-Borujerdi Judeo-Golpaygani Judeo-Hamedani Judeo-Shirazi Juhuri Judaeo-Portuguese Judeo-Urdu Karaim Kayliñña Kivruli Knaanic Koiné Greek Krymchak Lachoudisch Ladino Haketia Tetuani Lotegorisch Qwareña Shassagh Shassi Shuadit Yiddish dialects Eastern Galitzish Litvish Poylish Klezmer-loshn Western Judeo-Alsatian Lachoudisch Scots-Yiddish Zarphatic Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Rabbinic authority Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics Holiness God Names of God Halakha Haskalah Kabbalah Sefirot Land of Israel Who is a Jew?

Branches Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Litvaks Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Neo-Hasidism Renewal Neolog relations Haymanot Hellenistic Karaite Samaritanism Science Secularism Schisms Literature Sifrei Kodesh Tanakh /Hebrew Bible Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Hekhalot literature Pardes Rimonim Sefer HaBahir Sefer HaEtz Chaim Sefer Raziel HaMalakh Sefer Yetzirah Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Astrology perspectives Monen Astronomy Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Rebbe Marriage Divorce Music Mythology Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other religions Christian Anabaptism Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Jews and Christmas Jews and Halloween non-Christian Buddhism Islam Hinduism Italics indicate extinct languages Category Judaism portal v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Fad diets Food-specific diets Alkaline diet Banana and skimmed milk diet Cabbage soup diet Carnivore diet Clean eating Cookie diet Egg and wine diet Food combining Beverly Hills Diet Hay diet Fit for Life Fruitarianism Gluten-free diet Grape diet Grapefruit diet High-protein diet Lamb chop and pineapple diet Lectin-free diet Macrobiotic diet Milk diet Monotrophic diet Morning banana diet Mucusless Diet Mushroom diet No-Aging Diet Paleolithic diet Pegan diet Potato diet Raw foodism Raw veganism Rhubarb diet Superfood Uric-acid free diet Whole30 Low-carbohydrate / high-fat diets Atkins diet Banting diet Bulletproof diet Calories Don't Count Drinking Man's Diet Dukan Diet Eat and Grow Thin Hal Huggins diet Hamptons Diet Kimkins Kordel diet Montignac diet Salisbury diet Scarsdale diet Slimming for the Million South Beach Diet Pioppi Diet Protein Power Rosedale diet Stillman diet Strong Medicine Sugar Busters!

The 4-Hour Body The Cruise Control Diet Wahls Protocol Diet Wheat Belly diet Zone diet High-carbohydrate / low-fat diets Engine 2 Diet F-plan McDougall diet Ornish diet Nutritarian diet Pritikin diet Rice diet The Good Carbohydrate Revolution The Thrive Diet Detoxification / fasting 5:2 diet Activated charcoal cleanse Breatharianism Breuss diet Celery juice diet Chase Dietary Method Detox diet Dubrow Diet Eliminating Diet Enzyme-Catalyst Diet Fasting mimicking diet Fat Flush Plan Hippocrates Diet Intermittent fasting Time-restricted feeding Juice fasting KE diet Master Cleanse No Breakfast Plan Orthopathy Protein-sparing modified fast The Fast Way To Health The Last Chance Diet Wheatgrass diet Wigmore diet Other Blood type diet Budwig diet Cotton ball diet Fletcherism Hallelujah Diet Hip and Thigh Diet Immune Power Diet Maker's Diet Seed cycling Sensa diet Swank diet Tongue Patch Diet The Cambridge Diet Very-low-calorie diet Werewolf diet Related List of fad diets List of food faddists Pseudoscience Quackery Seed oil misinformation Category Commons v t e Naturopathy Practices Acupuncture Apitherapy Aromatherapy Balneotherapy Barefoot running Bates method Chelation therapy Chromotherapy Chiropractic Colon cleansing Ear candling Fasting Grape therapy Halotherapy Hydrotherapy Naturism Herbalism Homeopathy Iridology Mud bathing Nature therapy Oil pulling Ozone therapy Reflexology Reiki Rolfing Sungazing Urine therapy Yoga as therapy Naturopaths Otto Abramowski Bertrand P. Allinson Thomas Allinson R. F. E. Austin J. Ellis Barker Fereydoon Batmanghelidj Robert Bell Harry Benjamin Henry G. Bieler Friedrich Eduard Bilz Carlos Brandt Rudolf Breuss Haydn Brown James Burns Stanley Burroughs Otto Carque Paul Carton Thierry Casasnovas Eugene Christian John Christopher Hulda Regehr Clark Victor Dane Emmet Densmore Kurt Donsbach George J. Drews Anna Fischer-Dückelmann Gaston Durville Arnold Ehret August Engelhardt St. Louis Estes Emanuel Felke Jesse Mercer Gehman Theodor Hahn Gayelord Hauser Adolphus Hohensee J. Stenson Hooker Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland Archibald Hunter Adolf Just Hans Kalm Henry Valentine Knaggs Sebastian Kneipp Louis Kuhne Heinrich Lahmann Gordon Latto Eric Ledermann Elmer Lee Henry Lindlahr Evarts G. Loomis Philip M. Lovell Benedict Lust Reddie Mallett Jacques de Marquette Catherine Nimmo Ernest Nyssens Cyril V. Pink Eric F. W. Powell Vincenz Priessnitz Edward Earle Purinton Andrea Rabagliati Arnold Rikli J. P. Sandlands Edgar J. Saxon Gustav Schlickeysen Johann Schroth Ernst Schweninger Herbert M. Shelton John Henry Tilden Russell Thacher Trall Frank Newman Turner Alfred Vogel Ann Wigmore Arno Wolle Robert O. Young Beliefs Detoxification Germ theory denialism Holism Leaky gut syndrome Mucoid plaque Natural hygiene Vaccine hesitancy Vitalism Critics Kimball Atwood Stephen Barrett Barry Beyerstein Arthur J. Cramp David Gorski Martin Gardner Morris Fishbein Britt Marie Hermes Terence Hines Carl Malmberg Steven Novella Wallace Sampson Related Alternative medicine Pseudoscience Quackery Category Commons v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐66xgc
Cached time: 20250814215200
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.354 seconds
Real time usage: 1.689 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6406/1000000
Revision size: 36107/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 377235/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3208/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 242570/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.728/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24757297/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1132.920      1 -total
 35.24%  399.209      1 Template:Reflist
 19.58%  221.831      1 Template:Christianity_footer
 15.39%  174.314     17 Template:Cite_web
 10.28%  116.439     15 Template:Cite_journal
 10.22%  115.732      1 Template:Lang
  6.62%   74.948      1 Template:Short_description
  5.76%   65.265      1 Template:1983CIC
  5.49%   62.158      2 Template:Sister_project
  5.43%   61.561      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:187886:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215200 and revision id 1305882881. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fasting&oldid=1305882881 " Categories : Fasting Asceticism Biologically based therapies Diets Eating behaviors Fad diets Naturopathy Religious food and drink Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 16:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fasting 103 languages Add topic

