Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Defining Post-Impressionism Toggle Defining Post-Impressionism subsection 2.1 Reviews and adjustments 3 Post-Impression in specific countries Toggle Post-Impression in specific countries subsection 3.1 Canada 3.1.1 Canadian artists and exhibitions 4 Gallery of major Post-Impressionist artists 5 See also 6 References and sources Toggle References and sources subsection 6.1 References 6.2 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Post-Impressionism 69 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Seeltersk Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Predominantly French art movement, 1886–1905 Post-Impressionism From top to bottom: Henri Rousseau , The Centenary of Independence , 1892, Getty Center , Los Angeles Paul Cézanne , Les Joueurs de cartes , Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York Additional media Years active 1886 - 1905 Location France Major figures Émile Bernard , Paul Cézanne , Paul Gauguin , Vincent van Gogh , Henri Rousseau , Georges Seurat Influences Impressionism Influenced Fauvism , Expressionism Post-Impressionism (also spelled Postimpressionism ) was a predominantly French art movement that developed roughly between 1886 and 1905, from the last Impressionist exhibition to the birth of Fauvism . Post-Impressionism emerged as a reaction against Impressionists' concern for the naturalistic depiction of light and colour. Its broad emphasis on abstract qualities or symbolic content means Post-Impressionism encompasses Les Nabis , Neo-Impressionism , Symbolism , Cloisonnism , the Pont-Aven School , and Synthetism , along with some later Impressionists' work. The movement's principal artists were Paul Cézanne (known as the father of Post-Impressionism), Paul Gauguin , Vincent van Gogh and Georges Seurat .

[ 1 ] The term Post-Impressionism was first used by art critic Roger Fry in 1906.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Critic Frank Rutter in a review of the Salon d'Automne published in Art News , 15 October 1910, described Othon Friesz as a "post-impressionist leader"; there was also an advert for the show The Post-Impressionists of France .

[ 4 ] Three weeks later, Roger Fry used the term again when he organised the 1910 exhibition Manet and the Post-Impressionists , defining it as the development of French art since Édouard Manet .

Post-Impressionists extended Impressionism while rejecting its limitations: they continued using vivid colours, sometimes using impasto (thick application of paint) and painting from life, but were more inclined to emphasize geometric forms, distort form for expressive effect, and use unnatural or modified colour.

Overview [ edit ] The Post-Impressionists were dissatisfied with what they felt was the triviality of subject matter and the loss of structure in Impressionist paintings, though they did not agree on the way forward.

Georges Seurat and his followers concerned themselves with pointillism , the systematic use of tiny dots of colour.

Paul Cézanne set out to restore a sense of order and structure to painting, to "make of Impressionism something solid and durable, like the art of the museums".

[ 5 ] He achieved this by reducing objects to their basic shapes while retaining the saturated colours of Impressionism. The Impressionist Camille Pissarro experimented with Neo-Impressionist ideas between the mid-1880s and the early 1890s. Discontented with what he referred to as romantic Impressionism, he investigated pointillism , which he called scientific Impressionism, before returning to a purer Impressionism in the last decade of his life.

[ 6 ] Vincent van Gogh often used vibrant colour and conspicuous brushstrokes to convey his feelings and his state of mind.

Although they often exhibited together, Post-Impressionist artists were not in agreement concerning a cohesive movement. Yet, the abstract concerns of harmony and structural arrangement, in the work of all these artists, took precedence over naturalism . Artists such as Seurat adopted a meticulously scientific approach to colour and composition.

[ 7 ] Defining Post-Impressionism [ edit ] Poster of the 1889 Exhibition of Paintings by the Impressionist and Synthetist Group , at Café des Arts, known as The Volpini Exhibition, 1889 Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec , Portrait of Émile Bernard , 1886, Tate Gallery London The term was used in 1906, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and again in 1910 by Roger Fry in the title of an exhibition of modern French painters: Manet and the Post-Impressionists , organized by Fry for the Grafton Galleries in London.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Three weeks before Fry's show, art critic Frank Rutter had put the term Post-Impressionist in print in Art News of 15 October 1910, during a review of the Salon d'Automne , where he described Othon Friesz as a "post-impressionist leader"; there was also an advert in the journal for the show The Post-Impressionists of France .

[ 4 ] Most of the artists in Fry's exhibition were younger than the Impressionists. Fry later explained: "For purposes of convenience, it was necessary to give these artists a name, and I chose, as being the vaguest and most non-committal, the name of Post-Impressionism. This merely stated their position in time relatively to the Impressionist movement." [ 9 ] John Rewald limited the scope to the years between 1886 and 1892 in his pioneering publication on Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin (1956). Rewald considered this a continuation of his 1946 study, History of Impressionism , and pointed out that a "subsequent volume dedicated to the second half of the post-impressionist period": [ 10 ] Post-Impressionism: From Gauguin to Matisse , was to follow. This volume would extend the period covered to other artistic movements derived from Impressionism, though confined to the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Rewald focused on such outstanding early Post-Impressionists active in France as van Gogh , Gauguin , Seurat , and Redon . He explored their relationships as well as the artistic circles they frequented (or were in opposition to), including: Neo-Impressionism : ridiculed by contemporary art critics as well as artists as Pointillism ; Seurat and Signac would have preferred other terms: Divisionism for example Cloisonnism : a short-lived term introduced in 1888 by the art critic Édouard Dujardin , was to promote the work of Louis Anquetin , and was later also applied to contemporary works of his friend Émile Bernard Synthetism : another short-lived term coined in 1889 to distinguish recent works of Gauguin and Bernard from that of more traditional Impressionists exhibiting with them at the Café Volpini .

Pont-Aven School : implying little more than that the artists involved had been working for a while in Pont-Aven or elsewhere in Brittany.

Symbolism : a term highly welcomed by vanguard critics in 1891, when Gauguin dropped Synthetism as soon as he was acclaimed to be the leader of Symbolism in painting.

Furthermore, in his introduction to Post-Impressionism, Rewald opted for a second volume featuring Toulouse-Lautrec , Henri Rousseau "le Douanier", Les Nabis and Cézanne as well as the Fauves , the young Picasso and Gauguin's last trip to the South Seas ; it was to expand the period covered at least into the first decade of the 20th century—yet this second volume remained unfinished.

Camille Pissarro , Haying at Eragny, 1889, Private Collection Reviews and adjustments [ edit ] Rewald wrote that "the term 'Post-Impressionism' is not a very precise one, though a very convenient one"; convenient, when the term is by definition limited to French visual arts derived from Impressionism since 1886.  Rewald's approach to historical data was narrative rather than analytic, and beyond this point he believed it would be sufficient to "let the sources speak for themselves." [ 10 ] Rival terms like Modernism or Symbolism were never as easy to handle, for they covered literature, architecture and other arts as well, and they expanded to other countries.

Modernism , thus, is now considered to be the central movement within international western civilization with its original roots in France, going back beyond the French Revolution to the Age of Enlightenment .

Symbolism , however, is considered to be a concept which emerged a century later in France, and implied an individual approach. Local national traditions as well as individual settings therefore could stand side by side, and from the very beginning a broad variety of artists practicing some kind of symbolic imagery, ranged between extreme positions: The Nabis for example united to find synthesis of tradition and brand new form, while others kept to traditional, more or less academic forms, when they were looking for fresh contents: Symbolism is therefore often linked to fantastic, esoteric, erotic and other non-realist subject matter.

To meet the recent discussion, the connotations of the term 'Post-Impressionism' were challenged again: Alan Bowness and his collaborators expanded the period covered forward to 1914 and the beginning of World War I , but limited their approach widely on the 1890s to France. Other European countries are pushed back to standard connotations, and Eastern Europe is completely excluded.

In Germany, it was Paul Baum and Carl Schmitz-Pleis who, in retrospect, provided the decisive impetus.

[ 11 ] So, while a split may be seen between classical 'Impressionism' and 'Post-Impressionism' in 1886, the end and the extent of 'Post-Impressionism' remains under discussion. For Bowness and his contributors as well as for Rewald, ' Cubism ' was an absolutely fresh start, and so Cubism has been seen in France since the beginning, and later in England. Meanwhile, Eastern European artists, however, did not care so much for western traditions, and proceeded to manners of painting called abstract and suprematic —terms expanding far into the 20th century.

According to the present state of discussion, Post-Impressionism is a term best used within Rewald's definition in a strictly historical manner, concentrating on French art between 1886 and 1914, and re-considering the altered positions of impressionist painters like Claude Monet , Camille Pissarro , Auguste Renoir , and others—as well as all new schools and movements at the turn of the century: from Cloisonnism to Cubism . The declarations of war, in July/August 1914, indicate probably far more than the beginning of a World War —they signal a major break in European cultural history, too.

Along with general art history information given about "Post-Impressionism" works, there are many museums that offer additional history, information and gallery works, both online and in house, that can help viewers understand a deeper meaning of "Post-Impressionism" in terms of fine art and traditional art applications.

Post-Impression in specific countries [ edit ] The Advent of Modernism: Post-impressionism and North American Art, 1900-1918 by Peter Morrin, Judith Zilczer, and William C. Agee , the catalogue for an exhibition at the High Museum of Art , Atlanta in 1986, gave a major overview of Post-Impressionism in North America .

Canada [ edit ] Canadian Post-Impressionism is an offshoot of Post-Impressionism.

[ 12 ] In 1913, the Art Association of Montreal's Spring show included the work of Randolph Hewton , A. Y. Jackson and John Lyman : it was reviewed with sharp criticism by the Montreal Daily Witness and the Montreal Daily Star .

[ 13 ] Post-Impressionism was extended to include a painting by Lyman, who had studied with Matisse .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Lyman wrote in defence of the term and defined it. He referred to the British show which he described as a great exhibition of modern art.

[ 16 ] Canadian artists and exhibitions [ edit ] A wide and diverse variety of artists are called by this name in Canada. Among them are James Wilson Morrice , [ 17 ] John Lyman , [ 18 ] David Milne , [ 19 ] and Tom Thomson , [ 20 ] members of the Group of Seven , [ 21 ] and Emily Carr .

[ 22 ] In 2001, the Robert McLaughlin Gallery in Oshawa organized the travelling exhibition The Birth of the Modern: Post-Impressionism in Canada, 1900-1920 .

Gallery of major Post-Impressionist artists [ edit ] Odilon Redon (1840–1916) Henri Rousseau (1844–1910) Paul Gauguin (1848–1903) Vincent van Gogh (1853–1890) Charles Angrand (1854–1926) Henri-Edmond Cross (1856–1910) Maximilien Luce (1858–1941) Georges Seurat (1859–1891) Eugène Chigot (1860-1923) René Schützenberger (1860–1916) Marius Borgeaud (1861–1924) Charles Laval (1862–1894) Théo van Rysselberghe (1862–1926) Paul Signac (1863–1935) Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (1864–1901) Paul Sérusier (1864–1927) Robert Deborne (1870–1944) Paul Ranson (1864–1909) Georges Lemmen (1865–1916) Félix Vallotton (1865–1925) Pierre Bonnard (1867–1947) Édouard Vuillard (1868–1940) Émile Bernard (1868–1941) Maurice Denis (1870–1943) Carl-Schmitz-Pleis (1877– 1943) Robert Antoine Pinchon (1886–1943) See also [ edit ] Periods in Western art history Cubism Kapists Neo-impressionism Expressionism Fauvism History of painting Western painting References and sources [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ Metropolitan Museum of Art Timeline, Post-Impressionism ^ a b Brettell, Richard R.; Brettell, Richard (March 31, 1999).

Modern Art, 1851-1929: Capitalism and Representation . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780192842206 – via Google Books.

^ a b Peter Morrin, Judith Zilczer, William C. Agee, The Advent of Modernism. Post-Impressionism and North American Art, 1900-1918 , High Museum of Art, 1986 ^ a b Bullen, J. B.

Post-impressionists in England , p.37. Routledge, 1988.

ISBN 0-415-00216-8 , ISBN 978-0-415-00216-5 ^ Huyghe, Rene: Impressionism . (1973). Secaucus, N.J.: Chartwell Books Inc., p. 222.

OCLC 153804642 ^ Cogniat, Raymond (1975). Pissarro. New York: Crown, pp. 69–72.

ISBN 0-517-52477-5 .

^ a b "The Collection | MoMA" .

The Museum of Modern Art .

^ Grafton Galleries, London (March 31, 1910).

"Manet and the post-impressionists; Nov. 8th to Jan. 15th, 1910-11... (under revision)" . London : Ballantyne – via Internet Archive.

^ Gowing, Lawrence (2005).

Facts on File Encyclopedia of Art : 5. New York: Facts on File, p. 804.

ISBN 0-8160-5802-4 ^ a b Rewald, John: Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin , revised edition: Secker & Warburg, London, 1978, p. 9.

^ Christie's Review of the Season . 1986, p. 11.

^ Murray, Joan (2001).

The Birth of the Modern: Post-Impressionism in Canadian Art . Oshawa: Robert McLaughlin Gallery. p. 16 . Retrieved 25 July 2022 .

^ Murray 2001 , pp. 15–16.

^ Lyman, John.

"Adieux, Matisse" .

Canadian Art .

12 (2 (Winter 1955)): 44– 46 . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

^ Murray 2001 , pp. 143–144.

^ Murray 2001 , p. 16.

^ Murray 2001 , p. 117ff.

^ Murray 2001 , pp. 83–84, 143–144.

^ Murray 2001 , p. 111ff.

^ Murray 2001 , p. 133ff.

^ Murray 2001 , pp. 61ff, 78ff, 81ff etc..

^ Murray 2001 , p. 50ff.

Sources [ edit ] Bowness, Alan, et alt.: Post-Impressionism. Cross-Currents in European Painting , Royal Academy of Arts & Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London 1979 ISBN 0-297-77713-0 Further reading [ edit ] Manet and the Post-Impressionists (exh. cat. by R. Fry and D. MacCarthy, London, Grafton Gals, 1910–11) The Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition (exh. cat. by R. Fry, London, Grafton Gals, 1912) J. Rewald.

Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin (New York, 1956, rev. 3/1978) F. Elgar.

The Post-Impressionists (Oxford, 1977) Post-Impressionism: Cross-currents in European Painting (exh. cat., ed. J. House and M. A. Stevens; London, RA, 1979–80) B. Thomson.

The Post-Impressionists (Oxford and New York, 1983, rev. 2/1990) J. Rewald.

Studies in Post-Impressionism (London, 1986) Beyond Impressionism , exhibit at Columbus Museum of Art, October 21, 2017 – January 21, 2018 Beyond Impressionism Exhibition at Columbus Museum of Art External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Post-Impressionism .

"Post-Impressionists" , Walter Sickert's review in The Fortnightly Review of the "Manet and the Post-Impressionists" exhibition at the Grafton Galleries "Post-Impressionism" , Roger Fry's lecture on the closing of the "Manet and the Post-Impressionists" exhibition at the Grafton Galleries, as published in The Fortnightly Review Georges Seurat, 1859–1891 , a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Toulouse-Lautrec in the Metropolitan Museum of Art , a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art "Roger Fry, Walter Sickert and Post-Impressionism at the Grafton Galleries" , a reflection by Marnin Young on the 1910–1911 exhibition v t e Post-Impressionism 19th-century movements Neo-Impressionism Divisionism Pointillism Cloisonnism Les Nabis Synthetism Symbolism Art Nouveau Artists Cuno Amiet Charles Angrand Émile Bernard Edvard Munch Pierre Bonnard Marius Borgeaud Paul Cézanne Henri-Edmond Cross Maurice Denis Georges Dufrénoy Paul Gauguin Hippolyte Petitjean Paul Ranson Odilon Redon Henri Rousseau René Schützenberger Paul Sérusier Georges Seurat Paul Signac Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec Charles Laval Georges Lemmen Maximilien Luce Vincent van Gogh Théo van Rysselberghe Félix Vallotton Édouard Vuillard 20th-century movements Fauvism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Expressionism Cubism Artists Georges Braque Charles Camoin André Derain Raoul Dufy Henri Matisse Albert Gleizes Ernst Ludwig Kirchner Karl Schmidt-Rottluff Wassily Kandinsky Sonia Lewitska Franz Marc Jean Metzinger Henry Ottmann Francis Picabia Pablo Picasso Robert Antoine Pinchon Henriette Tirman Jean Marchand Othon Friesz Exhibitions Artistes Indépendants Les XX Volpini Exhibition Le Barc de Boutteville La Libre Esthétique Ambroise Vollard Salon d'Automne Salon des Indépendants Salon des Cent Salon des Tuileries Critics Félix Fénéon Albert Aurier Related Impressionism Modernism Modern art Secessionism v t e Impressionism Originators Frédéric Bazille Eugène Boudin Gustave Caillebotte Mary Cassatt Paul Cézanne Edgar Degas Armand Guillaumin Johan Jongkind Édouard Manet Claude Monet Berthe Morisot Camille Pissarro Pierre-Auguste Renoir Alfred Sisley Patrons Gustave Caillebotte Victor Chocquet Henry O. Havemeyer Ernest Hoschedé Dealers Paul Durand-Ruel Georges Petit Ambroise Vollard Exhibitions First Impressionist Exhibition American artists William Merritt Chase Frederick Carl Frieseke Childe Hassam Alphonse Maureau Willard Metcalf Lilla Cabot Perry Theodore Robinson Walter Elmer Schofield John Henry Twachtman Robert Vonnoh J. Alden Weir Australian artists Charles Conder E. Phillips Fox Elioth Gruner Frederick McCubbin Tom Roberts John Russell Arthur Streeton Walter Withers Canadian artists Henri Beau William Blair Bruce William Brymner Marc-Aurèle de Foy Suzor-Coté Maurice Cullen Helen Galloway McNicoll James Wilson Morrice Laura Muntz Lyall Robert Wakeham Pilot Other artists Eugène Baudouin Olga Boznańska Marie Bracquemond Giovanni Battista Ciolina Lovis Corinth Eva Gonzalès Antoine Guillemet Nazmi Ziya Güran Dominique Lang Max Liebermann Konstantin Korovin Martín Malharro Henry Moret Francisco Oller Nadežda Petrović Władysław Podkowiński Valentin Serov Max Slevogt Joaquín Sorolla Philip Wilson Steer Eliseu Visconti Other media Music Literature French impressionist cinema See also Amsterdam Impressionism Boston School California Impressionism Decorative Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Pennsylvania Impressionism Post-Impressionism Synthetic impressionism The Ten Related Wilfrid de Glehn The Impressionists (2006 TV series) Louis Leroy Nadar Pays des Impressionnistes v t e Nabis Painters Pierre Bonnard Maurice Denis Maxime Dethomas Meijer de Haan Hermann-Paul Henri-Gabriel Ibels Georges Lacombe Aristide Maillol Paul Ranson Ker-Xavier Roussel Paul Sérusier Félix Vallotton Jan Verkade Édouard Vuillard Paintings The Talisman (1888) The Seamstress (1893) Toulouse-Lautrec Cooking (1898) Homage to Cézanne (1900) Related L'Estampe originale Intimism Lugné-Poe Post-Impressionism v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-Impressionism&oldid=1297036578 " Categories : Post-Impressionism Modernism Art movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 20:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Post-Impressionism 69 languages Add topic

