Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient and medieval philosophy 1.2 Modern philosophy 1.3 Contemporary philosophy 1.4 Etymology 2 Description 3 Providing assumptions required for science 4 Methodological naturalism Toggle Methodological naturalism subsection 4.1 Views on methodological naturalism 4.1.1 W. V. O. Quine 4.1.2 Karl Popper 4.1.3 Alvin Plantinga 4.1.4 Robert T. Pennock 4.1.5 Mousavirad 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 References 6.3 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Naturalism (philosophy) 53 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy Nederlands Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief that only natural laws and forces operate in the universe This article is about the philosophical view. For other uses, see Naturalism (disambiguation) .

Double rainbow at Yosemite National Park . According to naturalism, the causes of all phenomena are to be found within the universe and not transcendental factors beyond it.

In philosophy , naturalism is the idea that only natural laws and forces (as opposed to supernatural ones) operate in the universe .

[ 1 ] In its primary sense, [ 2 ] it is also known as ontological naturalism , metaphysical naturalism , pure naturalism , philosophical naturalism and antisupernaturalism .   "Ontological" refers to ontology , the philosophical study of what exists. Philosophers often treat naturalism as equivalent to physicalism or materialism , but there are important distinctions between the philosophies.

For example, philosopher Paul Kurtz argued that nature is best accounted for by reference to material principles. These principles include mass , energy , and other physical and chemical properties accepted by the scientific community . Further, this sense of naturalism holds that spirits, deities , and ghosts are not real and that there is no " purpose " in nature as in dysteleology . This stronger formulation of naturalism is commonly referred to as metaphysical naturalism .

[ 3 ] On the other hand, the more moderate view that naturalism should be assumed in one's working methods as the current paradigm, without any further consideration of whether naturalism is true in the robust metaphysical sense, is called methodological naturalism .

[ 4 ] With the exception of pantheists – who believe that nature is identical with divinity while not recognizing a distinct personal anthropomorphic god – theists challenge the idea that nature contains all of reality. According to some theists, natural laws may be viewed as secondary causes of God(s).

In the 20th century, Willard Van Orman Quine , George Santayana , and other philosophers argued that the success of naturalism in science meant that scientific methods should also be used in philosophy. According to this view, science and philosophy are not always distinct from one another, but instead form a continuum .

"Naturalism is not so much a special system as a point of view or tendency common to a number of philosophical and religious systems; not so much a well-defined set of positive and negative doctrines as an attitude or spirit pervading and influencing many doctrines. As the name implies, this tendency consists essentially in looking upon nature as the one original and fundamental source of all that exists, and in attempting to explain everything in terms of nature. Either the limits of nature are also the limits of existing reality, or at least the first cause, if its existence is found necessary , has nothing to do with the working of natural agencies. All events, therefore, find their adequate explanation within nature itself. But, as the terms nature and natural are themselves used in more than one sense, the term naturalism is also far from having one fixed meaning".

— Dubray 1911 History [ edit ] See also: History of materialism and History of metaphysical realism Ancient and medieval philosophy [ edit ] Naturalism is most notably a Western phenomenon, but an equivalent idea has long existed in the East . Naturalism was the foundation of two out of six orthodox schools and one heterodox school of Hinduism.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Samkhya , one of the oldest schools of Indian philosophy puts nature ( Prakriti ) as the primary cause of the universe, without assuming the existence of a personal God or Ishvara .  The Carvaka , Nyaya , Vaisheshika schools originated in the 7th, 6th, and 2nd century BCE, respectively.

[ 7 ] Similarly, though unnamed and never articulated into a coherent system, one tradition within Confucian philosophy embraced a form of Naturalism dating to the Wang Chong in the 1st century, if not earlier, but it arose independently and had little influence on the development of modern naturalist philosophy or on Eastern or Western culture.

Ancient Roman mosaic showing Anaximander , a contributor to naturalism in ancient Greek philosophy Western metaphysical naturalism originated in ancient Greek philosophy . The earliest pre-Socratic philosophers , especially the Milesians ( Thales , Anaximander , and Anaximenes ) and the atomists ( Leucippus and Democritus ), were labeled by their peers and successors "the physikoi " (from the Greek φυσικός or physikos , meaning "natural philosopher" borrowing on the word φύσις or physis , meaning "nature") because they investigated natural causes, often excluding any role for gods in the creation or operation of the world. This eventually led to fully developed systems such as Epicureanism , which sought to explain everything that exists as the product of atoms falling and swerving in a void.

[ 8 ] Aristotle surveyed the thought of his predecessors and conceived of nature in a way that charted a middle course between their excesses.

[ 9 ] Plato's world of eternal and unchanging Forms , imperfectly represented in matter by a divine Artisan , contrasts sharply with the various mechanistic Weltanschauungen , of which atomism was, by the fourth century at least, the most prominent … This debate was to persist throughout the ancient world. Atomistic mechanism got a shot in the arm from Epicurus … while the Stoics adopted a divine teleology … The choice seems simple: either show how a structured, regular world could arise out of undirected processes, or inject intelligence into the system. This was how Aristotle… when still a young acolyte of Plato, saw matters.

Cicero … preserves Aristotle's own cave-image : if troglodytes were brought on a sudden into the upper world, they would immediately suppose it to have been intelligently arranged. But Aristotle grew to abandon this view; although he believes in a divine being, the Prime Mover is not the efficient cause of action in the Universe, and plays no part in constructing or arranging it … But, although he rejects the divine Artificer, Aristotle does not resort to a pure mechanism of random forces. Instead he seeks to find a middle way between the two positions, one which relies heavily on the notion of Nature, or phusis .

[ 10 ] With the rise and dominance of Christianity in the West and the later spread of Islam , metaphysical naturalism was generally abandoned by intellectuals. Thus, there is little evidence for it in medieval philosophy .

Modern philosophy [ edit ] It was not until the early modern era of philosophy and the Age of Enlightenment that naturalists like Benedict Spinoza (who put forward a theory of psychophysical parallelism ), David Hume , [ 11 ] and the proponents of French materialism (notably Denis Diderot , Julien La Mettrie , and Baron d'Holbach ) started to emerge again in the 17th and 18th centuries. In this period, some metaphysical naturalists adhered to a distinct doctrine, materialism , which became the dominant category of metaphysical naturalism widely defended until the end of the 19th century.

Thomas Hobbes was a proponent of naturalism in ethics who acknowledged normative truths and properties.

[ 12 ] Immanuel Kant rejected ( reductionist ) materialist positions in metaphysics, [ 13 ] but he was not hostile to naturalism. His transcendental philosophy is considered to be a form of liberal naturalism .

[ 14 ] Hegel who together with Joseph von Schelling developed the form of natural philosophy recognised as Naturphilosophie In late modern philosophy , Naturphilosophie , a form of natural philosophy , was developed by Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling [ 15 ] and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel [ 15 ] as an attempt to comprehend nature in its totality and to outline its general theoretical structure.

A version of naturalism that arose after Hegel was Ludwig Feuerbach 's anthropological materialism , [ 16 ] which influenced Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels 's historical materialism , Engels's "materialist dialectic" philosophy of nature ( Dialectics of Nature ), and their follower Georgi Plekhanov 's dialectical materialism .

[ 17 ] Another notable school of late modern philosophy advocating naturalism was German materialism : members included Ludwig Büchner , Jacob Moleschott , and Carl Vogt .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The current usage of the term naturalism "derives from debates in America in the first half of the 20th century. The self-proclaimed 'naturalists' from that period included John Dewey , Ernest Nagel , Sidney Hook , and Roy Wood Sellars ." [ 20 ] Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] Currently, metaphysical naturalism is more widely embraced than in previous centuries, especially but not exclusively in the natural sciences and the Anglo-American, analytic philosophical communities. While the vast majority of the population of the world remains firmly committed to non-naturalistic worldviews, contemporary defenders of naturalism and/or naturalistic theses and doctrines today include Graham Oppy , Kai Nielsen , J. J. C. Smart , David Malet Armstrong , David Papineau , Paul Kurtz , Brian Leiter , Daniel Dennett , Michael Devitt , Fred Dretske , Paul and Patricia Churchland , Mario Bunge , Jonathan Schaffer , Hilary Kornblith , Leonard Olson , Quentin Smith , Paul Draper and Michael Martin , among many other academic philosophers.

[ citation needed ] According to David Papineau , contemporary naturalism is a consequence of the build-up of scientific evidence during the twentieth century for the " causal closure of the physical", the doctrine that all physical effects can be accounted for by physical causes.

[ 21 ] By the middle of the twentieth century, the acceptance of the causal closure of the physical realm led to even stronger naturalist views. The causal closure thesis implies that any mental and biological causes must themselves be physically constituted, if they are to produce physical effects. It thus gives rise to a particularly strong form of ontological naturalism, namely the physicalist doctrine that any state that has physical effects must itself be physical.
From the 1950s onwards, philosophers began to formulate arguments for ontological physicalism. Some of these arguments appealed explicitly to the causal closure of the physical realm (Feigl 1958, Oppenheim and Putnam 1958). In other cases, the reliance on causal closure lay below the surface. However, it is not hard to see that even in these latter cases the causal closure thesis played a crucial role.

— Papineau 2007 In contemporary continental philosophy , Quentin Meillassoux proposed speculative materialism , a post-Kantian return to David Hume which can strengthen classical materialist ideas.

[ 22 ] This speculative approach to philosophical naturalism has been further developed by other contemporary thinkers including Ray Brassier and Drew M. Dalton .

Etymology [ edit ] The term "methodological naturalism" is much more recent, though. According to Ronald Numbers , it was coined in 1983 by Paul de Vries, a Wheaton College philosopher. De Vries distinguished between what he called "methodological naturalism", a disciplinary method that says nothing about God's existence, and "metaphysical naturalism", which "denies the existence of a transcendent God".

[ 23 ] The term "methodological naturalism" had been used in 1937 by Edgar S. Brightman in an article in The Philosophical Review as a contrast to "naturalism" in general, but there the idea was not really developed to its more recent distinctions.

[ 24 ] Description [ edit ] Hubble Ultra-Deep Field Flammarion engraving A 21st century image of the universe and a 1888 illustration of the cosmos According to Steven Schafersman , naturalism is a philosophy that maintains that; "Nature encompasses all that exists throughout space and time ; Nature (the universe or cosmos ) consists only of natural elements, that is, of spatio-temporal physical substance – mass – energy . Non-physical or quasi-physical substance , such as information , ideas , values , logic , mathematics , intellect , and other emergent phenomena , either supervene upon the physical or can be reduced to a physical account; Nature operates by the laws of physics and in principle, can be explained and understood by science and philosophy; The supernatural does not exist, i.e., only nature is real . Naturalism is therefore a metaphysical philosophy opposed primarily by supernaturalism".

[ 25 ] Or, as Carl Sagan succinctly put it: " The Cosmos is all that is or ever was or ever will be ." [ 26 ] In addition Arthur C. Danto states that naturalism, in recent usage, is a species of philosophical monism according to which whatever exists or happens is natural in the sense of being susceptible to explanation through methods which, although paradigmatically exemplified in the natural sciences, are continuous from domain to domain of objects and events. Hence, naturalism is polemically defined as repudiating the view that there exists or could exist any entities which lie, in principle, beyond the scope of scientific explanation.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Arthur Newell Strahler states: "The naturalistic view is that the particular universe we observe came into existence and has operated through all time and in all its parts without the impetus or guidance of any supernatural agency." [ 29 ] "The great majority of contemporary philosophers urge that that reality is exhausted by nature, containing nothing 'supernatural', and that the scientific method should be used to investigate all areas of reality, including the 'human spirit'." Philosophers widely regard naturalism as a "positive" term, and "few active philosophers nowadays are happy to announce themselves as 'non-naturalists'". "Philosophers concerned with religion tend to be less enthusiastic about 'naturalism'" and that despite an "inevitable" divergence due to its popularity, if more narrowly construed, (to the chagrin of John McDowell , David Chalmers and Jennifer Hornsby , for example), those not so disqualified remain nonetheless content "to set the bar for 'naturalism' higher." [ 30 ] Alvin Plantinga stated that Naturalism is presumed to not be a religion. However, in one very important respect it resembles religion by performing the cognitive function of a religion. There is a set of deep human questions to which a religion typically provides an answer. In like manner  naturalism gives a set of answers to these questions".

[ 31 ] Providing assumptions required for science [ edit ] According to Robert Priddy, all scientific study inescapably builds on at least some essential assumptions that cannot be tested by scientific processes; [ 32 ] that is, that scientists must start with some assumptions as to the ultimate analysis of the facts with which it deals. These assumptions would then be justified partly by their adherence to the types of occurrence of which we are directly conscious, and partly by their success in representing the observed facts with a certain generality, devoid of ad hoc suppositions." [ 33 ] Kuhn also claims that all science is based on assumptions about the character of the universe, rather than merely on empirical facts. These assumptions – a paradigm – comprise a collection of beliefs, values and techniques that are held by a given scientific community, which legitimize their systems and set the limitations to their investigation.

[ 34 ] For naturalists, nature is the only reality, the "correct" paradigm, and there is no such thing as supernatural , i.e. anything above, beyond, or outside of nature.  The scientific method is to be used to investigate all reality, including the human spirit.

[ 35 ] Some claim that naturalism is the implicit philosophy of working scientists, and that the following basic assumptions are needed to justify the scientific method: [ 36 ] That there is an objective reality shared by all rational observers .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] "The basis for rationality is acceptance of an external objective reality." [ 38 ] "Objective reality is clearly an essential thing if we are to develop a meaningful perspective of the world. Nevertheless its very existence is assumed." [ 39 ] "Our belief that objective reality exist is an assumption that it arises from a real world outside of ourselves. As infants we made this assumption unconsciously.  People are happy to make this assumption that adds meaning to our sensations and feelings, than live with solipsism ." [ 40 ] "Without this assumption, there would be only the thoughts and images in our own mind (which would be the only existing mind) and there would be no need of science, or anything else." [ 41 ] [ self-published source?

] That this objective reality is governed by natural laws ; [ 36 ] [ 37 ] "Science, at least today, assumes that the universe obeys knowable principles that don't depend on time or place, nor on subjective parameters such as what we think, know or how we behave." [ 38 ] Hugh Gauch argues that science presupposes that "the physical world is orderly and comprehensible." [ 42 ] That reality can be discovered by means of systematic observation and experimentation.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Stanley Sobottka said: "The assumption of external reality is necessary for science to function and to flourish. For the most part, science is the discovering and explaining of the external world." [ 41 ] [ self-published source?

] "Science attempts to produce knowledge that is as universal and objective as possible within the realm of human understanding." [ 38 ] That Nature has uniformity of laws and most if not all things in nature must have at least a natural cause.

[ 37 ] Biologist Stephen Jay Gould referred to these two closely related propositions as the constancy of nature's laws and the operation of known processes.

[ 43 ] Simpson agrees that the axiom of uniformity of law, an unprovable postulate, is necessary in order for scientists to extrapolate inductive inference into the unobservable past in order to meaningfully study it.

[ 44 ] "The assumption of spatial and temporal invariance of natural laws is by no means unique to geology since it amounts to a warrant for inductive inference which, as Bacon showed nearly four hundred years ago, is the basic mode of reasoning in empirical science. Without assuming this spatial and temporal invariance, we have no basis for extrapolating from the known to the unknown and, therefore, no way of reaching general conclusions from a finite number of observations. (Since the assumption is itself vindicated by induction, it can in no way "prove" the validity of induction — an endeavor virtually abandoned after Hume demonstrated its futility two centuries ago)." [ 45 ] Gould also notes that natural processes such as Lyell's "uniformity of process" are an assumption: "As such, it is another a priori assumption shared by all scientists and not a statement about the empirical world." [ 46 ] According to R. Hooykaas: "The principle of uniformity is not a law, not a rule established after comparison of facts, but a principle, preceding the observation of facts ... It is the logical principle of parsimony of causes and of economy of scientific notions. By explaining past changes by analogy with present phenomena, a limit is set to conjecture, for there is only one way in which two things are equal, but there are an infinity of ways in which they could be supposed different." [ 47 ] That experimental procedures will be done satisfactorily without any deliberate or unintentional mistakes that will influence the results .

[ 37 ] That experimenters won't be significantly biased by their presumptions.

[ 37 ] That random sampling is representative of the entire population.

[ 37 ] A simple random sample (SRS) is the most basic probabilistic option used for creating a sample from a population. The benefit of SRS is that the investigator is guaranteed to choose a sample that represents the population that ensures statistically valid conclusions.

[ 48 ] Methodological naturalism [ edit ] Aristotle, one of the philosophers behind the modern day scientific method used as a central term in methodological naturalism Methodological naturalism , the second sense of the term "naturalism", (see above) is "the adoption or assumption of philosophical naturalism … with or without fully accepting or believing it." [ 25 ] Robert T. Pennock used the term to clarify that the scientific method confines itself to natural explanations without assuming the existence or non-existence of the supernatural.

[ 49 ] "We may therefore be agnostic about the ultimate truth of [philosophical] naturalism, but nevertheless adopt it and investigate nature as if nature is all that there is." [ 25 ] According to Ronald Numbers , the term "methodological naturalism" was coined in 1983 by Paul de Vries, a Wheaton College philosopher.

[ 23 ] Both Schafersman and Strahler assert that it is illogical to try to decouple the two senses of naturalism. "While science as a process only requires methodological naturalism, the practice or adoption of methodological naturalism entails a logical and moral belief in philosophical naturalism, so they are not logically decoupled." [ 25 ] This “[philosophical] naturalistic view is espoused by science as its fundamental assumption." [ 29 ] But Eugenie Scott finds it imperative to do so for the expediency of deprogramming the religious. "Scientists can defuse some of the opposition to evolution by first recognizing that the vast majority of Americans are believers, and that most Americans want to retain their faith." Scott apparently believes that "individuals can retain religious beliefs and still accept evolution through methodological naturalism.  Scientists should therefore avoid mentioning metaphysical naturalism and use methodological naturalism instead." [ 50 ] "Even someone who may disagree with my logic … often understands the strategic reasons for separating methodological from philosophical naturalism—if we want more Americans to understand evolution." [ 51 ] Scott's approach has found success as illustrated in Ecklund's study where some religious scientists reported that their religious beliefs affect the way they think about the implications – often moral – of their work, but not the way they practice science within methodological naturalism.

[ 52 ] Papineau notes that "Philosophers concerned with religion tend to be less enthusiastic about metaphysical naturalism and that those not so disqualified remain content "to set the bar for 'naturalism' higher." [ 30 ] In contrast to Schafersman, Strahler, and Scott, Robert T. Pennock, an expert witness [ 49 ] at the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial and cited by the Judge in his Memorandum Opinion, [ 53 ] described "methodological naturalism" stating that it is not based on dogmatic metaphysical naturalism.

[ 54 ] Pennock further states that as supernatural agents and powers "are above and beyond the natural world and its agents and powers" and "are not constrained by natural laws", only logical impossibilities constrain what a supernatural agent cannot do.  In addition he says: "If we could apply natural knowledge to understand supernatural powers, then, by definition, they would not be supernatural." "Because the supernatural is necessarily a mystery to us, it can provide no grounds on which one can judge scientific models." "Experimentation requires observation and control of the variables.... But by definition we have no control over supernatural entities or forces." The position that the study of the function of nature is also the study of the origin of nature is in contrast with opponents who take the position that functioning of the cosmos is unrelated to how it originated.  While they are open to supernatural fiat in its invention and coming into existence, during scientific study to explain the functioning of the cosmos, they do not appeal to the supernatural. They agree that allowing "science to appeal to untestable supernatural powers to explain how nature functions would make the scientist's task meaningless, undermine the discipline that allows science to make progress, and would be as profoundly unsatisfying as the ancient Greek playwright's reliance upon the deus ex machina to extract his hero from a difficult predicament." [ 55 ] Views on methodological naturalism [ edit ] W. V. O. Quine [ edit ] Main article: Naturalized epistemology W. V. O. Quine describes naturalism as the position that there is no higher tribunal for truth than natural science itself. In his view, there is no better method than the scientific method for judging the claims of science, and there is neither any need nor any place for a "first philosophy", such as (abstract) metaphysics or epistemology , that could stand behind and justify science or the scientific method.

Therefore, philosophy should feel free to make use of the findings of scientists in its own pursuit, while also feeling free to offer criticism when those claims are ungrounded, confused, or inconsistent. In Quine's view, philosophy is "continuous with" science, and both are empirical.

[ 56 ] Naturalism is not a dogmatic belief that the modern view of science is entirely correct. Instead, it simply holds that science is the best way to explore the processes of the universe and that those processes are what modern science is striving to understand.

[ 57 ] Karl Popper [ edit ] Karl Popper equated naturalism with inductive theory of science. He rejected it based on his general critique of induction (see problem of induction ), yet acknowledged its utility as means for inventing conjectures.

A naturalistic methodology (sometimes called an "inductive theory of science") has its value, no doubt.

… I reject the naturalistic view: It is uncritical. Its upholders fail to notice that whenever they believe to have discovered a fact, they have only proposed a convention. Hence the convention is liable to turn into a dogma. This criticism of the naturalistic view applies not only to its criterion of meaning, but also to its idea of science, and consequently to its idea of empirical method.

— Karl R. Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery , (Routledge, 2002), pp. 52–53, ISBN 0-415-27844-9 .

Popper instead proposed that science should adopt a methodology based on falsifiability for demarcation , because no number of experiments can ever prove a theory, but a single experiment can contradict one. Popper holds that scientific theories are characterized by falsifiability.

Alvin Plantinga [ edit ] Alvin Plantinga , Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at Notre Dame , and a Christian , has become a well-known critic of naturalism.

[ 58 ] [ failed verification ] He suggests, in his evolutionary argument against naturalism , that the probability that evolution has produced humans with reliable true beliefs , is low or inscrutable, unless the evolution of humans was guided (for example, by God). According to David Kahan of the University of Glasgow , in order to understand how beliefs are warranted, a justification must be found in the context of supernatural theism, as in Plantinga's epistemology.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] (See also supernormal stimuli ).

Plantinga argues that together, naturalism and evolution provide an insurmountable " defeater for the belief that our cognitive faculties are reliable", i.e., a skeptical argument along the lines of Descartes' evil demon or brain in a vat .

[ 62 ] Take philosophical naturalism to be the belief that there aren't any supernatural entities – no such person as God, for example, but also no other supernatural entities, and nothing at all like God. My claim was that naturalism and contemporary evolutionary theory are at serious odds with one another – and this despite the fact that the latter is ordinarily thought to be one of the main pillars supporting the edifice of the former. (Of course I am not attacking the theory of evolution, or anything in that neighborhood; I am instead attacking the conjunction of naturalism with the view that human beings have evolved in that way. I see no similar problems with the conjunction of theism and the idea that human beings have evolved in the way contemporary evolutionary science suggests.) More particularly, I argued that the conjunction of naturalism with the belief that we human beings have evolved in conformity with current evolutionary doctrine … is in a certain interesting way self-defeating or self-referentially incoherent.

— Alvin Plantinga, Naturalism Defeated?: Essays on Plantinga's Evolutionary Argument Against Naturalism , "Introduction" [ 62 ] The argument is controversial and has been criticized as seriously flawed, for example, by Elliott Sober .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Robert T. Pennock [ edit ] Robert T. Pennock states that as supernatural agents and powers "are above and beyond the natural world and its agents and powers" and "are not constrained by natural laws", only logical impossibilities constrain what a supernatural agent cannot do. He says: "If we could apply natural knowledge to understand supernatural powers, then, by definition, they would not be supernatural." As the supernatural is necessarily a mystery to us, it can provide no grounds on which one can judge scientific models. "Experimentation requires observation and control of the variables.... But by definition we have no control over supernatural entities or forces." Science does not deal with meanings; the closed system of scientific reasoning cannot be used to define itself. Allowing science to appeal to untestable supernatural powers would make the scientist's task meaningless, undermine the discipline that allows science to make progress, and "would be as profoundly unsatisfying as the ancient Greek playwright's reliance upon the deus ex machina to extract his hero from a difficult predicament." [ 65 ] Naturalism of this sort says nothing about the existence or nonexistence of the supernatural, which by this definition is beyond natural testing. As a practical consideration, the rejection of supernatural explanations would merely be pragmatic, thus it would nonetheless be possible for an ontological supernaturalist to espouse and practice methodological naturalism. For example, scientists may believe in God while practicing methodological naturalism in their scientific work. This position does not preclude knowledge that is somehow connected to the supernatural. Generally however, anything that one can examine and explain scientifically would not be supernatural, simply by definition.

Mousavirad [ edit ] Seyyed Jaaber Mousavirad distinguishes between epistemological and methodological naturalism. While he accepts that knowledge is not limited to sense perception and experimentation, he views methodological naturalism as a practical convention for pursuing universal science. Referring to Michael Ruse’s claim that science must exclude references to God [ 66 ] , Mousavirad challenges the implication that empirical methods are the only valid path to knowledge. He argues that although natural sciences, by consensus, rely solely on sensory and empirical data, they cannot assert that empirical knowledge is the only form of factual knowledge. Natural science can report only on what is observable; it must remain neutral regarding metaphysical influences. Thus, while methodological naturalism is valid as a shared scientific approach, it cannot justify or refute knowledge from non-empirical source.

[ 67 ] See also [ edit ] Atheism Clockwork universe Daoism Deism Dysteleology Empiricism Hylomorphism Legal naturalism Liberal naturalism Materialism Monism Naturalist computationalism Naturalistic fallacy Naturalistic pantheism Philosophy of nature Physicalism Platonized naturalism Poetic naturalism Religious naturalism Scientism Sociological naturalism Supernaturalism Transcendental naturalism Vaisheshika References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "naturalism" .

Oxford English Dictionary Online .

^ Papineau, David (22 February 2007).

"Naturalism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

According to philosopher Steven Lockwood, naturalism can be separated into an ontological sense and a methodological sense.

^ Kurtz, Paul (Spring 1998).

"Darwin Re-Crucified: Why Are So Many Afraid of Naturalism?" .

Free Inquiry .

18 (2). Archived from the original on 18 October 2012 . Retrieved 6 April 2011 .

^ Schafersman 1996 , Methodological naturalism is the adoption or assumption of naturalism in scientific belief and practice without really believing in naturalism.

^ Chatterjee, A (2012).

"Naturalism in Classical Indian Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 Edition) .

^ Riepe, Dale (1996).

Naturalistic Tradition in Indian Thought . Motilal Banarsidass Publ. pp.

227– 246.

ISBN 978-8120812932 .

^ Leaman, Oliver (1999).

Key Concepts in Eastern Philosophy . Routledge. p. 269.

ISBN 978-0415173629 .

^ O'Keefe, Tim (2010).

Epicureanism . University of California Press. pp.

11– 13.

^ See especially Physics , books I and II.

^ Hankinson, R. J. (1997).

Cause and Explanation in Ancient Greek Thought . Oxford University Press. p. 125.

ISBN 978-0-19-924656-4 .

^ William Edward Morris, "David Hume" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (21 May 2014), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) ^ Abizadeh, A. (2018).

Hobbes and the Two Faces of Ethics . Cambridge University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-108-41729-7 . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ Rohlf, Michael (28 July 2020). "Immanuel Kant".

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Hanna, Robert, Kant, Science, and Human Nature . Clarendon Press, 2006, p. 16.

^ a b Frederick C. Beiser (2002), German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism 1781–1801 , Harvard university Press, p. 506.

^ Axel Honneth , Hans Joas , Social Action and Human Nature , Cambridge University Press, 1988, p. 18.

^ See Georgi Plekhanov, "For the Sixtieth Anniversary of Hegel's Death" (1891). See also Plekhanov, Essays on the History of Materialism (1893) and Plekhanov, The Development of the Monist View of History (1895).

^ Owen Chadwick, The Secularization of the European Mind in the Nineteenth Century , Cambridge University Press, 1990, p. 165: "During the 1850s German ... scientists conducted a controversy known ... as the materialistic controversy. It was specially associated with the names of Vogt, Moleschott and Büchner" and p. 173: "Frenchmen were surprised to see Büchner and Vogt. ... [T]he French were surprised at German materialism".

^ The Nineteenth Century and After , Vol. 151 , 1952, p. 227: "the Continental materialism of Moleschott and Buchner".

^ Papineau, David "Naturalism" , in "The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" ^ Papineau, David (2011).

"The Rise of Physicalism" . In Gillett, Carl; Loewer, Barry (eds.).

Physicalism and its Discontents . Cambridge.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511570797 .

ISBN 9780521801751 . Archived from the original on 1 June 2016 . Retrieved 9 January 2018 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Quentin Meillassoux (2008), After Finitude , Bloomsbury, p. 90.

^ a b Nick Matzke : On the Origins of Methodological Naturalism Archived 2006-09-03 at the Wayback Machine .

The Pandas Thumb (March 20, 2006) ^ "ASA March 2006 – Re: Methodological Naturalism" . Archived from the original on 1 August 2012 . Retrieved 18 June 2006 .

^ a b c d Schafersman 1996 .

^ Sagan, Carl (2002).

Cosmos .

Random House .

ISBN 9780375508325 .

^ Danto 1967 , p. 448.

^ Stone 2008 , p. 2: Personally, I place great emphasis on the phrase "in principle", since there are many things that science does not now explain. And perhaps we need some natural piety concerning the ontological limit question as to why there is anything at all. But the idea that naturalism is a polemical notion is important" ^ a b Strahler 1992 , p. 3.

^ a b Papineau 2007 .

^ ( Plantinga 2010 ) ^ Priddy, Robert (1998).

"Chapter Five, Scientific Objectivity in Question" .

Science Limited .

^ Whitehead 1997 , p. 135.

^ Boldman, Lee (2007).

"Chapter 6, The Privileged Status of Science" (PDF) .

^ Papineau, David "Naturalism" , in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , quote, "The great majority of contemporary philosophers would happily... reject 'supernatural' entities, and allow that science is a possible route (if not necessarily the only one) to important truths about the 'human spirit'." ^ a b c d Heilbron 2003 , p. vii.

^ a b c d e f g Chen 2009 , pp. 1–2.

^ a b c Durak 2008 .

^ Vaccaro, Joan.

"Reality" . Retrieved 22 December 2017 .

^ Vaccaro, Joan.

"Objectiveism" . Retrieved 22 December 2017 .

Objective reality exists beyond or outside our self. Any belief that it arises from a real world outside us is actually an assumption. It seems more beneficial to assume that an objective reality exists than to live with solipsism, and so people are quite happy to make this assumption. In fact we made this assumption unconsciously when we began to learn about the world as infants. The world outside ourselves appears to respond in ways which are consistent with it being real. The assumption of objectivism is essential if we are to attach the contemporary meanings to our sensations and feelings and make more sense of them.

^ a b Sobottka 2005 , p. 11.

^ Gauch 2002 , p. 154, "Expressed as a single grand statement, science presupposes that the physical world is orderly and comprehensible. The most obvious components of this comprehensive presupposition are that the physical world exists and that our sense perceptions are generally reliable." ^ Gould 1987 , p. 120, "You cannot go to a rocky outcrop and observe either the constancy of nature's laws or the working of known processes. It works the other way around." You first assume these propositions and "then you go to the outcrop of rock." ^ Simpson 1963 , pp. 24–48, "Uniformity is an unprovable postulate justified, or indeed required, on two grounds. First, nothing in our incomplete but extensive knowledge of history disagrees with it. Second, only with this postulate is a rational interpretation of history possible and we are justified in seeking—as scientists we must seek—such a rational interpretation." ^ Gould 1965 , pp. 223–228.

^ Gould 1984 , p. 11.

^ Hooykaas 1963 , p. 38.

^ "Simple Random Sampling" . Archived from the original on 2 January 2018 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

A simple random sample (SRS) is the most basic probabilistic option used for creating a sample from a population. Each SRS is made of individuals drawn from a larger population, completely at random. As a result, said individuals have an equal chance of being selected throughout the sampling process. The benefit of SRS is that as a result, the investigator is guaranteed to choose a sample which is representative of the population, which ensures statistically valid conclusions.

^ a b "Kitzmiller v. Dover: Day 3, AM: Robert Pennock (continued)" .

www.talkorigins.org .

^ Scott, Eugenie C.

(1996). " "Creationism, Ideology, and Science" ". In Gross; Levitt; Lewis (eds.).

The Flight From Science and Reason . The New York Academy of Sciences. pp.

519– 520.

^ Scott, Eugenie C.

(2008).

"Science and Religion, Methodology and Humanism" . NCSE . Retrieved 20 March 2012 .

^ Ecklund, Elaine Howard (2010).

Science vs. Religion: What Scientists Really Think . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195392982 .

^ [[wikisource:Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District/4:Whether ID Is Science#4. Whether ID is Science
|Kitzmiller v. Dover: Whether ID is Science]] ^ "Kitzmiller v. Dover: Day 3, AM: Robert Pennock (continued)" .

www.talkorigins.org .

^ Pennock, Robert T. (10 June 2015).

"Supernaturalist Explanations..." msu.edu . Archived from the original on 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 .

^ Lynne Rudder (2013).

Naturalism and the First-Person Perspective . Oxford University Press. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0199914746 .

^ Quine has argued that "Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter of psychology."  The Quinean view that we should abandon epistemology for psychology, however, is not widely accepted by contemporary naturalists in epistemology.  See Feldman, Richard (2012).

"Naturalized Epistemology" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2012 ed.) . Retrieved 4 June 2014 .

Quinean Replacement Naturalism finds relatively few supporters.

^ Beilby, J.K. (2002).

Naturalism Defeated?: Essays on Plantinga's Evolutionary Argument Against Naturalism . G – Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series. Cornell University Press. p. ix.

ISBN 9780801487637 .

LCCN 2001006111 .

^ "Gifford Lecture Series – Warrant and Proper Function 1987–1988" . Archived from the original on 4 January 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ Plantinga, Alvin (11 April 2010).

"Evolution, Shibboleths, and Philosophers — Letters to the Editor" . The Chronicle of Higher Education.

...I do indeed think that evolution functions as a contemporary shibboleth by which to distinguish the ignorant fundamentalist goats from the informed and scientifically literate sheep.

According to Richard Dawkins, 'It is absolutely safe to say that, if you meet somebody who claims not to believe in evolution, that person is ignorant, stupid, or insane (or wicked, but I'd rather not consider that).' Daniel Dennett goes Dawkins one (or two) further: 'Anyone today who doubts that the variety of life on this planet was produced by a process of evolution is simply ignorant—inexcusably ignorant.' You wake up in the middle of the night; you think, can that whole Darwinian story really be true? Wham! You are inexcusably ignorant.

I do think that evolution has become a modern idol of the tribe. But of course it doesn't even begin to follow that I think the scientific theory of evolution is false. And I don't.

^ Plantinga, Alvin (1993).

Warrant and Proper Function . Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chap. 11.

ISBN 0-19-507863-2 .

^ a b Beilby, J.K., ed. (2002). "Introduction by Alvin Plantinga".

Naturalism Defeated?: Essays on Plantinga's Evolutionary Argument Against Naturalism . Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. pp.

1–2, 10 .

ISBN 978-0-8014-8763-7 .

LCCN 2001006111 .

^ Oppy, Graham; Trakakis, N. N. (11 September 2014).

Twentieth-Century Philosophy of Religion: The History of Western Philosophy of Religion . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-54638-2 .

^ Fitelson, Branden; Sober, Elliott (1998).

"Plantinga's Probability Arguments Against Evolutionary Naturalism" .

Pacific Philosophical Quarterly .

79 (2): 115– 129.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0114.00053 .

^ T., Robert (10 June 2015).

"Supernaturalist Explanations..." msu.edu . Archived from the original on 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 .

^ Ruse, Michael (1 January 2005).

"Methodological Naturalism Under Attack" .

South African Journal of Philosophy .

24 (1): 44– 60.

doi : 10.4314/sajpem.v24i1.31413 .

ISSN 0258-0136 .

^ Mousavirad, Seyyed Jaaber (2025).

"The Plausibility of Theistic Science" .

philpapers.org . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

References [ edit ] Audi, Robert (1996). "Naturalism". In Borchert, Donald M. (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy Supplement . USA: Macmillan Reference. pp.

372– 374.

Carrier, Richard (2005).

Sense and Goodness without God: A defense of Metaphysical Naturalism . AuthorHouse. p. 444.

ISBN 1-4208-0293-3 .

Chen, Christina S. (2009). Larson, Thomas (ed.).

"Atheism and the Assumptions of Science and Religion" .

Lyceum (2): 1– 10. Archived from the original on 26 March 2014.

Danto, Arthur C.

(1967). "Naturalism". In Edwards, Paul (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy . New York: The Macmillan. pp.

448– 450.

Dubray, Charles Albert (1911).

"Naturalism" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 10. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Durak, Antoine Berke (6 June 2008).

"The nature of reality and knowledge" .

Gauch, Hugh G. (2002).

Scientific Method in Practice .

Cambridge University Press .

Gould, S. J. (1965).

"Is uniformitarianism necessary?" .

American Journal of Science .

263 (3): 223– 228.

Bibcode : 1965AmJS..263..223G .

doi : 10.2475/ajs.263.3.223 .

Gould, Stephen J.

(1984).

"Toward the vindication of punctuational change in catastrophes and earth history" . In Bergren, W. A.; Van Couvering, J. A. (eds.).

Catastrophes and Earth History . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Gould, Stephen J.

(1987).

Time's Arrow, Time's Cycle: Myth and Metaphor in the Discovery of Geological Time . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp.

119 .

Heilbron, John L.

, ed. (2003).

The Oxford Companion to the History of Modern Science . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195112290 .

Hooykaas, R. (1963).

The principle of uniformity in geology, biology, and theology (2nd ed.). London: E.J. Brill.

Kurtz, Paul (1990).

Philosophical Essays in Pragmatic Naturalism . Prometheus Books.

Lacey, Alan R. (1995).

"Naturalism" . In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. pp.

604–606 .

ISBN 978-0-19-866132-0 .

Post, John F. (1995).

"Naturalism" . In Audi, Robert (ed.).

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. pp.

517–518 .

Rea, Michael (2002).

World Without Design: The Ontological Consequences of Naturalism .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-924760-9 .

Sagan, Carl (2002).

Cosmos .

Random House .

ISBN 978-0-375-50832-5 .

Schafersman, Steven D.

(1996).

"Naturalism is Today An Essential Part of Science" . Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 .

Simpson, G. G. (1963). "Historical science". In Albritton, C. C. Jr. (ed.).

Fabric of geology . Stanford, California: Freeman, Cooper, and Company.

Sobottka, Stanley (2005).

"Consciousness" (PDF) .

Strahler, Arthur N.

(1992).

Understanding Science: An Introduction to Concepts and Issues . Buffalo: Prometheus Books.

ISBN 9780879757243 .

Stone, J.A. (2008).

Religious Naturalism Today: The Rebirth of a Forgotten Alternative . G – Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series. State University of New York Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-7914-7537-9 .

LCCN 2007048682 .

Whitehead, A.N. (1997) [1920].

Science and the Modern World . Lowell Lectures. Free Press.

ISBN 978-0-684-83639-3 .

LCCN 67002244 .

Further reading [ edit ] Mario De Caro and David Macarthur (eds) Naturalism in Question.

Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 2004.

Mario De Caro and David Macarthur (eds) Naturalism and Normativity.

New York: Columbia University Press, 2010.

Friedrich Albert Lange, The History of Materialism, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co Ltd, 1925, ISBN 0-415-22525-6 David Macarthur, "Quinean Naturalism in Question," Philo. vol 11, no. 1 (2008).

Sander Verhaeg, Working from Within: The Nature and Development of Quine's Naturalism . New York: Oxford University Press, 2018.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Naturalism (philosophy) .

Media related to Naturalism (philosophy) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9ngrm
Cached time: 20250816100827
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.991 seconds
Real time usage: 1.215 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8212/1000000
Revision size: 59081/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 309219/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14699/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 242467/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.583/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9273704/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  951.767      1 -total
 24.87%  236.696      1 Template:Reflist
 17.59%  167.382     33 Template:Cite_book
 13.51%  128.542     11 Template:Navbox
 12.23%  116.365      5 Template:Blockquote
 10.48%   99.755      1 Template:Metaphysics
  7.32%   69.716     16 Template:Cite_web
  6.35%   60.438      1 Template:Short_description
  6.06%   57.669     30 Template:Sfn
  4.92%   46.795      2 Template:ISBN Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42796964:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100827 and revision id 1304566535. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Naturalism_(philosophy)&oldid=1304566535 " Categories : Naturalism (philosophy) Nature Metaphysical theories Metatheory of science Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from May 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from November 2018 CS1: unfit URL Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Naturalism (philosophy) 53 languages Add topic

