Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Primary literature 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Elmar Altvater 11 languages Català Deutsch Magyar مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Simple English Svenska Türkçe Volapük Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Marxist academic (1938–2018) Elmar Altvater Elmar Altvater in April 2005 Born ( 1938-08-24 ) August 24, 1938 Kamen , Province of Westphalia , Germany Died May 1, 2018 (2018-05-01) (aged 79) Berlin, Germany Occupation(s) Economist, sociologist, political scientist , university teacher Employer Otto-Suhr-Institut Political party Alliance 90/The Greens The Left Elmar Altvater (24 August 1938 – 1 May 2018) [ 1 ] was a German political scientist . He was professor of political science at the Otto-Suhr-Institut of the Free University of Berlin , before retiring on 30 September 2004. He continued to work at the institute, and published articles and books.

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] As a student, Altvater studied economics and sociology in Munich, and attained a doctorate with a dissertation on "Environmental Problems in the Soviet Union". At the Otto-Suhr-Institut, he was active in socialist research groups, working with among others Klaus Busch, Wolfgang Schoeller and Frank Seelow, and he gained fame as one of Germany's most important Marxist philosophers, who strongly influenced the political and economic theory of the 1968 generation of radicals .

[ 2 ] His analysis, centered on the logic of capital accumulation crisis in state interventions is key to the Marxist theory of state-derivationism .

[ 3 ] Altvater argues that the state performs four general maintenance functions particular capitalists cannot undertake: providing an initial legal system with property and contract law, regulating the class struggle between workers and owners of capital, enforcing terms of international trade and market expansion through military presence, and providing infrastructure.

[ 4 ] In 1970, he co-founded the German journal PROKLA - Journal for Critical Social Science [ 5 ] of which he remained an editor. In 1971, he became university professor in political economy at the Otto-Suhr-Institut. Apart from questions of development theory, the debt crisis, and the regulation of markets, he remains preoccupied with the effects of capitalist economies on the environment.

Altvater was a noted critic of the political economy and author of numerous writings on globalization and critiques of capitalism . A standard work is his book The Limits of Globalization (1996), written with his companion Birgit Mahnkopf.

[ 6 ] Altvater supported the German Greens for some time, but after the 1999 military intervention in Kosovo (which as a member of the governing coalition the party had to support) increasingly maintained a critical distance. He was a member of the Bundestag Commission of Inquiry The World Economy - Challenges and Answers (1999–2002) . Altvater was a supporter of ATTAC (he was a member of its Scientific Advisory Board [ 7 ] ) and the World Social Forum .

Altvater has employed the term " Capitalocene ", which is used by environmentalists as an alternative to the Anthropocene .

[ 8 ] Primary literature [ edit ] 1969: Die Weltwährungskrise 1969: Gesellschaftliche Produktion und ökonomische Rationalität - Externe Effekte und zentrale Planung im Wirtschaftssystem des Sozialismus 1979: Vom Wirtschaftswunder zur Wirtschaftskrise, Berlin (West) (with Jürgen Hoffmann and Willi Semmler ) 1983: Alternative Wirtschaftspolitik jenseits des Keynesianismus - Wirtschaftspolitische Optionen der Gewerkschaften in Westeuropa (with Kurt Hübner and Michael Stanger) ISBN 3-531-11620-7 1987: Sachzwang Weltmarkt. Verschuldungskrise, blockierte Industrialisierung, ökologische Gefährdung - der Fall Brasilien 1991: Die Zukunft des Marktes. Ein Essay über die Regulation von Geld und Natur nach dem Scheitern des "real existierenden Sozialismus" . (translated into English as The Future of the Market: An Essay on the Regulation of Money and Nature after the Collapse of 'Actually Existing Socialism' (Verso). English ISBN 0-86091-610-3 ISBN 978-0860916109 1991: The Poverty of Nations: A Guide to the Debt Crisis-From Argentina to Zaire , by Kurt Hubner (Author), Jochen Lorentzen (Author), Elmar Altvater (Author, Editor), Raul Rojas (Editor), (St. Martin's Press) ISBN 0-86232-949-3 1992: Der Preis des Wohlstands oder Umweltplünderung und neue Welt(un)ordnung . Münster 1994: Tschernobyl und Sonnenbrand oder: Vom Sinn physikalischer Kategorien in den Sozialwissenschaften. Replik auf die Kritik von Wolfgang Hein, in: Peripherie, Nr. 54, S. 101–112 1996: (with Birgit Mahnkopf) Grenzen der Globalisierung. Ökonomie, Ökologie und Politik in der Weltgesellschaft .

ISBN 3-929586-75-4 1999: "Restructuring the space of democracy: the effects of capitalist globalization and the ecological crisis on the form and substance of democracy" in Global Ethics and Environment , Editor Nicholas Low ISBN 0-415-19736-8 2002: (with Birgit Mahnkopf): Globalisierung der Unsicherheit – Arbeit im Schatten, schmutziges Geld und informelle Politik .

ISBN 3-89691-513-4 2005: Das Ende des Kapitalismus, wie wir ihn kennen. Eine radikale Kapitalismuskritik . Münster: Westfälisches Dampfboot.

ISBN 978-3-89691-627-3 2007 Elmar Altvater & Birgit Mahnkopf, Konkurrenz für das Empire. Die Zukunft der Europäischen Union in der globalisierten Welt .

ISBN 978-3-89691-652-5 2008 Elmar Altvater & Achim Brunnengräber (eds.), Ablasshandel gegen Klimawandel? Marktbasierte Instrumente in der globalen Klimapolitik und ihre Alternativen .

ISBN 978-3-89965-291-8 2010 Elmar Altvater, Der große Krach, oder die Jahrhundertkrise von Wirtschaft und Finanzen, von Politik und Natur .

ISBN 978-3-89691-785-0 References [ edit ] ^ Elmar Altvater: Geboren am 24. August 1938 in Kamen – gestorben am 1. Mai 2018 , Rosa-Luxemburg-Stiftung ^ a b "Otto-Suhr-Institut für Politikwissenschaft: Prof. Dr. Elmar Altvater" . Archived from the original on 19 July 2011.

^ Barrow, C.W. (1991).

Critical Theories of the State: Marxist, Neo-Marxist, Post-Marxist.

Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, pg. 79.

^ Altvater, E. (1973). "Notes on Some Problems of State Interventionism (I)." Kapitalistate I: pp. 97–108.

^ http://www.prokla.de/ , the Publication, in German ^ http://d-nb.info/gnd/115428844 , listings in the German National Library, Deutsche Nationalbibliothek ^ "ATTAC Scientific Advisory Board" (in German). Archived from the original on 27 February 2012 . Retrieved 21 May 2012 .

^ Schwägerl, Christian (2011).

The Anthropocene: The Human Era and How It Shapes Our Planet . p. 65.

External links [ edit ] Website dedicated to Elmar Altvater Altvater old homepage at the Free University Berlin [1] New homepage at the FU [2] Archived 3 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine Elmar Altvater (1972).

"Notes on Some Problems of State Interventionism" Overview of his life and work (in German) [3] Birgit Mahnkopf: In memory of the life and work of Elmar Altvater v t e Alliance 90/The Greens ( German : Bündnis 90/Die Grünen ) Politicians ( List ) Elmar Altvater Carl Amery Luise Amtsberg Kerstin Andreae Muhterem Aras Ali Atalan Lisa Badum Annalena Baerbock Monika Barz Gert Bastian Margarete Bause Danyal Bayaz Canan Bayram Marieluise Beck Volker Beck Angelika Beer Cornelia Behm Birgitt Bender Matthias Berninger Joseph Beuys Marianne Birthler Ann-Sophie Bohm-Eisenbrandt Alexander Bonde Ralf Briese Reinhard Bütikofer Sevim Çelebi-Gottschlich Anna Christmann Michael Cramer Viola von Cramon-Taubadel Sepp Daxenberger Ekin Deligöz Katja Dörner Katharina Dröge Harald Ebner Katharina Fegebank Hans-Josef Fell Andrea Fischer Joschka Fischer Ralf Fücks Tessa Ganserer Kai Gehring Stefan Gelbhaar Sven Giegold Christa Goetsch Katrin Göring-Eckardt Gabriele Gottwald Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf Erhard Grundl Friedel Grützmacher Robert Habeck Enno Hagenah Anja Hajduk Rebecca Harms Ludwig Hartmann Britta Haßelmann Renate Haußleiter-Malluche August Haußleiter Gabriele Heinen-Kljajic Monika Heinold Sarah-Lee Heinrich Ursula Helmhold Bettina Herlitzius Winfried Hermann Bettina Hoffmann Anton Hofreiter Bärbel Höhn Ottmar von Holtz Uwe Hüser Dieter Janecek Bettina Jarasch Ulla Jelpke Kirsten Kappert-Gonther Uwe Kekeritz Petra Kelly Sven-Christian Kindler Maria Klein-Schmeink Hans-Jürgen Klein Sibyll-Anka Klotz Hubertus Knabe Wilhelm Knabe Ina Korter Georg Kössler Sylvia Kotting-Uhl Bruno Kramm Winfried Kretschmann Oliver Krischer Christian Kühn Fritz Kuhn Stephan Kühn Renate Künast Markus Kurth Monika Lazar Sven Lehmann Eveline Lemke Steffi Lemke Vera Lengsfeld Helge Limburg Tobias Lindner Karoline Linnert Sylvia Löhrmann Cornelia Lüddemann Anna Lührmann Christian Meyer Irene Mihalic Jerzy Montag Beate Müller-Gemmeke Claudia Müller Özcan Mutlu Winfried Nachtwei Árpád von Nahodyl Ingrid Nestle Luisa Neubauer Ehrhart Neubert Konstantin von Notz Jutta Oesterle-Schwerin Claus Offe Belit Onay Verena Osgyan Friedrich Ostendorff Cem Özdemir Boris Palmer Lisa Paus Simone Peter Filiz Polat Ramona Pop Tabea Rößner Claudia Roth Manuela Rottmann Corinna Rüffer Herbert Rusche Rüdiger Sagel Dieter Salomon Manuel Sarrazin Ulle Schauws Gerhard Schick Otto Schily Stefan Schmidt Charlotte Schneidewind-Hartnagel Michaele Schreyer Kordula Schulz-Asche Katharina Schulze Anja Siegesmund Edith Sitzmann Sarah Sorge Anne Spiegel Malte Spitz Grietje Staffelt Claudia Stamm Miriam Staudte Till Steffen Bernhard Stengele Silke Stokar von Neuforn Eckhard Stratmann-Mertens Wolfgang Strengmann-Kuhn Hans-Christian Ströbele Margit Stumpp June Tomiak Aminata Touré Markus Tressel Jürgen Trittin Wolfgang Ullmann Franz Untersteller Julia Verlinden Roland Vogt Antje Vollmer Daniela Wagner Beate Walter-Rosenheimer Tarek Al-Wazir Stefan Wenzel Heike Wilms-Kegel Josef Winkler Thomas Wüppesahl Gerhard Zickenheiner Related groups Heinrich Böll Foundation Green Youth Related articles Alliance 90 East German Green Party Fundi German cannabis control bill Anti-nuclear movement in Germany Bundestag Faction Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Artists FID People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elmar_Altvater&oldid=1292231774 " Categories : 1938 births 2018 deaths People from Kamen People from the Province of Westphalia Alliance 90/The Greens politicians Labour and Social Justice – The Electoral Alternative politicians Die Linke politicians Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund members Academic staff of the Free University of Berlin Marxist theorists German Marxists Members of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 22:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elmar Altvater 11 languages Add topic

