Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relation to Marxist philosophy 2 Notable economic determinists 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Economic determinism 13 languages العربية Български Español فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն Polski Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory that all societal relationships are based on economic relationships This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is missing information about how Marx and Engles applied historical materialism in concrete cases and whether this makes the theory amount to a determinism.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( June 2020 ) This article is missing information about economic determinism outside of Marxism.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dr. Charles A. Beard, (right) before testifying in defense of the O'Mahoney Corporation Licensing Bill, which, if passed, would require corporations dealing in interstate commerce to comply with specified standards to acquire a federal license. Senator Joseph O'Mahoney , author of the bill and Chairman of the Committee, on left Economic determinism is a socioeconomic theory that economic relationships (such as being an owner or capitalist or being a worker or proletarian) are the foundation upon which all other societal and political arrangements in society are based. The theory stresses that societies are divided into competing economic classes whose relative political power is determined by the nature of the economic system.

In the writing of American history the term is associated with historian Charles A. Beard (1874–1948), who was not a Marxist but who emphasized the long-term political contest between bankers and business interest on the one hand, and agrarian interests on the other.

[ 1 ] Relation to Marxist philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e According to Marx , each social mode of production produces the material conditions of its reproduction. Otherwise said, it is the ideology that is responsible for grounding secondary civil services such as politics, legislature, and even culture to an extent. Roughly speaking, ideology is the guiding influence of the mode of production, and without it, difficulties would theoretically arise with reproduction. Marx did not believe that the same economic rules governed all of history, but that each new era brought with it new economic factors.

[ 2 ] Furthermore, Marx and Engels are said to have believed, should a revolutionary force change the mode of production, the dominant class will immediately set out to create a new society to protect this new economic order.

[ 3 ] In the modernity of their era, Marx and Engels felt the propertied class had essentially accomplished the establishment of a new societal and economic order, instinctively creating a society protective of their capitalist interests. They made this statement to the Bourgeoisie in the Communist Manifesto : "Your very ideas are but the outgrowth of conditions of your bourgeois production and bourgeois property, just as your jurisprudence is but the will of your class, made into law for all, a will whose essential character and direction are determined by the economic conditions of the existence of your class." [ 4 ] Marx also believed that the same ideas could not grow out of just any economic system:" Don Quixote long ago paid the penalty for wrongly imagining that knight-errantry was compatible with all economical forms of society." [ 5 ] Other Marxists and Marx-scholars—including Eduard Bernstein , [ 6 ] Gerald Hubmann, [ 7 ] György Lukács , Antonio Gramsci , Louis Althusser , Maurice Godelier , Franz Jakubowski , Edward P. Thompson and Michael Löwy —completely reject the interpretation of Marx and Engels as "economic determinists". They claim this idea is based on a poor and selective reading of Marx and Engels' work. They argue that this interpretation originated in the early years of the Second International and was popularised by Paul Lafargue [ 8 ] and Nikolai Bukharin , among others. They refer to the disclaimers by Engels (see historical materialism ) to the effect that while Marx and himself had focused a lot on the economic aspects, they were very aware that this did not in fact constitute the totality of society or of social life. In Socialism: Utopian and Scientific , Engels notes how the same material conditions and class situation led to different political situations in Britain as that society tried to adapt to the results of the French Revolution and other external events.

[ 9 ] Richard Wolff also notes that Marx studied things he thought under appreciated by mainstream academia, but did not proclaim or think their theories to be irrelevant.

[ 10 ] Notable economic determinists [ edit ] American geostrategist Thomas P. M. Barnett describes himself as an economic determinist in his book The Pentagon's New Map . Maurice Rea Davie describes William Graham Sumner as an economic determinist, albeit not of the Marxian variety, in his book about the former social scientist.

See also [ edit ] Biocultural evolution Communism Critique of political economy Dialectical materialism Parametric determinism Philosophy of history References [ edit ] ^ Coleman, Peter J. (1960). "Beard, McDonald, and Economic Determinism in American Historiography".

Business History Review .

34 (1): 113– 121.

JSTOR 3111785 .

^ K. Marx (1952).

Capital , (S. Moore and E. Aveling, Trans., F. Engels, Ed.). In R. M. Hutchins (Ed.), Marx (1st ed., Vol. 50, Great Books of the Western World , p. 10). Chicago, Illinois: Encyclopaedia Britannica. (Original work published 1883) ^ Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels, "The German Ideology," from Selected Writings, p. 120 ^ Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Communist Manifesto , p. 35 ^ Marx, Capital , Footnote 2, p. 36 ^ Bernstein, Eduard . "1".

Evolutionary Socialism . Retrieved 2020-06-20 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ "Afgestoft en gerehabiliteerd" .

De Groene Amsterdammer (in Dutch) . Retrieved 2020-06-20 .

^ Lafargue, Paul (1903).

The Historical Method of Karl Marx . Retrieved 2021-05-09 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2020-06-20 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : " "Intro to Marxian Economics" 1 (3of6) - Richard D Wolff" .

YouTube .

Further reading [ edit ] Helmut Fleischer, Marxism and History . New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1973.

Friedrich Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific . London: Mondial, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Marxism's Internal Contradiction v t e Determinism Types Architectural Biological Cultural Economic Environmental Genetic Historical Linguistic Nominative Psychic Psychological Reciprocal Social Technological Theological Related topics Causality Proximate and ultimate causation Correlation does not imply causation Contingency (philosophy) Etiology Cause (medicine) Falliblism Illusionism Destiny Deterministic system Essentialism and non-essentialism Fatalism Free will Compatibilism Hard determinism Indeterminism Predeterminism Metaphysical necessity Necessitarianism Superdeterminism Uncertainty principle Libertarianism (metaphysics) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐pnfd8
Cached time: 20250812021457
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.478 seconds
Real time usage: 0.597 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1160/1000000
Revision size: 7659/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 96455/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5633/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58546/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.312/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6062923/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  460.434      1 -total
 33.09%  152.374      1 Template:Reflist
 29.96%  137.933      1 Template:Marxism
 29.28%  134.818      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 22.56%  103.880      1 Template:Cite_journal
 14.96%   68.886      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 14.09%   64.853      1 Template:Short_description
 13.57%   62.489      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.33%   47.553      2 Template:Missing_information
  9.67%   44.527      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1965426:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021457 and revision id 1225212488. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_determinism&oldid=1225212488 " Categories : Communist theory Determinism Historical determinism Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles to be expanded from June 2020 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 23 May 2024, at 01:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic determinism 13 languages Add topic

