Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 History and productions Toggle History and productions subsection 2.1 Background 2.2 Debut 2.3 Principal productions 2.4 Successors 3 The dancers 4 Choreographers Toggle Choreographers subsection 4.1 Michel Fokine 4.2 Vaslav Nijinsky 4.3 Léonide Massine 4.4 Bronislava Nijinska 4.5 George Balanchine 5 The designers Toggle The designers subsection 5.1 Alexandre Benois 5.2 Léon Bakst 5.3 Pablo Picasso 5.4 Natalia Goncharova 5.5 Mikhail Larionov 6 Composers and conductors Toggle Composers and conductors subsection 6.1 Igor Stravinsky 7 Film of a performance 8 Centennial exhibitions and celebrations 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Ballets Russes 36 languages Afrikaans العربية Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Itinerant ballet company (1909–1929) This article is about the early 20th-century ballet company. For the 2005 feature documentary, see Ballets Russes (film) . For other uses, see Russian ballet .

Ballets Russes General information Name Ballets Russes Year founded 1909 Closed 1929 Principal venue Various Artistic staff Artistic Director Sergei Diaghilev Other Formation Principal Soloist Corps de Ballet Poster by Jean Cocteau for the 1911 Ballet Russe season showing Nijinsky in costume for Le Spectre de la rose , Paris The Ballets Russes ( French: [balɛ ʁys] ) was an itinerant ballet company begun in Paris that performed between 1909 and 1929 throughout Europe and on tours to North and South America. The company never performed in Russia, where the Revolution disrupted society. After its initial Paris season, the company had no formal ties there.

[ 1 ] Originally conceived by impresario Sergei Diaghilev , the Ballets Russes is widely regarded as the most influential ballet company of the 20th century, [ 2 ] in part because it promoted ground-breaking artistic collaborations among young choreographers, composers, designers, and dancers, all at the forefront of their several fields. Diaghilev commissioned works from composers such as Igor Stravinsky , Claude Debussy , Sergei Prokofiev , Erik Satie , and Maurice Ravel , artists such as Vasily Kandinsky , Alexandre Benois , Konstantin Korovin , Nicholas Roerich , Pablo Picasso , and Henri Matisse , and costume designers Léon Bakst , Ivan Bilibin and Coco Chanel .

The company's productions created a huge sensation, completely reinvigorating the art of performing dance, bringing many visual artists to public attention, and significantly affecting the course of musical composition. It also introduced European and American audiences to tales, music, and design motifs drawn from Russian folklore . The company's employment of European avant-garde art went on to influence broader artistic and popular culture of the early twentieth century, not least the development of Art Deco .

Nomenclature [ edit ] The French plural form of the name, Ballets Russes , specifically refers to the company founded by Sergei Diaghilev and active during his lifetime.  (In some publicity the company was advertised as Les Ballets Russes de Serge Diaghileff.

)  In English, the company is now commonly referred to as "the Ballets Russes", although in the early part of the 20th century, it was sometimes referred to as "The Russian Ballet" or "Diaghilev's Russian Ballet".  To add to the confusion, some publicity material spelled the name in the singular.

The names Ballet Russe de Monte-Carlo and the Original Ballet Russe (using the singular) refer to companies that formed after Diaghilev's death in 1929.

History and productions [ edit ] Sergei Diaghilev , founder of the Ballets Russes Background [ edit ] Sergei Diaghilev , the company's impresario (or " artistic director " in modern terms), was chiefly responsible for its success. He was uniquely prepared for the role; born into a wealthy Russian family of vodka distillers (though they went bankrupt when he was 18), he was accustomed to moving in the upper-class circles that provided the company's patrons and benefactors. It is indispensable to mention the name of the sponsor Winnaretta Singer whose generous financial subsidies ensured the success of Sergei Diaghilev's Ballets Russes in Europe.

[ 3 ] In 1890, he enrolled at the Faculty of Law, St. Petersburg, to prepare for a career in the civil service like many Russian young men of his class.

[ 4 ] There he was introduced (through his cousin Dmitry Filosofov ) to a student clique of artists and intellectuals calling themselves The Nevsky Pickwickians whose most influential member was Alexandre Benois ; others included Léon Bakst , Walter Nouvel , and Konstantin Somov .

[ 4 ] From childhood, Diaghilev had been passionately interested in music. However, his ambition to become a composer was dashed in 1894 when Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov told him he had no talent.

[ 5 ] In 1898, several members of The Pickwickians founded the journal Mir iskusstva ( World of Art ) under the editorship of Diaghilev.

[ 6 ] As early as 1902, Mir iskusstva included reviews of concerts, operas, and ballets in Russia. The latter were chiefly written by Benois, who exerted considerable influence on Diaghilev's thinking.

[ 7 ] Mir iskusstva also sponsored exhibitions of Russian art in St. Petersburg, culminating in Diaghilev's important 1905 show of Russian portraiture at the Tauride Palace .

[ 8 ] Ballet Russes by August Macke , 1912 Frustrated by the extreme conservatism of the Russian art world, Diaghilev organized the groundbreaking Exhibition of Russian Art at the Petit Palais in Paris in 1906, the first major showing of Russian art in the West. Its enormous success created a Parisian fascination with all things Russian. Diaghilev organised a 1907 season of Russian music at the Paris Opéra . In 1908, Diaghilev returned to the Paris Opéra with six performances of Modest Mussorgsky 's opera Boris Godunov , starring basso Fyodor Chaliapin . This was Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov 's 1908 version (with additional cuts and re-arrangement of the scenes). The performances were a sensation, though the costs of producing grand opera were crippling.

Debut [ edit ] In 1909, Diaghilev presented his first Paris "Saison Russe" devoted exclusively to ballet (although the company did not use the name "Ballets Russes" until the following year). Most of this original company were resident performers at the Imperial Ballet of Saint Petersburg , hired by Diaghilev to perform in Paris during the Imperial Ballet's summer holidays. The first season's repertory featured a variety of works chiefly choreographed by Michel Fokine , including Le Pavillon d'Armide , the Polovtsian Dances (from Prince Igor ), Les Sylphides , and Cléopâtre . The season also included Le Festin , a pastiche set by several choreographers (including Fokine) to music by several Russian composers.

Principal productions [ edit ] See also: Category:Ballets Russes productions The principal productions are shown in the table below.

Year Title Image Composer(s) Choreographer(s) Sets and costumes 1909 Le Pavillon d'Armide Nikolai Tcherepnin Michel Fokine Alexandre Benois Prince Igor Alexander Borodin Michel Fokine Nicholas Roerich Le Festin Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov (march from Le Coq d'Or used for processional entry) Konstantin Korovin (sets and costumes) Léon Bakst (costumes) Alexandre Benois (costumes) Ivan Bilibin (costumes) Mikhail Glinka ( "Lezginka" from Ruslan and Ludmilla ) Michel Fokine, Marius Petipa Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky ( "L'Oiseau d'Or" from The Sleeping Beauty ) Marius Petipa Alexander Glazunov ( "Czardas" from Raymonda ) Alexander Gorsky Modest Mussorgsky ( "Hopak" from The Fair at Sorochyntsi ) Michel Fokine Mikhail Glinka ( "Mazurka" from A Life for the Tsar ) Nicolai Goltz, Felix Kchessinsky Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky ( "Trepak" from The Nutcracker ) Michel Fokine Alexander Glazunov ( "Grand Pas Classique Hongrois" from Raymonda ) Marius Petipa Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky ( "Finale" of the Second Symphony ) Michel Fokine Les Sylphides Frédéric Chopin (orch. Glazunov, Igor Stravinsky , Alexander Taneyev ) Michel Fokine Alexandre Benois Cléopâtre Anton Arensky (additional music by Glazunov, Glinka, Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov, Sergei Taneyev , Nikolai Tcherepnin ) Michel Fokine Léon Bakst 1910 Carnaval Robert Schumann (orch. Arensky, Glazunov, Anatol Liadov , Rimsky-Korsakov, Tcherepnin) Michel Fokine Léon Bakst Schéhérazade Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Michel Fokine Léon Bakst Giselle Adolphe Adam Jean Coralli , Jules Perrot , Marius Petipa (revival), Michel Fokine (revisions) Alexandre Benois Les Orientales Christian Sinding ( Rondoletto giocoso, op.32/5 ) (orch. Igor Stravinsky for "Danse Siamoise" ) Edvard Grieg ( Småtroll, op.71/3, from Lyric Pieces , Book X ) (orch. Igor Stravinsky for "Variation") Vaslav Nijinsky ("Danse Orientale" and "Variation") Michel Fokine Konstantin Korovin (sets and costumes) Léon Bakst (costumes) L'Oiseau de feu Igor Stravinsky Michel Fokine Alexander Golovine (sets and costumes) Léon Bakst (costumes) 1911 Le Spectre de la rose Carl Maria von Weber Michel Fokine Léon Bakst Narcisse Nikolai Tcherepnin Michel Fokine Léon Bakst Sadko Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Mikhail Fokine Boris Anisfeld Petrushka Igor Stravinsky Michel Fokine Alexandre Benois Swan Lake Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky Marius Petipa, Lev Ivanov , Michel Fokine (revisions) Konstantin Korovin (sets) Alexander Golovin (sets and costumes) 1912 L'après-midi d'un faune Claude Debussy Vaslav Nijinsky Léon Bakst Daphnis et Chloé Maurice Ravel Michel Fokine Léon Bakst Le Dieu bleu Reynaldo Hahn Michel Fokine Léon Bakst Thamar Mily Balakirev based on his symphonic poem Tamara Michel Fokine Léon Bakst 1913 Jeux Claude Debussy Vaslav Nijinsky Léon Bakst Le sacre du printemps Igor Stravinsky Vaslav Nijinsky Nicholas Roerich Tragédie de Salomé Florent Schmitt Boris Romanov Sergey Sudeykin 1914 Les Papillons Robert Schumann (orch.

Nikolai Tcherepnin ) Mikhail Fokine Mstislav Doboujinsky La légende de Joseph Richard Strauss Michel Fokine Léon Bakst Le coq d'or Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Michel Fokine Natalia Goncharova Le rossignol Igor Stravinsky Boris Romanov Alexandre Benois Midas Maximilian Steinberg Michel Fokine Mstislav Doboujinsky 1915 Soleil de Nuit Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov Léonide Massine Mikhail Larionov 1916 Las Meniñas Louis Aubert , Gabriel Fauré ( Pavane ), Maurice Ravel ( Alborada del gracioso ), Emmanuel Chabrier ( Menuet pompeux ) Léonide Massine Josep Maria Sert (costumes) Kikimora Anatoly Liadov Léonide Massine Mikhail Larionov Till Eulenspiegel Richard Strauss Vaslav Nijinsky Robert Edmond Jones 1917 Feu d'Artifice Igor Stravinsky Giacomo Balla Les Femmes de Bonne Humeur Domenico Scarlatti (orch.

Vincenzo Tommasini ) Léonide Massine Léon Bakst Parade Erik Satie Léonide Massine Pablo Picasso 1919 La Boutique fantasque Gioachino Rossini (arr.

Ottorino Respighi ) Léonide Massine André Derain El sombrero de tres picos Manuel de Falla Léonide Massine Pablo Picasso Les jardins d'Aranjuez (new version of Las Meninas ) Louis Aubert, Gabriel Fauré, Maurice Ravel, Emmanuel Chabrier Léonide Massine Josep Maria Sert (costumes) 1920 Le chant du rossignol Igor Stravinsky Léonide Massine Henri Matisse Pulcinella Igor Stravinsky Léonide Massine Pablo Picasso Ballet de l'astuce féminine or Cimarosiana Domenico Cimarosa Léonide Massine Josep Maria Sert Le sacre du printemps (revival) Igor Stravinsky Léonide Massine Nicholas Roerich 1921 Chout Sergei Prokofiev Léonide Massine Mikhail Larionov Cuadro Flamenco Traditional Andalusian music (arr. Manuel de Falla) Pablo Picasso The Sleeping Beauty Pyotr Tchaikovsky Marius Petipa Léon Bakst 1922 Le Mariage de la Belle au Bois Dormant Pyotr Tchaikovsky Marius Petipa Alexandre Benois (sets and costumes) Natalia Goncharova (costumes) Mavra Igor Stravinsky Bronislava Nijinska Léopold Survage Renard Igor Stravinsky Bronislava Nijinska Mikhail Larionov 1923 Les noces Igor Stravinsky Bronislava Nijinska Natalia Goncharova 1924 Les Tentations de la Bergère, ou l'Amour Vainqueur Michel de Montéclair (arr. and orch.

Henri Casadesus ) Bronislava Nijinska Juan Gris Le Médecin malgré lui Charles Gounod Bronislava Nijinska Alexandre Benois Les biches Francis Poulenc Bronislava Nijinska Marie Laurencin Cimarosiana Domenico Cimarosa (orch. Ottorino Respighi) Léonide Massine, Bronislava Nijinska José-María Sert Les Fâcheux Georges Auric Bronislava Nijinska Georges Braque Le train bleu Darius Milhaud Bronislava Nijinska Henri Laurens (sets) Gabrielle Chanel (costumes) Pablo Picasso (sets) 1925 Zephyr et Flore Vladimir Dukelsky Léonide Massine Georges Braque Le chant du rossignol (revival) Igor Stravinsky George Balanchine Henri Matisse Les matelots Georges Auric Léonide Massine Pere Pruna Barabau Vittorio Rieti George Balanchine Maurice Utrillo 1926 Roméo et Juliette Constant Lambert Bronislava Nijinska Max Ernst (curtain) Joan Miró (sets and costumes) Pastorale Georges Auric George Balanchine Pere Pruna Jack in the Box Erik Satie (orch. Milhaud) George Balanchine André Derain The Triumph of Neptune Lord Berners George Balanchine Pedro Pruna (costumes) 1927 La chatte Henri Sauguet George Balanchine Naum Gabo Mercure Erik Satie Léonide Massine Pablo Picasso Le pas d'acier Sergei Prokofiev Léonide Massine Georgy Yakulov 1928 Ode Nikolai Nabokov Léonide Massine Pavel Tchelitchev Apollon musagète (Apollo) Igor Stravinsky George Balanchine André Bauschant (scene) Coco Chanel (costumes) The Gods Go A-Begging George Frederic Handel George Balanchine Léon Bakst (sets) Juan Gris (costumes) 1929 Le Bal Vittorio Rieti George Balanchine Giorgio de Chirico Renard (revival) Igor Stravinsky Serge Lifar Mikhail Larionov Le fils prodigue Sergei Prokofiev George Balanchine Georges Rouault Successors [ edit ] Further information: Original Ballet Russe and Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo Dimitri Rostoff as Malatesta in Francesca da Rimini , Original Ballet Russe , 1940 When Sergei Diaghilev died of diabetes in Venice on 19 August 1929, the Ballets Russes was left with substantial debts. As the Great Depression began, its property was claimed by its creditors and the company of dancers dispersed.

In 1931, Colonel Wassily de Basil (a Russian émigré entrepreneur from Paris) and René Blum (ballet director at the Monte Carlo Opera ) founded the Ballets Russes de Monte-Carlo , giving its first performances there in 1932.

[ 9 ] Diaghilev alumni Léonide Massine and George Balanchine worked as choreographers with the company and Tamara Toumanova was a principal dancer.

Artistic differences led to a split between Blum and de Basil, [ 10 ] after which de Basil renamed his company initially "Ballets Russes de Colonel W. de Basil".

[ 11 ] Blum retained the name "Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo", while de Basil created a new company. In 1938, he called it "The Covent Garden Russian Ballet" [ 11 ] and then renamed it the " Original Ballet Russe " in 1939.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Col de Basil's company was run by famed promoter Fortune Gallo for a year after losing their manager.

[ 13 ] After World War II began, the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo left Europe and toured extensively in the United States and South America. As dancers retired and left the company, they often founded dance studios in the United States or South America or taught at other former company dancers' studios.  With Balanchine's founding of the School of American Ballet , and later the New York City Ballet , many outstanding former Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo dancers went to New York to teach in his school. When they toured the United States, Cyd Charisse , the film actress and dancer, was taken into the cast.

The Original Ballet Russe toured mostly in Europe. Its alumni were influential in teaching classical Russian ballet technique in European schools.

The successor companies were the subject of the 2005 documentary film Ballets Russes .

The dancers [ edit ] Scene from Apollon musagète , 1928. Dancers: Serge Lifar , Danilova , Chernysheva, Dubrovska , Petrova The Ballets Russes was noted for the high standard of its dancers, most of whom had been classically trained at the great Imperial schools in Moscow and St. Petersburg. Their high technical standards contributed a great deal to the company's success in Paris, where dance technique had declined markedly since the 1830s.

Principal female dancers included: Anna Pavlova , Tamara Karsavina , Olga Spessivtseva , Mathilde Kschessinska , Ida Rubinstein , Bronislava Nijinska , Lydia Lopokova , Sophie Pflanz , and Alicia Markova , among others; many earned international renown with the company, including Ekaterina Galanta and Valentina Kachouba .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Prima ballerina Xenia Makletzova was dismissed from the company in 1916 and sued by Diaghilev; she countersued for breach of contract, and won $4500 in a Massachusetts court.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The Ballets Russes was even more remarkable for raising the status of the male dancer, largely ignored by choreographers and ballet audiences since the early 19th century. Among the male dancers were Michel Fokine , Serge Lifar , Léonide Massine , Anton Dolin , George Balanchine , Valentin Zeglovsky , Theodore Kosloff , Adolph Bolm , and the legendary Vaslav Nijinsky , considered the most popular and talented dancer in the company's history.

After the Russian Revolution of 1917 , in later years, younger dancers were taken from those trained in Paris by former Imperial dancers, within the large community of Russian exiles. Recruits were even accepted from America and included a young Ruth Page who joined the troupe in Monte Carlo during 1925.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Choreographers [ edit ] The company featured and premiered now-famous (and sometimes notorious) works by the great choreographers Marius Petipa and Michel Fokine , as well as new works by Vaslav Nijinsky , Bronislava Nijinska , Léonide Massine , and the young George Balanchine at the start of his career.

Michel Fokine [ edit ] The choreography of Michel Fokine was of paramount importance in the initial success of the Ballets Russes.  Fokine had graduated from the Imperial Ballet School in Saint Petersburg in 1898, and eventually become First Soloist at the Mariinsky Theater .  In 1907, Fokine choreographed his first work for the Imperial Russian Ballet, Le Pavillon d'Armide . In the same year, he created Chopiniana to piano music by the composer Frédéric Chopin as orchestrated by Alexander Glazunov . This was an early example of creating choreography to an existing score rather than to music specifically written for the ballet, a departure from the normal practice at the time.

Fokine established an international reputation with his works choreographed during the first four seasons (1909–1912) of the Ballets Russes. These included the Polovtsian Dances (from Prince Igor ), Le Pavillon d'Armide (a revival of his 1907 production for the Imperial Russian Ballet), Les Sylphides (a reworking of his earlier Chopiniana ), The Firebird , Le Spectre de la Rose , Petrushka , and Daphnis and Chloé . After a longstanding tumultuous relationship with Diaghilev, Fokine left the Ballets Russes at the end of the 1912 season.

[ 21 ] Vaslav Nijinsky [ edit ] Vaslav Nijinsky in Scheherazade Vaslav Nijinsky had attended the Imperial Ballet School , St. Petersburg since the age of eight.  He graduated in 1907 and joined the Imperial Ballet where he immediately began to take starring roles. Diaghilev invited him to join the Ballets Russes for its first Paris season.

In 1912, Diaghilev gave Nijinsky his first opportunity as a choreographer, for his production of L'Après-midi d'un faune to Claude Debussy 's symphonic poem Prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune .  Featuring Nijinsky himself as the Faun, the ballet's frankly erotic nature caused a sensation.

[ citation needed ] The following year, Nijinsky choreographed a new work by Debussy composed expressly for the Ballets Russes, Jeux . Indifferently received by the public, Jeux was eclipsed two weeks later by the premiere of Igor Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring ( Le Sacre du printemps ), also choreographed by Nijinsky.

Nijinsky eventually retired from dance and choreography, after he was diagnosed with schizophrenia in 1919.

Léonide Massine [ edit ] Léonide Massine was born in Moscow, [ 22 ] where he studied both acting and dancing at the Imperial School.  On the verge of becoming an actor, Massine was invited by Sergei Diaghilev to join the Ballets Russes, as he was seeking a replacement for Vaslav Nijinsky. Diaghilev encouraged Massine's creativity and his entry into choreography.

Massine's most famous creations for the Ballets Russes were Parade , El sombrero de tres picos , and Pulcinella .  In all three of these works, he collaborated with Pablo Picasso , who designed the sets and costumes.

Massine extended Fokine's choreographic innovations, especially those relating to narrative and character.  His ballets incorporated both folk dance and demi-charactère dance, a style using classical technique to perform character dance . Massine created contrasts in his choreography, such as synchronized yet individual movement, or small-group dance patterns within the corps de ballet .

Bronislava Nijinska in Petrushka Bronislava Nijinska [ edit ] Bronislava Nijinska was the younger sister of Vaslav Nijinsky . She trained at the Imperial Ballet School in St. Petersburg, joining the Imperial Ballet company in 1908. From 1909, she (like her brother) was a member of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes.

In 1915, Nijinska and her husband fled to Kiev to escape World War I.  There, she founded the École de movement, where she trained Ukrainian artists in modern dance.  Her most prominent pupil was Serge Lifar (who later joined the Ballets Russes in 1923).

Following the Russian Revolution, Nijinska fled again to Poland, and then, in 1921, re-joined the Ballets Russes in Paris.  In 1923, Diaghilev assigned her the choreography of Stravinsky's Les Noces .

The result combines elements of her brother's choreography for The Rite of Spring with more traditional aspects of ballet, such as dancing en pointe .

The following year, she choreographed three new works for the company: Les biches , Les Fâcheux , and Le train bleu .

George Balanchine [ edit ] Born Giorgi Melitonovitch Balanchivadze in Saint Petersburg, George Balanchine was trained at the Imperial School of Ballet.  His education there was interrupted by the Russian Revolution of 1917 .  Balanchine graduated in 1921, after the school reopened.  He subsequently studied music theory, composition, and advanced piano at the Petrograd Conservatory , graduating in 1923. During this time, he worked with the corps de ballet of the Mariinsky Theater .  In 1924, Balanchine (and his first wife, ballerina Tamara Geva ) fled to Paris while on tour of Germany with the Soviet State Dancers.  He was invited by Sergei Diaghilev to join the Ballets Russes as a choreographer.

[ 23 ] The designers [ edit ] Diaghilev invited the collaboration of contemporary fine artists in the design of sets and costumes.  These included Alexandre Benois , Léon Bakst , Nicholas Roerich , Georges Braque , Natalia Goncharova , Mikhail Larionov , Pablo Picasso , Coco Chanel , Henri Matisse , André Derain , Joan Miró , Giorgio de Chirico , Salvador Dalí , Ivan Bilibin , Juan Gris , Pavel Tchelitchev , Maurice Utrillo , and Georges Rouault .

Their designs contributed to the groundbreaking excitement of the company's productions. The scandal caused by the premiere performance in Paris of Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring has been partly attributed to the provocative aesthetic of the costumes of the Ballets Russes.

[ 24 ] While they created amazing works most of the designers were not trained in theater but started out as studio painters.

Alexandre Benois [ edit ] Alexandre Benois had been the most influential member of The Nevsky Pickwickians and was one of the original founders (with Bakst and Diaghilev) of Mir iskusstva . His particular interest in ballet as an art form strongly influenced Diaghilev and was seminal in the formation of the Ballets Russes. Benois was also focused on historical accuracy and had an extensive knowledge of fashion history. In addition, Benois contributed scenic and costume designs to several of the company's earlier productions: Le Pavillon d'Armide , portions of Le Festin , and Giselle . Benois also participated with Igor Stravinsky and Michel Fokine in the creation of Petrushka , to which he contributed much of the scenario as well as the stage sets and costumes.

Léon Bakst [ edit ] Léon Bakst was also an original member of both The Nevsky Pickwickians and Mir iskusstva .  "He regarded the nude body as an aesthetic totality whose artistry had been forgotten under the weight of nineteenth century social and theatrical dress." [ 25 ] He participated as designer in productions of the Ballets Russes from its beginning in 1909 until 1921, creating sets and costumes for Scheherazade , The Firebird , Les Orientales , Le Spectre de la rose , L'Après-midi d'une faune , and Daphnis et Chloé , among other productions.

Pablo Picasso [ edit ] Main article: Picasso and the Ballets Russes In 1917, Pablo Picasso designed sets and costumes in the Cubist style for three Diaghilev ballets, all with choreography by Léonide Massine : Parade , El sombrero de tres picos , and Pulcinella .

Natalia Goncharova [ edit ] Natalia Goncharova was born in 1881 near Tula, Russia . Her art was inspired by Russian folk art, Fauvism , and cubism. She began designing for the Ballets Russes in 1914 (the Golden Cockerel ballet).

Although the Ballets Russes firmly established the 20th-century tradition of fine art theatre design, the company was not unique in its employment of fine artists.  For instance, Savva Mamontov 's Private Opera Company had made a policy of employing fine artists, such as Konstantin Korovin and Golovin , who went on to work for the Ballets Russes.

Mikhail Larionov [ edit ] Mikhail Larionov (1881-1964) was a Russian avant-garde painter who pioneered the approach to abstract Russian art and husband of Natalia Goncharova , with whom they worked on Sergei Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes in France and Switzerland.

After Diaghilev’s invitation, Goncharova in May 1914 went to Paris to prepare the Golden Cockerel ballet decorations, accompanied by Larionov. They stayed in Paris until World War I broke out. Since Larionov was liable for military service, he returned to Russia in August 1914 and was sent to the front, but got severely wounded and demobilized in December, 1914. When Sergei Diaghilev learned about it, he started bombarding Goncharova and Larionov with telegrams urging to come to him to work on Russian ballets. Thus in July 1915 Goncharova and Larionov went to Diaghilev’s rented villa in Ouchy near Lausanne to work on “Les Noces” and «Liturgy» (Natalia Goncharova) and “Soleil de Nuit” («Полуночное солнце») by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov (Mikhail Larionov).

[ 26 ] Composers and conductors [ edit ] Igor Stravinsky with Vaslav Nijinsky in costume for Petrushka For his new productions, Diaghilev commissioned the foremost composers of the 20th century, including: Debussy , Milhaud , Poulenc , Prokofiev , Ravel , Satie , Respighi , Stravinsky , de Falla , and Strauss . He was also responsible for commissioning the first two significant British-composed ballets: Romeo and Juliet (composed in 1925 by nineteen-year-old Constant Lambert ) and The Triumph of Neptune (composed in 1926 by Lord Berners ).

The impresario also engaged conductors who were or became eminent in their field during the 20th century, including Pierre Monteux (1911–16 and 1924), Ernest Ansermet (1915–23), Edward Clark (1919–20) and Roger Désormière (1925–29).

[ 27 ] Igor Stravinsky [ edit ] Diaghilev hired the young Stravinsky at a time when he was virtually unknown to compose the music for The Firebird , after the composer Anatoly Lyadov proved unreliable, and this was instrumental in launching Stravinsky's career in Europe and the United States of America.

Stravinsky's early ballet scores were the subject of much discussion.

The Firebird (1910) was seen as an astonishingly accomplished work for such a young artist ( Debussy is said to have remarked drily: "Well, you've got to start somewhere!"). Many contemporary audiences found Petrushka (1911) to be almost unbearably dissonant and confused.

The Rite of Spring (1913) nearly caused an audience riot. It stunned people because of its willful rhythms and aggressive dynamics. The audience's negative reaction to it is now regarded as a theatrical scandal as notorious as the failed runs of Richard Wagner 's Tannhäuser at Paris in 1861 and Jean-Georges Noverre 's Les Fêtes Chinoises in London on the eve of the Seven Years' War . However, Stravinsky's early ballet scores are now widely considered masterpieces of the genre.

[ 28 ] Film of a performance [ edit ] Diaghilev always maintained that no camera could ever do justice to the artistry of his dancers, and it was long believed there was no film legacy of the Ballets Russes.  However, in 2011 a 30-second newsreel film of a performance in Montreux , Switzerland, in June 1928 came to light. The ballet was Les Sylphides and the lead dancer was identified as Serge Lifar .

[ 29 ] Centennial exhibitions and celebrations [ edit ] Russian stamp: Sergei Diaghilev Paris, 2008 : In September 2008, on the eve of the 100th anniversary of the creation of the Ballets Russes, Sotheby's announced the staging of an exceptional exhibition of works lent mainly by French, British and Russian private collectors, museums and foundations. Some 150 paintings, designs, costumes, theatre decors, drawings, sculptures, photographs, manuscripts, and programs were exhibited in Paris, retracing the key moments in the history of the Ballets Russes. On display were costumes designed by André Derain ( La Boutique fantasque , 1919) and Henri Matisse ( Le chant du rossignol , 1920), and Léon Bakst .

Posters recalling the surge of creativity that surrounded the Ballets Russes included Pablo Picasso 's iconic image of the Chinese Conjuror for the audacious production of Parade and Jean Cocteau 's poster for Le Spectre de la rose . Costumes and stage designs presented included works by Alexander Benois , for Le Pavillon d'Armide and Petrushka ; Léon Bakst, for La Péri and Le Dieu bleu ; Mikhail Larionov , for Le Soleil à Minuit ; and Natalia Goncharova , for The Firebird (1925 version). The exhibition also included important contemporary artists, whose works reflected the visual heritage of the Ballets Russes – notably an installation made of colorfully painted paper by the Belgian artist Isabelle de Borchgrave , and items from the Imperial Porcelain Factory in St. Petersburg.

[ 30 ] Monte-Carlo, 2009 : In May, in Monaco, two postage stamps "Centenary of Ballets Russians of Diaghilev" went out, created by Georgy Shishkin .

London, 2010–11 : London's Victoria and Albert Museum presented a special exhibition entitled Diaghilev and the Golden Age of the Ballets Russes, 1909–1929 at the V&A South Kensington between 5 September 2010 and 9 January 2011.

Canberra, 2010–11 : An exhibition of the company's costumes held by the National Gallery of Australia was held from 10 December 2010 – 1 May 2011 at the Gallery in Canberra . Entitled Ballets Russes: The Art of Costume , it included 150 costumes and accessories from 34 productions from 1909 to 1939; one third of the costumes had not been seen since they were last worn on stage. Along with costumes by Natalia Goncharova, Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, André Derain, Georges Braque , André Masson and Giorgio de Chirico , the exhibition also featured photographs, film, music and artists' drawings.

[ 31 ] Washington, DC, 2013 : Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes, 1909–1929: When Art Danced with Music.

National Gallery of Art , East Building Mezzanine. 12 May— 2 September 2013. Organized by the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, in collaboration with the National Gallery of Art, Washington.

Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes, 1909-1929: When Art Danced with Music Stockholm, 2014–2015 : Sleeping Beauties – Dreams and Costumes . The Dance Museum in Stockholm owns about 250 original costumes from the Ballets Russes, in this exhibition about fifty of them are shown. (www.dansmuseet.se) New York, NY 2024 : Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes, 1909-1929: When Art Danced with Music at The Morgan Library & Museum from June 28 through September 22, 2024.  The exhibit displayed musical manuscripts from its Robert Owen Lehman collection.  The catalog was written by Robinson McClellan ( ISBN 978-1913875671 ).

[ 32 ] Crafting the Ballets Russes: The Robert Owen Lehman Collection See also [ edit ] List of productions of Swan Lake derived from its 1895 revival References [ edit ] Notes ^ Garafola 1998 , p. vii.

^ "Diaghilev's Golden Age of the Ballets Russes dazzles London with V&A display" . Culture24. 2011-01-09 . Retrieved 2013-05-08 .

^ "Singer, Winnaretta (1865–1943) | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2024-05-07 .

^ a b Garafola 1998 , p. 150.

^ Garafola 1998 , p. 438, n. 7.

^ Garafola 1998 , p. 151.

^ Morrison, Simon.  "The 'World of Art' and Music," in [Mir Iskusstva]:  Russia's Age of Elegance.

Palace Editions.  Omaha, Minneapolis, and Princeton, 2005. p. 38.

^ Guroff, Greg.  "Introduction" in [Mir Iskusstva]:  Russia's Age of Elegance.

Palace Editions.  Omaha, Minneapolis, and Princeton, 2005. p. 14.

^ Amanda.

"Ballets Russes" , The Age (17 July 2005) ^ Homans, Jennifer.

"René Blum: Life of a Dance Master," New York Times (July 8, 2011).

^ a b c "Les Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo" . The Oxford Dictionary of Dance. 2004 . Retrieved 2010-03-28 .

^ Tennant, Victoria (2014).

Irina Baronova and the Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo . University of Chicago Press. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-226-16716-9 . Retrieved 14 June 2016 .

^ "Fortune Gallo Ballet Russe business letters" .

New York Library Archives . Fortune Gallo . Retrieved 15 June 2024 .

^ "Diaghileff Ballet Russ Arrives" .

Musical America .

24 : 33. September 23, 1916.

^ "They Look Pretty, Too" .

Los Angeles Times . December 16, 1916. p. 15 . Retrieved April 10, 2019 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Banni-Viñas, Vanessa (2013). "Correcting a Ballerina's Story: The Truth Behind Makletzova v. Diaghileff".

American Journal of Legal History .

53 (3): 353– 361.

doi : 10.1093/ajlh/53.3.353 .

^ Xenia P. Makletzova v. Sergei Diaghileff , 227 Mass. 100 (March 13, 1917 — May 25, 1917).

^ " Ruth Page - Early Architect of the American Ballet a biographical essay by Joellen A. Meglin on www.danceheritage.org" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-09-16 . Retrieved 2017-12-20 .

^ Anderson, Jack (9 April 1991).

"Ruth Page's Obituary in The New York Times 9 April 1991 on www.nytimes.com" .

The New York Times .

^ "archives.nypl.org -- Ruth Page collection" .

archives.nypl.org .

^ Walsh (2000), p. 180.

^ "Leonide Massine" .

American Ballet Theatre . Archived from the original on 13 December 2010 . Retrieved 17 January 2011 .

^ Horowitz, Joseph.

Artists in Exile: How Refugees from Twentieth-Century War and Revolution Transformed the American Performing Arts , New York: Harper Collins, 2008.

^ Albert, Jane (2010-12-11). "Inside the dress circle". The Sydney Morning Herald, "Spectrum" section. p. 2.

^ pritchard, jane (2010).

Diaghilev and the golden age of the ballet russes . V&A Publishing. p. 104.

^ Kovtun, Evgeniy Fedorovich. Mikhail Larionov. 1881-1964. St. Petersburg, Aurora Publishing House, 1998. - 175 p. ISBN 5-7300-0668-3 (Ковтун, Евгений Фёдорович. Михаил Ларионов. 1881—1964. Санкт-Петербург, издательство «Аврора», 1998. - 175 c. ISBN 5-7300-0668-3). Pp.136-137.

^ Buckle, Richard . Diaghilev. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1979.

^ Thomas Kelly (1999).

"Igor Stravinsky's "The Rite of Spring" " . Washington D.C.: National Public Radio.

^ "Ballets Russes brought back to life on film" by Maev Kennedy , The Guardian , 1 February 2011. Retrieved 10 January 2014.

^ "Dancing into Glory: The Golden Age of the Ballets Russes" . Ballets-Russes.com . Retrieved 26 February 2011 .

^ Bell, Robert, ed. (2010).

Ballets Russes: the art of costume . Thames & Hudson UK and University of Washington Press, USA.

ISBN 978-0-642-54157-4 .

^ " 'Dancing With the Other Arts': The Ballets Russes' Creative Churn" . 2024-08-21 . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

Sources Garafola, Lynn (1998).

Diaghilev's Ballets Russes . New York: Da Capo Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Anderson, Jack (1992).

Ballet and Modern Dance: A Concise History . New Jersey: Princeton Book Company.

Anderson, Margot, et al.

Creative Australia and the Ballets Russes . Published in conjunction with the Exhibition, Arts Centre, Melbourne 2009.

ISBN 978 0 9802958 1 8 Berggruen, Olivier .

The Writing of Art (London: Pushkin Press, 2011) Bell, Robert.

Ballets Russes: The Art of Costume . National Gallery of Australia, 2011 Christofis, Lee (June 2009).

"The Ballets Russes in Australia 1936–1940" (PDF) .

The National Library Magazine .

1 (2): 21– 23 . Retrieved 17 January 2011 .

Clarke, Mary, and Clement Crisp.

Design for Ballet . Studio Vista, 1978.

Garafola, Lynn (1999).

The Ballet Russe and its World . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

Papanikolaou, Eftychia (March 2008).

"The Art of the Ballets Russes Captured: Reconstructed Ballet Performances on Video" .

Music Library Association Notes .

64 (3): 564– 585.

Purvis, Alston (2009).

The Ballets Russes and the Art of Design . New York: The Monacelli Press.

Shead, Richard.

Ballets Russes . Wellfleet Press, 1989.

Gosudarstvennyĭ russkiĭ muzeĭ; Foundation for International Arts and Education; Joslyn Art Museum; Frederick R. Weisman Art Museum; Princeton University Art Museum (2005).

Mir Iskusstva: Russia's Age of Elegance . St. Petersburg, Russia; Omaha, Nebraska; Minneapolis, Minnesote; Princeton, New Jersey: Palace Editions.

ISBN 9780967845135 .

OCLC 60593691 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ballets Russes .

Ballets Russes The History of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes 1909–1929 [ usurped ] Ballet Russe Cultural Partnership website Pathé newsreel extract of Les Sylphides by Ballets Russes , featuring the dancer Serge Lifar . Festival 'Fetes de Narcisses' in Montreux, Switzerland; June 1928.

Ballets Russes de Serge Diaghilev at the Library of Congress : digital exhibition Ballets Russes, 1928, concert program, Library of Congress Eugene Olshansky Production Photographs at Newberry Library Ballets Russes Centennial and other exhibitions From Russia with love: costumes from the Ballets Russes, 1909–1933 , an online exhibition featuring material from the collection of the National Gallery of Australia Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, 1909–1929: 20 Years That Changed The World of Art Online Exhibition, Houghton Library, Harvard University « Centenary of Ballets Russians of Diaghilev » Serge Diaghilev and His World: A Centennial Celebration of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, 1909–1929 Library of Congress Successor companies The Ballets Russes in Australia Archived 2016-04-03 at the Wayback Machine , Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo materials held in the Performing Arts Collection Archived 2012-11-03 at the Wayback Machine , at Arts Centre Melbourne v t e Ballet companies Africa Cairo Opera Ballet Company Cape Town City Ballet Asia Ballet Manila Ballet Philippines Guangzhou Ballet Gwangju City Ballet Hong Kong Ballet Iranian National Ballet Company Israel Ballet K-ballet Korea National Ballet National Ballet of China New National Theatre Tokyo Philippine Ballet Theatre Seoul Ballet Theatre Shanghai Ballet Company Singapore Dance Theatre State Ballet of Georgia Tokyo Ballet Universal Ballet Europe Ballet Cymru Ballet Ireland Ballet Romand Ballet Zürich Les Ballets Persans Ballets Russes Barcelona Ballet Bayerisches Staatsballett Béjart Ballet Berlin State Ballet Birmingham Royal Ballet Bolshoi Ballet Charleroi Danses Cork City Ballet Royal Danish Ballet Donetsk Ballet Dutch National Ballet Eifman Ballet English National Ballet Finnish National Ballet Royal Ballet of Flanders Sukhishvili Georgian National Ballet Grand Kyiv Ballet Greek National Opera Hamburg Ballet Hungarian National Ballet Kyiv Ballet Kyiv City Ballet Kyiv Modern-Ballet La Scala Theatre Ballet Lviv Theatre of Opera and Ballet Mariinsky Ballet Mikhailovsky Theatre Ballet National Opera and Ballet Theatre of Moldova The Monte-Carlo Ballet National Opera and Ballet of Bulgaria Northern Ballet Norwegian National Opera and Ballet Novosibirsk Theatre Ballet Odesa Opera and Ballet Theatre Original Ballet Russe Paris Opera Ballet Perm Theatre Ballet Polish National Ballet National Ballet of Portugal The Royal Ballet Rambert Dance Company Russian State Ballet of Siberia Saint Petersburg Ballet Theatre Scottish Ballet Spanish National Dance Company Stanislavski Ballet Stuttgart Ballet Royal Swedish Ballet Théâtre du Silence Turkish State Opera and Ballet United Ukrainian Ballet Company Vienna State Ballet North America Alabama Ballet Alberta Ballet Company Alexandra Ballet Alonzo King LINES Ballet American Ballet Theatre American Midwest Ballet American Repertory Ballet Anaheim Ballet Aspen Santa Fe Ballet Atlanta Ballet Atlanta Festival Ballet Ballet Arizona Ballet Austin Ballet BC Ballet Des Moines Ballet Fantastique Ballet Hispanico Ballet Magnificat!

Ballet Memphis BalletMet Ballet Minnesota Ballet Quad Cities Ballet San Jose Ballet Theatre of Maryland Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo Ballet West Ballez Bay Pointe Ballet Boston Ballet Les Grands Ballets Canadiens California Riverside Ballet Carolina Ballet Charlotte Ballet Chicago Ballet Chicago Festival Ballet Cincinnati Ballet Cleveland Ballet ( 1935 · 1972 · 2014 ) Colorado Ballet Complexions Contemporary Ballet Cuban National Ballet Dance Theatre of Harlem Dayton Ballet Greensboro Ballet Houston Ballet Joffrey Ballet Kansas City Ballet Los Angeles Ballet Louisville Ballet Moscow Ballet (United States) National Ballet of Canada National Ballet Theater of Puerto Rico New Jersey Ballet New York City Ballet Oklahoma City Ballet Oregon Ballet Theatre Orlando Ballet Pacific Northwest Ballet Pennsylvania Ballet Pittsburgh Ballet Royal Winnipeg Ballet San Francisco Ballet The Washington Ballet Tulsa Ballet Wonderbound Oceania The Australian Ballet Ballet Theatre of Queensland Queensland Ballet Melbourne City Ballet Royal New Zealand Ballet West Australian Ballet South America Ballet Municipal de Lima Chilean National Ballet Colon Theater Ballet National Ballet of Uruguay v t e Igor Stravinsky List of compositions Discography Operas and musical dramas The Nightingale Renard The Soldier's Tale Mavra Oedipus rex Perséphone The Rake's Progress The Flood Ballets The Firebird Petrushka The Rite of Spring ( discography ) Les noces Pulcinella Apollo The Fairy's Kiss Jeu de cartes Danses concertantes Scènes de ballet Orpheus Agon Symphonies Symphony in E ♭ Symphony of Psalms Symphony in C Symphony in Three Movements Orchestral music Scherzo fantastique Fireworks Funeral Song Four Études The Song of the Nightingale Circus Polka Ode Scherzo à la russe Greeting Prelude Variations: Aldous Huxley in memoriam Canon on a Russian Popular Tune Concertos Concerto for Piano and Wind Instruments Capriccio for Piano and Orchestra Violin Concerto in D Concerto in E ♭ ( "Dumbarton Oaks" ) Ebony Concerto Movements for Piano and Orchestra Concerto in D Solo vocal Pastorale Pribaoutki Berceuses du chat Abraham and Isaac Elegy for J.F.K.

" The Owl and the Pussy Cat " Choral Zvezdoliki Ave Maria Babel Mass Cantata Canticum Sacrum Threni A Sermon, a Narrative, and a Prayer Requiem Canticles Piano and pianola " Tarantella " Scherzo Piano Sonata in F ♯ minor Four Études " Valse des fleurs " Three Easy Pieces Five Easy Pieces Étude for Pianola Piano-Rag-Music Les cinq doigts Three Movements from Petrushka Piano Sonata Serenade in A Concerto for Two Pianos Tango Sonata for Two Pianos Two Sketches for a Sonata Chamber music Three Pieces for String Quartet Three Pieces for Solo Clarinet Lied ohne Name Octet Duo Concertant Elegy Septet Epitaphium Double Canon (in Memoriam Raoul Dufy) Other Symphonies of Wind Instruments Fanfare for a New Theatre Arrangements Bluebird Pas de Deux (from Tchaikovsky 's The Sleeping Beauty ) Monumentum pro Gesualdo Family Parents Fyodor Stravinsky (father) Wives Yekaterina Nosenko (first) Vera Sudeikina (second) Children Soulima Stravinsky Théodore Strawinsky Amanuensis Robert Craft Named for Stravinsky 4382 Stravinsky Igor Stravinsky (river cruise ship) Stravinsky (crater) Stravinsky Fountain Stravinsky Inlet Related Earnest Andersson Ernest Ansermet George Balanchine Ballets Russes Nadia Boulanger Coco Chanel & Igor Stravinsky (film) Jean Cocteau Sergei Diaghilev Samuel Dushkin Arthur Lourié Monday Evening Concerts New York City Ballet Pierre Monteux Neoclassicism Petrushka chord Psalms chord Charles Ferdinand Ramuz Werner Reinhart Serialism Category Audio Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Norway Sweden Israel Catalonia Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dxcql
Cached time: 20250817044457
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.791 seconds
Real time usage: 0.973 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4349/1000000
Revision size: 56169/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119219/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10918/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 115708/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.450/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16264816/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  689.978      1 -total
 18.45%  127.277      1 Template:Reflist
 13.36%   92.204      1 Template:IPA
  9.25%   63.812      1 Template:Ballet_companies
  9.05%   62.462      1 Template:Navbox
  8.10%   55.884      1 Template:Short_description
  7.76%   53.566      9 Template:Cite_web
  7.25%   50.030      2 Template:ISBN
  5.98%   41.282      5 Template:Sfn
  5.55%   38.302      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4802982:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044457 and revision id 1304213750. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ballets_Russes&oldid=1304213750 " Categories : Arts organizations established in 1909 Ballets Russes and descendants Defunct ballet companies Creative works in popular culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 17:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ballets Russes 36 languages Add topic

