Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities and politics 2 Guardian of Small Business Award 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents National Federation of Independent Business 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Association of small businesses in the United States This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "National Federation of Independent Business" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) National Federation Of Independent Business Inc Abbreviation NFIB Formation 1943 ; 82 years ago ( 1943 ) Type 501(c)(6) [ 1 ] Headquarters Nashville Region United States President Brad Close Revenue $113 million USD (2023) Expenses $124 million USD (2023) Website nfib .com [ 2 ] [ 3 ] NFIB FED PAC Formation August 1, 1978 ; 47 years ago ( 1978-08-01 ) Type Membership Organization political action committee Registration no.

C00101105 Headquarters Washington, DC Revenue $998,969.12 USD (January 2023 to December 2024) Expenses $971,136.95 USD (January 2023 to December 2024) [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The National Federation of Independent Business ( NFIB ) is an association of small businesses in the United States. It is headquartered in Nashville, Tennessee , with offices in Washington, D.C.

, and all 50 state capitals. The stated goal of NFIB is to advance the interests of small businesses.

[ 6 ] Since 1990, it has donated $725,551 to Democratic candidates and party committees versus $11,972,074 to Republican candidates or party committees.

[ 7 ] It was a key opponent of President Bill Clinton 's attempt to reform American health care in 1993, [ 8 ] as well as a lead plaintiff to have the Affordable Care Act deemed unconstitutional.

[ 9 ] The NFIB has lobbied against "click to cancel" rules (which would require companies to make cancellations as easy as the process to subscribe in the first place), [ 10 ] as well as beneficial ownership rules (which would require companies to disclose their true owners).

[ 11 ] Activities and politics [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Federation states it provides advocacy counsel on matters including legislation, taxes and guidance to small business owners on management, operating and marketing. It also provides information on legal issues and health care. It also hosts a podcast on some concerns facing small business.

[ 12 ] On its website, the National Federation of Independent Business states that it is a "nonprofit, nonpartisan organization founded in 1943".

[ 2 ] In 2010, 25 of its members, all Republican, were elected to the 112th Congress.

[ 13 ] In 2010, the NFIB became the lead plaintiff opposing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act health care reform legislation. The organization joined 26 states in the lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the act. The case reached the Supreme Court, which issued its ruling on National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius on June 28, 2012, upholding most provisions of the act.

Karl Rove's conservative Crossroads GPS PAC gave NFIB $3.7 million to help fund the court fight.

[ 9 ] The NFIB supported the America's Small Business Tax Relief Act of 2014 (H.R. 4457; 113th Congress) , a bill that would amend section 179 of the Internal Revenue Code , which mostly affects small- to medium-sized businesses, to retroactively and permanently extend from January 1, 2014, increased limitations on the amount of investment that can be immediately deducted from taxable income .

[ 14 ] The bill would return the tax code to its 2013 status and make the change permanent.

[ 15 ] Dan Danner, the president and CEO at that time, argued that Congress could help small business by passing the bill as it would enable small businesses to "plan for the future, invest in the economy and hire new workers." [ 16 ] In 2017, NFIB endorsed the confirmation of SCOTUS nominee Neil Gorsuch .

[ 17 ] In 2021, it successfully sued OSHA to oppose a COVID-19 vaccine mandate for businesses before the Supreme Court, resulting in OSHA withdrawing the mandate.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In fiscal year 2022, NFIB had total revenue of $105,848,770.

[ 3 ] In October 2023, the federation reported a slight decline in small business optimism sentiment due to inflation and staffing concerns.

[ 20 ] In October 2024, the NFIB, along with the Michigan Press Association, sued to block the US Federal Trade Commission (FTC) from implementing its so-called "click to cancel" rule, a set of revisions to the FTC's Negative Option Rule that would require businesses to make the cancellation process for subscriptions, renewals, and free trials that convert to paid memberships as easy as the signup process, as well as to obtain proof of consent before billing customers for such services.

[ 10 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] The NFIB sued to stop the federal government from enforcing the Corporate Transparency Act 's Beneficial ownership rules.

[ 11 ] [ 23 ] The rule would have required foreign and domestic companies to disclose their true owners.

[ 11 ] The NFIB filed an amicus brief in Ryan, LLC. v. Federal Trade Commission "supporting a challenge to the FTC’s final rule banning noncompete agreements".

[ 24 ] The NFIB filed a Legal Challenge To Overturn 2024 Missouri Proposition A .

[ 25 ] Guardian of Small Business Award [ edit ] NFIB has given out the Guardian of Small Business Award for legislators who vote consistently with small business on the key issues identified by small business owners.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Union of Industrial and Employers' Confederations of Europe (UNICE, now BusinessEurope) European Association of Craft, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Canadian Federation of Independent Business References [ edit ] ^ "National Federation Of Independent Business Inc - Nonprofit Explorer" .

ProPublica . 9 May 2013.

^ a b "About NFIB" . www.NFIB.com. 2012 . Retrieved 2012-02-26 .

^ a b Roberts, Ken Schwencke, Mike Tigas, Sisi Wei, Alec Glassford, Andrea Suozzo, Brandon (9 May 2013).

"National Federation Of Independent Business Inc - Nonprofit Explorer" .

ProPublica . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "PAC Profile: National Federation of Independent Business" .

OpenSecrets .

^ "NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS FEDERAL POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE - committee overview" .

FEC.gov . 1 January 2025.

^ "National Federation of Independent Business - SourceWatch" .

^ "National Fedn of Independent Business Profile: Totals" .

OpenSecrets . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

^ Mandelbaum, Robb (10 August 2009).

"Health care reform's strange bedfellows" .

money.cnn.com . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

^ a b Slack, Donovan (2012-04-13).

"Crossroads GPS gave $3.7 million to plaintiff in health care suit" .

Politico.com . Retrieved 2013-10-11 .

^ a b Brodkin, Jon (2024-10-24).

"Cable companies ask 5th Circuit to block FTC's click-to-cancel rule" .

Ars Technica . Retrieved 2024-10-25 .

^ a b c "Treasury Department won't enforce beneficial ownership rule under the Corporate Transparency Act" .

ICIJ . 2025-03-05.

^ "Could the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) Be a Good Resource for You?" .

www.visionmonday.com .

^ "25 NFIB Members Join the 112th Congress" . www.NFIB.com. 2012 . Retrieved 2012-02-26 .

^ "CBO - H.R. 4457" . Congressional Budget Office. May 2014 . Retrieved 12 June 2014 .

^ Pomerleau, Kyle (22 April 2014).

"Tiberi Bill on permanent Extension of Small Business Expensing" . Tax Foundation . Retrieved 12 June 2014 .

^ Danner, Dan (15 May 2014).

"5 ways Washington can help small business" . CNBC. Archived from the original on May 16, 2014 . Retrieved 12 June 2014 .

^ "NFIB - The voice of Small Business" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-06-22.

^ SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES Nos. 21A244 and 21A247 NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS, ET AL., APPLICANTS21A244 v. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, ET AL.

^ "OSHA Withdraws Vaccine Mandate Following Successful Supreme Court Challenge By NFIB" .

NFIB . 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

^ Niasse, Amina (10 October 2023).

"US small business sentiment declines moderately -NFIB" .

Reuters.com .

^ "Click to Cancel: The FTC's amended Negative Option Rule and what it means for your business" .

Federal Trade Commission . 2024-10-16 . Retrieved 2024-10-24 .

^ "NFIB Files Lawsuit Against FTC's Onerous Automatic Renewal Rule - NFIB" .

NFIB.com (Press release). 6 November 2024.

^ "NFIB Prevails in Blocking Burdensome Beneficial Ownership Requirements for Small Businesses - NFIB" .

NFIB.com (Press release). 3 December 2024.

^ "Small Businesses Take Legal Action Against FTC Ban on Noncompete Agreements - NFIB" .

NFIB.com (Press release). 15 May 2024.

^ "Business Groups File Legal Challenge To Overturn Proposition A - NFIB" .

NFIB.com (Press release). 9 December 2024.

^ "NFIB Guardian of Small Business Award - NFIB" .

www.nfib.com . Retrieved 2025-05-12 .

^ "Harper receives the 'Guardian of Small Business award - Magnolia Tribune" .

magnoliatribune.com . Retrieved 2025-05-12 .

External links [ edit ] National Federation of Independent Business official site National Federation of Independent Business at Ballotpedia Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Federation_of_Independent_Business&oldid=1305817180 " Categories : Organizations established in 1943 1943 establishments in the United States Tea Party movement Business organizations based in the United States Organizations based in Nashville, Tennessee Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2012 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 07:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Federation of Independent Business 1 language Add topic

