Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Membership 3 Meetings 4 Journals 5 Retired journals 6 Abstracts 7 Awards 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychonomic Society 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Psychonomic Bulletin & Review ) International society for Experimental Psychology, Cognative Science, and Psycholinguistics This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Psychonomic Society" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Psychonomic Society" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for companies and organizations .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Psychonomic Society" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Psychonomic Society Formation March 31, 1960 ; 65 years ago ( 1960-03-31 ) [ 1 ] Type Scientific society Legal status 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization Headquarters 2424 American Lane Location Madison, Wisconsin United States Membership 4,500+ 2025 Chair Eva Van den Bussche [ 2 ] Key people Governing Board , Louis Shomette, Executive Director & CEO [ 3 ] Website www.psychonomic.org The Psychonomic Society is an international scientific society of over 4,500 scientists in the field of experimental psychology . The mission of the Psychonomic Society is to foster the science of cognition through the advancement and communication of basic research in experimental psychology and allied sciences. It is open to international researchers, and almost 40% of members are based outside of North America. Although open to all areas of experimental and cognitive psychology, its members typically study areas such as learning, memory, attention, motivation, perception, categorization, decision making, and psycholinguistics. Its name is taken from the word psychonomics , meaning "the science of the laws of the mind".

History [ edit ] The Psychonomic Society was founded by a group of experimental psychologists during a meeting in Chicago, Illinois, USA in December 1959. The main goal was to create a society that would support open communication about psychological science with minimal structure. An interesting article about the society's inception and history can be found in Dewsbury, D. A., & Bolles, R. C. (1995). The founding of the Psychonomic Society. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 216-233.

The society was founded in 1959 by a small group of experimental psychologists, who recognized the need for a distinct society that would support open and accessible communications about new research on experimental and cognitive psychology. They broke away from the dominant association of the day, the American Psychological Association, to create a smaller, more select and less formal society with a minimal structure and sole focus on experimental work rather than practice-related research. Their early success in publishing a journal to report on the latest experimental research paved the way for the Psychonomic Society ("Society" or "PS") to ultimately self-publish six distinct journals.

However, psychology is a science that is constantly evolving, and the past ten years have seen dramatic changes and an expansion of the field, particularly at its juncture with neuroscience. New and more specialized societies have been created to focus on particular types of science, much as the Psychonomic Society was created in 1959. There has also been a dramatic shift for the society as it embraced the modern publishing process, divested itself of its own publishing house, and contracted with Springer Publishing to produce its six journals. There was also a transition of society management from internal staff to an external management firm. In addition, the publishing contract brought in a new and substantial revenue stream that has put the Psychonomic Society in a position to consider various new programs.

Upon establishment, the governing board of the society undertook an assessment of where the society stood at present and what its goals should be for the future. They wanted to make sure the Psychonomic Society retained the qualities that its members value and yet is nimble enough to change with the times. A strategic planning process was used to chart a course for the society for the next decade.

Its organizing committee included:  Wilfred J. Brogden, William K. Estes , Frank A. Geldard, Clarence H. Graham, Lloyd G. Humphreys , Clifford T. Morgan , William D. Neff, Kenneth W. Spence , Stanley Smith Stevens , Benton J. Underwood , and William S. Verplanck (Secretary-Treasurer).

Past chairs of the society's governing board have included Clifford T. Morgan and Lloyd G. Humphreys .

[ 4 ] Membership [ edit ] The society includes over 4,500 members, including graduate student members, and beginning in 2023, undergraduate student members. Emeritus, Fellows, and Full Members hold a Ph.D. or equivalent degrees in their field. To be eligible for Fellow status, researchers must have published significant research other than their doctoral dissertation.

Members of the Society are experimental and experimental psychologists and include some of the most distinguished researchers in the field.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Many members of the society are concerned with the application of psychology to health, technology and education, and many use converging methods such as neuroscience and computational science to achieve their research goals. A common underlying thread of the society’s research is the use of behavioral techniques to better understand mental functioning.  The society and its members perform and promote the basic science of behavior in areas such as memory, learning, problem solving, action planning, language, and perception that connect with other fields of research.

The society works closely with other societies that focus on allied fields of research. The society also support advocacy for research funding by working in partnership with the Federation of Associations in Behavioral & Brain Sciences (FABBS).

Meetings [ edit ] The Psychonomic Society convenes every year in the fall, usually November. Normally, around 2,600 people attend, with 1,300 papers and posters presented.

The first meeting was held at the University of Chicago in 1960, in conjunction with the American Psychological Association meeting. Many of the meetings of the society have occurred in Chicago (in the 1960s) and St. Louis (in the 1970s). In recent years, the meeting has moved between major convention cities in the USA and Canada. There are occasional international meetings of the society, the first of which was held jointly with the UK Experimental Psychology Society in Edinburgh, UK in 2007. Starting in 2001, the meeting instituted a keynote address honoring distinguished members.

Journals [ edit ] The Psychonomic Society publishes seven peer-reviewed journals covering experimental psychology: Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics (2009–present) (formerly Perception & Psychophysics ) Behavior Research Methods (2004–present) (formerly Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers ) Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience (2001–present) Cognitive Research: Principles & Implications (2015–present) Learning & Behavior (2003–present) (formerly Animal Learning & Behavior ) Memory & Cognition (1973–present) Psychonomic Bulletin & Review (1994–present) Retired journals [ edit ] The Society previously published: Psychonomic Science (1964-1972) [ 7 ] Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society (1973-1993).

[ 8 ] Abstracts [ edit ] Beginning with the 37th annual meeting, abstracts of the society's annual meeting are published in Abstracts of the Psychonomic Society , starting with Volume 1 (in 1996), and numbered consecutively. Prior to this, the abstracts were published in the 'Program of the Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society.' Awards [ edit ] The Psychonomic Society provides a range of awards with the "aim of recognizing individuals who have made outstanding contributions to advancing cognitive science". Each year, the Society recognizes its members and promising students with the following awards and honors: Clifford T. Morgan Distinguished Leadership Award [ 9 ] Mid-Career Award [ 10 ] Early Career Award [ 11 ] Best Article Award [ 12 ] Graduate Conference Award [ 13 ] J. Frank Yates Student Conference Award [ 14 ] Psychonomic Society/Women in Cognitive Science Travel and Networking Award for Junior Scientists [ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ "About, Mission, & History - Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org .

^ "2025 Governing Board" .

psychonomic.org .

^ "Executive Director & CEO - Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org .

^ "Past Governing Boards" . Psychonomic Society.

^ "International Meeting of the Psychonomic Society" .

www.rsc.org . Retrieved 2021-11-02 .

^ "Advance Cognition: Give to the Psychonomic Society Today" .

Psychonomic Society . Retrieved 2 November 2021 .

^ "Psychonomic Science" .

Springer . Retrieved 2022-07-14 .

^ "Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society" .

Springer . Retrieved 2018-06-08 .

^ "Clifford T. Morgan Distinguished Leadership Award - Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org .

^ "Psychonomic Society Mid-Career Award - Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org .

^ [1] [ dead link ] ^ "Best Article Award - Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "Graduate Conference Award - Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org .

^ "Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org .

^ "Psychonomic Society/Women in Cognitive Science Travel and Networking Award for Junior Scientists - Psychonomic Society" .

Psychonomic.org .

Bibliography [ edit ] Dewsbury, D. A., & Bolles, R. C. (1995) The founding of the Psychonomic Society.

Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 2, 216-233.

Dewsbury, D. A.  (1996) History of the Psychonomic Society II:  The Journal Publishing Program.

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 3, 322-338.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Norway Israel People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychonomic_Society&oldid=1299031455 " Categories : Psychology organizations based in the United States 1959 establishments in Illinois Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing additional references from November 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with topics of unclear notability from June 2023 All articles with topics of unclear notability Organization articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 04:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychonomic Society 1 language Add topic

