Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Middle Platonism 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stage of philosophy development Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e Middle Platonism is the modern name given to a stage in the development of Platonic philosophy , lasting from about 90 BC – when Antiochus of Ascalon rejected the scepticism of the new Academy – until the development of neoplatonism under Plotinus in the 3rd century. Middle Platonism absorbed many doctrines from the rival Peripatetic and Stoic schools. The pre-eminent philosopher in this period, Plutarch (c. 45–120), defended the freedom of the will and the immortality of the soul . He sought to show that God, in creating the world, had transformed matter, as the receptacle of evil , into the divine soul of the world, where it continued to operate as the source of all evil. God is a transcendent being, who operates through divine intermediaries, which are the gods and daemons of popular religion.

Numenius of Apamea (c. 160) combined Platonism with neopythagoreanism and other eastern philosophies, in a move which would prefigure the development of neoplatonism.

History [ edit ] Antiochus of Ascalon (c. 125–68 BC), was the pupil of Philo of Larissa , and the teacher of Cicero . Through his influence, Platonism made the transition from Academic skepticism to Eclecticism .

[ 1 ] Whereas Philo had still adhered to the doctrine that there is nothing absolutely certain, Antiochus returned to a pronounced dogmatism . Among other objections to Academic scepticism was the consideration that without firm convictions no rational content of life is possible.

[ 1 ] He argued that it is self-contradictory to claim that nothing can be asserted or to attempt to prove that nothing can be proved; likewise, one cannot speak of false ideas while simultaneously denying the distinction between the false and the true.

[ 2 ] He expounded the Academic, Peripatetic , and Stoic systems in such a way as to show that these three schools deviate from one another only in minor points.

[ 2 ] He himself was chiefly interested in ethics, in which he tried to find a middle way between Zeno , Aristotle , and Plato . For instance, he said that virtue suffices for happiness, but for the highest grade of happiness bodily and external goods are necessary as well.

[ 2 ] This eclectic tendency was favoured by the lack of dogmatic works by Plato.

[ 3 ] Middle Platonism was promoted by the necessity of considering the main theories of the post-Platonic schools of philosophy, such as the Aristotelian logic and the Stoic psychology and ethics (theory of goods and emotions).

[ 4 ] On the one hand the middle Platonists were engaged like the later Peripatetics in scholarly activities such as the exposition of Plato's doctrines and the explanation of his dialogues; on the other hand they attempted to develop the Platonic theories systematically. In so far as it was subject in this to the influence of neopythagoreanism , it was of considerable importance in preparing the way for neoplatonism .

[ 4 ] Plutarch The most important of the middle Platonists was Plutarch (45–120), who also won fame as a historian. Although he was a Platonist, he was open to the influence of the Peripatetics, and even, in some details, to the Stoics, despite his polemics against their principles; he absolutely rejected only Epicureanism .

[ 5 ] In opposition to Stoic materialism and Epicurean "atheism," he cherished a pure idea of God that was more in accordance with Plato.

[ 5 ] Nevertheless, he adopted a second principle in order to explain the constitution of the physical world.

[ 5 ] This principle he sought not in any indeterminate matter, but in the evil world-soul which had from the beginning been bound up with matter, but in the creation was filled with reason and arranged by it.

[ 5 ] Thus it was transformed into the divine soul of the world, but continued to operate as the source of all evil.

[ 5 ] He elevated God above the finite world, but he believed that God comes to our aid by direct revelations ; this enabled Plutarch to justify popular belief in prophecy .

[ 6 ] The gods of popular religion are merely different names for one and the same divine Being and the powers that serve them.

[ 6 ] Daemons were for him agents of God's influence on the world.

[ 5 ] Plutarch defended freedom of the will and the immortality of the soul .

[ 5 ] Platonic-Peripatetic ethics were upheld by Plutarch against the opposing theories of the Stoics and Epicureans.

[ 5 ] Among later middle Platonists there were Theon of Smyrna , who wrote a mathematical introduction to Plato, and Gaius (2nd century) who was a teacher of Platonist philosophy.

[ 6 ] His pupil, Albinus , wrote an account of his lectures, of which we possess the introduction.

[ 6 ] Around the same time, Alcinous wrote an extant treatise on Platonism, in which he postulated three principles: the first God, the ideas , which are regarded as thoughts of this "first God", and matter.

[ 7 ] Apuleius (c. 125), a popular writer, expounded an eclectic Platonism in his books On the God of Socrates and On Plato and his Doctrine , which are written in Latin .

[ 7 ] Maximus of Tyre (c. 180), like Plutarch, endeavoured to bridge the gulf between a transcendent God and matter by the assumption of numerous daemons as intermediaries.

[ 7 ] Atticus (c. 175) opposed the eclecticism which had invaded the school and contested the theories of Aristotle as an aberration from Plato. He was an uncompromising supporter of Plato and regarded the theory of immortality as the basis of his whole system. Nevertheless, in this theology he approached more closely to the Stoic idea of immanence.

[ 7 ] Numenius of Apamea (c. 160) combined both neopythagoreanism and Platonism.

[ 7 ] He exhibited a far-going syncretism. Like Plutarch he supposed that an evil soul was combined with matter.

[ 8 ] From this the mortal part of the human soul is derived, which he described as the second irrational soul.

[ 8 ] Because of its guilt the soul had to descend from its bodiless life into the body, and after its departure from the body, if it does not need to undergo further incarnation, it becomes indistinguishably united with God.

[ 8 ] A gift of God is the wisdom which is the highest good, and this gift is only granted to those who devote themselves to the ultimate good to the exclusion of all other thoughts.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Allegorical interpretations of Plato References [ edit ] ^ a b Zeller 1931 , p. 273.

^ a b c Zeller 1931 , p. 274.

^ Zeller 1931 , p. 305.

^ a b Zeller 1931 , p. 306.

^ a b c d e f g h Zeller 1931 , p. 307 ^ a b c d Zeller 1931 , p. 308 ^ a b c d e Zeller 1931 , p. 309 ^ a b c d Zeller 1931 , p. 310.

Bibliography [ edit ] Zeller, Eduard (1931), Outlines of the History of Greek Philosophy (13th ed.) .

Further reading [ edit ] Brittain, Charles. 2001.

Philo of Larissa: The Last of the Academic Sceptics.

Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

Bonazzi, Mauro. 2012.

Antiochus and Platonism.

In The Philosophy of Antiochus.

Edited by David N. Sedley, 307–333. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.

Catana, Leo. 2013. "The Origin of the Division between Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism." Apeiron: A Journal for Ancient Philosophy and Science 46.2: 166–200.

Centrone, Bruno. 2000. "Platonism and Pythagoreanism in the Early Empire." In The Cambridge History of Greek and Roman Political Thought.

Edited by Christopher Rowe and Malcolm Schofield, 559–584. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Chiaradonna, Riccardo. 2009. "Galen and Middle Platonism." In Galen and the World of Knowledge.

Edited by Christopher J. Gill , Tim Whitmarsh, and John Wilkins, 243–260. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Dillon, John. 1996.

The Middle Platonists: 80 B.C. to A.D. 220.

Rev. ed. London: Duckworth.

Jones, Roger M. 1980.

The Platonism of Plutarch and Selected Papers.

2d ed. New York: Garland.

Kalligas, Paul. 2004. "Platonism in Athens During the First Two Centuries AD: An Overview." Rhizai 2:37–56.

Mansfeld, Jaap. 1988. "Compatible Alternatives: Middle Platonist Theology and the Xenophanes Reception." In Knowledge of God in the Graeco-Roman World.

Edited by Robert van den Broek, Tjitze Baarda, and Jaap Mansfeld , 92–117. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.

Opsomer, Jan. 1998.

In Search of the Truth: Academic Tendencies in Middle Platonism.

Brussels: Koninklijke Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schone Kunsten.

Zambon, Marco. 2006. "Middle Platonism." In A Companion to Ancient Philosophy.

Edited by Mary Louise Gill and Pierre Pellegrin, 561–576. Oxford: Blackwell.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Middle Platonism Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Middle Platonism in Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Middle_Platonism&oldid=1299576969 " Categories : Middle Platonism Ancient Roman philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 07:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Middle Platonism 19 languages Add topic

