Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and history 2 Characteristics 3 Jewish apocalypses Toggle Jewish apocalypses subsection 3.1 Canonical (including proto-apocalyptic) 3.2 Non-canonical 4 Christian and gnostic apocalypses Toggle Christian and gnostic apocalypses subsection 4.1 Canonical (New Testament) 4.2 Non-canonical 4.3 Gnostic 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Apocalypse 42 languages العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept of a prophetic unveiling, sometimes about eschatology This article is about the literary genre in Judeo-Christian religious culture. For the general concept of a world-ending disaster, see global catastrophic risk . For the related genre of religious writings about "end times", see Apocalyptic literature . For contemporary fiction about cataclysm in general, see Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction . For other uses, see Apocalypse (disambiguation) .

Apocalypse depicted in Christian Orthodox traditional fresco scenes in Osogovo Monastery , North Macedonia Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e Apocalypse (from Ancient Greek ἀποκάλυψις ( apokálupsis ) ' revelation , disclosure ' ) is a literary genre originating in Judaism in the centuries following the Babylonian exile (597–587 BCE) but persisting in Christianity and Islam. In apocalypse, a supernatural being reveals cosmic mysteries or the future to a human intermediary.

[ 1 ] The means of mediation include dreams, visions and heavenly journeys, [ 2 ] and they typically feature symbolic imagery drawn from the Jewish Bible , [ 3 ] cosmological and (pessimistic) historical surveys, the division of time into periods, esoteric numerology, and claims of ecstasy and inspiration.

[ 4 ] Almost all are written under pseudonyms (false names), claiming as author a venerated hero from previous centuries, [ 5 ] as with the Book of Daniel , composed during the 2nd century BCE but bearing the name of the legendary Daniel from the 6th century BCE.

[ 6 ] Eschatology (from Greek eschatos , last) concerns expectations of the end of the present age.

[ 7 ] Thus, apocalyptic eschatology is the application of the apocalyptic world-view to the end of the world, when God will bring judgment to the world and save his followers.

[ 8 ] An apocalypse will often contain much eschatological material like the epiphany of Paul the Apostle , but need not: the baptism of Jesus in Matthew's gospel , for example, can be considered apocalyptic in that the heavens open for the presence of a divine mediator (the dove representing the spirit of God) and a voice communicates supernatural information, but there is no eschatological element.

[ 9 ] In popular use apocalypse often means such a catastrophic end-times event, but in scholarly use the term is restricted to the visionary or revelatory event.

Scholars have identified examples of the genre ranging from the mid-2nd century BCE to the 2nd century CE, [ 10 ] and examples are to be found in Persian and Greco-Roman literature as well as Jewish and Christian.

[ 11 ] The sole clear case in the Jewish Bible ( Old Testament ) is chapters 7–12 of the Book of Daniel , but there are many examples from non-canonical Jewish works; [ 12 ] the Book of Revelation is the only apocalypse in the New Testament , but passages reflecting the genre are to be found in the gospels and in nearly all the genuine Pauline epistles .

[ 13 ] Definition and history [ edit ] "Apocalypse" has come to be used popularly as a synonym for catastrophe, but the Greek word apokálypsis , from which it is derived, means a revelation.

[ 13 ] It has been defined by John J Collins as "a genre of revelatory literature with a narrative framework, in which a revelation is mediated by an otherworldly being to a human recipient, disclosing a transcendent reality which is both temporal, in that it envisages eschatological salvation, and spatial, insofar as it involves another, supernatural world." [ 14 ] Collins later refined his definition by adding that apocalypse "is intended to interpret present, earthly circumstances in light of the supernatural world and of the future, and to influence both the understanding and the behaviour of the audience by means of divine authority." [ 14 ] The genre of Jewish and Christian apocalypse flourished c. 250 BCE–250 CE, but its antecedents can be traced back much further, in the Jewish prophetic and wisdom traditions (e.g., Ezekiel 1–3 and Zechariah 1–6), and in the mythologies of the Ancient Near East, which have left a legacy of symbology (e.g., the sea as a symbol of chaos in Daniel 7 and Revelation 13:1).

[ 15 ] Zoroastrian dualism may also have played a role.

[ 10 ] The reasons for its rise are obscure, but there seems to be a connection to times of crisis, such as the 2nd century BCE persecution of the Jews reflected in Daniel's final vision , or the destruction of the Temple in 70 CE reflected in 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch .

[ 16 ] Characteristics [ edit ] The Seven trumpets .

Apocalyptic revelations are typically mediated through such means as dreams and visions (the ancient world did not distinguish between these), angels, and heavenly journeys.

[ 2 ] These serve to connect two sets of axes, the spatial axis which has God and the heavenly realm above and the human world below, and the temporal axis of the present and the future.

[ 2 ] The revelation thus demonstrates that God rules the visible world, and that the present days are leading to an end-time in which divine justice will be done and God's rule will become visible.

[ 2 ] Mythic images with their roots in texts from the Hebrew Bible and rich in symbolic meaning are a significant characteristic of the genre.

[ 3 ] Further characteristics include transcendentalism , mythology, pessimistic cosmological and historical surveys , dualism (including a doctrine of two ages and the division of time into periods), numerology (e.g., the " number of the beast " in Revelation), claims of ecstasy and inspiration, and esotericism .

[ 4 ] With the exception of the Apocalypse of John the authors of apocalyptic works released their books under pseudonyms (false names): [ 5 ] the Book of Daniel , for example, was composed during the 2nd century BCE but took the name of the legendary Daniel for its hero.

[ 6 ] Pseudonymity may have been used to secure acceptance for the new works, to protect the real authors from reprisals, or because the authors had experienced what they believed to be genuine revelations from the famous past figure or identified with him and claimed to write on his behalf.

[ 17 ] Jewish apocalypses [ edit ] Canonical (including proto-apocalyptic) [ edit ] Isaiah 24–27; 33; 34–35 Jeremiah 33:14–26 Ezekiel 38–39 Joel 3:9–17 Zechariah 12–14 Daniel 7–12 Non-canonical [ edit ] 3 Enoch Apocalypse of Abraham Apocalypse of Adam Apocalypse of Moses Apocalypse of Sedrach Apocalypse of Zephaniah Apocalypse of Zerubbabel Aramaic Apocalypse Gabriel's Revelation Genesis Apocryphon Greek Apocalypse of Baruch Greek Apocalypse of Daniel Greek Apocalypse of Ezra Sefer Elijah Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch Christian and gnostic apocalypses [ edit ] Canonical (New Testament) [ edit ] Matthew 24 The Sheep and the Goats Mark 13 2 Thessalonians 2 1 Timothy 4 2 Peter 3 Jude 14–15 Book of Revelation Non-canonical [ edit ] Apocalypse of Golias Apocalypse of Paul Apocalypse of Peter Apocalypse of Pseudo-Methodius Apocalypse of Samuel of Kalamoun Apocalypse of Stephen Apocalypse of Thomas Coptic Apocalypse of Elijah Gnostic [ edit ] Gnostic Apocalypse of Peter First Apocalypse of James Second Apocalypse of James Coptic Apocalypse of Paul See also [ edit ] Apocalypticism Christian eschatology Climate apocalypse Divine retribution Eschatology Islamic eschatology List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianic Age Ultimate fate of the universe References [ edit ] ^ Carey 2012 , p. 4.

^ a b c d Najman 2014 , p. 37.

^ a b Reynolds 2011 , p. 45–46.

^ a b Lewis 2004 , p. 12.

^ a b Linton 2006 , p. 35.

^ a b Redditt 2008 , p. 180.

^ Carroll 2000 , p. 420.

^ Crawford 2000 , p. 73.

^ Foster 2020 , p. 81.

^ a b Arnold 2007 , p. 80.

^ Collins 1984 , p. 106.

^ Najman 2014 , p. 40.

^ a b Lewis 2004 , p. 7.

^ a b Lewis 2004 , p. 17.

^ Crawford 2000 , p. 72.

^ Crawford 2000 , p. 72–73.

^ Aune 1983 , p. 109.

Sources [ edit ] Arnold, Bill (2007).

"Old Testament Eschatology and the Rise of Apocalypticism" . In Walls, Jerry L. (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Eschatology . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-988359-2 .

Aune, David (1983).

Prophecy in Early Christianity and the Ancient Mediterranean World . Eerdmans.

ISBN 9780802806352 .

Carroll, John T. (2000).

"Eschatology" . In Freedman, David Noel; Myers, Allen C. (eds.).

Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible . Eerdmans.

ISBN 9789053565032 .

Carey, Greg (2012).

Ultimate Things . Chalice Press.

ISBN 9780827238183 .

Collins, John J. (1984).

Daniel: With an Introduction to Apocalyptic Literature . Eerdmans.

ISBN 9780802800206 .

Crawford, Sidnie White (2000).

"Apocalyptic" . In Freedman, David Noel; Myers, Allen C. (eds.).

Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible . Eerdmans.

ISBN 9789053565032 .

Foster, Paul (2020).

"The Eschatology of the Gospel of Matthew" . In Ferda, Tucker; Frayer-Griggs, Daniel; C. Johnson, Nathan (eds.).

"To Recover What Has Been Lost" . BRILL.

ISBN 9789004444010 .

Lewis, Scott M. (2004).

The Mother of All Theology . Paulist Press.

ISBN 9780809142286 .

Linton, Gregory L. (2006).

"Reading the Apocalypse as Apocalypse" . In Barr, David L. (ed.).

The Reality of Apocalypse: Rhetoric and Politics in the Book of Revelation . Society of Biblical Literature.

ISBN 9781589832183 .

Najman, Hindy (2014).

"The Inheritance of Prophecy in Apocalypse" . In Collins, John Joseph (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Apocalyptic Literature . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-985649-7 .

Redditt, Paul L. (2008).

Introduction to the Prophets . Eerdmans.

ISBN 9780802828965 .

Reynolds, Bennie (2011).

Between Symbolism and Realism: The Use of Symbolic and Non-Symbolic Language in Ancient Jewish Apocalypses 333-63 B.C.E.

Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

ISBN 978-0-8091-4228-6 .

v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apocalypse&oldid=1306368592 " Categories : Apocalypticism Christian genres Christian terminology Mythology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from October 2024 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 10:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apocalypse 42 languages Add topic

