Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Effects 2 Geometry 3 Examples 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Slab window 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of gap in a subducted oceanic plate Diagram of a cross-section of the Patagonia slab window. The Nazca plate and Antarctic plate are colliding with the South American plate at the Chile Ridge.

[ 1 ] In geology , a slab window is a gap that forms in a subducted oceanic plate when a mid-ocean ridge meets with a subduction zone and plate divergence at the ridge and convergence at the subduction zone continue, causing the ridge to be subducted.

[ 2 ] Formation of a slab window produces an area where the crust of the over-riding plate is lacking a rigid lithospheric mantle component and thus is exposed to hot asthenospheric mantle (for a diagram of this, see the link below). This produces anomalous thermal, chemical and physical effects in the mantle that can dramatically change the over-riding plate by interrupting the established tectonic and magmatic regimes.

[ 2 ] In general, the data used to identify possible slab windows comes from seismic tomography and heat flow studies.

[ 3 ] Effects [ edit ] As a slab window develops, the mantle in that region becomes increasingly hot and dry. The decrease in hydration causes arc volcanism to diminish or stop entirely, as magma production in subduction zones generally results from hydration of the mantle wedge due to de-watering of the subducting slab. Slab-window magmatism may then replace this melting, and can be produced by multiple processes, including increased temperatures, mantle circulation producing interaction of supra- and sub-slab mantle, partial melting of subducted slab edges and extension in the upper plate.

[ 2 ] Mantle flowing upward through the slab window in order to compensate for the decreased lithospheric volume can also produce decompression melting. Slab window melts are distinguished from calc-alkaline subduction-related magmas by their different chemical compositions.
The increase in temperature caused by the presence of a slab window can also produce anomalous high temperature metamorphism in the region between the trench and the volcanic arc.

[ 4 ] Geometry [ edit ] The geometry of a slab window depends primarily on the angle the ridge intersects the subduction zone and the dip angle of the down-going plate. Other influential factors include the rates of divergence and subduction as well as heterogeneities found within specific systems.

[ 2 ] There are two end-member scenarios in terms of the geometry of a slab window: the first is when the subducted ridge is perpendicular to the trench, producing a V-shaped window, and the second is when the ridge is parallel to the trench, causing a rectangular window to form.

[ 5 ] Examples [ edit ] The North American Cordillera is a well-studied plate margin that provides a good example of the effects a slab window can have on an over-riding continental plate. Beginning in the Cenozoic , the fragmentation of the Farallon plate as it subducted caused slab windows to open that then generated anomalous features in the North American plate . These effects include distinct fore-arc volcanism and extension in the plate which may be a contributing factor to the formation of the Basin and Range Province .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The northward younging of Pemberton Belt volcanism in southwestern British Columbia , Canada, may have been related to a northward moving slab window edge under North America 29 to 6.8 million years ago.

[ 7 ] In addition to the fossil slab windows of the Cenozoic seen in North America, there are other regions along the Pacific Rim (e.g. in California, Mexico, Costa Rica, Patagonia and the Antarctic Peninsula) that exhibit active ridge subduction producing slab windows.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Slab (geology) – The portion of a tectonic plate that is being subducted Slab gap hypothesis – Theory in plate tectonics Triple junction References [ edit ] ^ Russo, R.M.; VanDecar, John C.; Comte, Diana; Mocanu, Victor I.; Gallego, Alejandro; Murdie, Ruth E. (2010).

"Subduction of the Chile Ridge: Upper mantle structure and flow" .

GSA Today : 4– 10.

doi : 10.1130/gsatg61a.1 .

ISSN 1052-5173 .

^ a b c d Thorkelson, Derek J., 1996, Subduction of diverging plates and the principles of slab window formation, Tectonophysics , v. 255, p. 47-63 ^ van Wijk, J.W., Govers, R., Furlong, K.P., 2001, Three-dimensional thermal modeling of the California upper mantle: a slab window vs. stalled slab, Earth and Planetary Letters , v. 186, p. 175-186 ^ Groome, Wesley G., Thorkelson, Derek J., 2009, The three-dimensional thermo-mechanical signature of ridge subduction and slab window migration: Tectonophysics v. 464, p. 70-83 ^ Guillaume, Benjamin et al. 2010, mantle flow and dynamic topography associated with slab window openings: Insights from laboratory models: Tectonophysics v. 496, p. 83-98 ^ Thorkelson, Derek J., Taylor, Richard P., 1989, Cordilleran slab windows: Geology, v. 17, p. 833-836 ^ a b Madson, J.K.; Thorkelson, D.J.; Friedman, R.M.; Marshall, D.D. (2006).

"Cenozoic to Recent plate configurations in the Pacific Basin: Ridge subduction and slab window magmatism in western North America" .

Geosphere .

2 (1): 11– 34.

Bibcode : 2006Geosp...2...11M .

doi : 10.1130/GES00020.1 .

^ Zandt, G., Humphreys, E., 2008, Toroidal mantle flow through the western U.S. slab window: Geology v. 36, p. 295-298, doi : 10.1130/G24611A.1 ^ McCrory, P.A., Wilson, D.S., Stanley, R.G., 20 January 2009, "Continuing evolution of the Pacific-Juan de Fuca-North America slab window system – A trench-ridge-transform example from the Pacific Rim" .

Tectonophysics vol. 464, issues 1–4, pp. 30–42.

doi : 10.1016/j.tecto.2008.01.018 .

External links [ edit ] Schematic diagram of a slab window and related effects , GSA publications Slab gap versus Slab window , University of Colorado Western US Tectonics term project v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Slab_window&oldid=1292737957 " Categories : Geological processes Plate tectonics Subduction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 14:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Slab window 1 language Add topic

