Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Overview 3 Discipline Toggle Discipline subsection 3.1 Reconnaissance-in-force 3.2 Reconnaissance-by-fire 3.3 Reconnaissance-pull 4 Types Toggle Types subsection 4.1 Area 4.2 Civil 4.3 Route 4.4 Zone 5 Psychology 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Reconnaissance 47 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Boarisch Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Military observation of enemy activities For other uses, see Reconnaissance (disambiguation) , Recce (disambiguation) , and Recon (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Renaissance .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Reconnaissance" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) U.S. Marines on a recon mission during a field training exercise in 2003 In military operations , military reconnaissance ( / r ɪ ˈ k ɒ n ɪ s ə n s / ) or scouting is the exploration of an area by military forces to obtain information about enemy forces, the terrain , and civil activities in the area of operations . In military jargon, reconnaissance is abbreviated to recce [ a ] (in British, Canadian, Australian English) and to recon [ b ] (in American English), both derived from the root word reconnoitre / reconnoitering .

[ 1 ] The types of reconnaissance include patrolling the local area of operations and long-range reconnaissance patrols , which are tasks usually realized in the United States of America by U.S. Army Rangers , cavalry scouts , and military intelligence specialists, using navy ships and submarines , reconnaissance aircraft , satellites to collect raw intelligence; and establishing observation posts . Moreover, espionage is different from reconnaissance, because spies work as civilians in enemy territory.

Etymology [ edit ] Reconnaissance is a mission to obtain information by visual observation or other detection methods, about the activities and resources of an enemy or potential enemy, or about the meteorologic, hydrographic, or geographic characteristics of a particular area.

[ 2 ] Reconnaissance (US Army FM 7-92; Chap. 4) The word is derived from the Middle French word reconoissance .

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] A tracked FV107 Scimitar as used by armoured reconnaissance regiments of the British Army A two-man JGSDF team mans Kawasaki KLX250 dirt bikes in the reconnaissance role during a public demonstration Reconnaissance conducted by ground forces includes special reconnaissance , armored reconnaissance , amphibious reconnaissance and civil reconnaissance.

Aerial reconnaissance is reconnaissance carried out by aircraft (of all types including balloons and uncrewed aircraft). The purpose is to survey weather conditions, map terrain, and may include military purposes such as observing tangible structures, particular areas, and movement of enemy forces.

Naval forces use aerial and satellite reconnaissance to observe enemy forces. Navies also undertake hydrographic surveys and intelligence gathering .

Reconnaissance satellites provide military commanders with photographs of enemy forces and other intelligence. Military forces also use geographical and meteorological information from Earth observation satellites .

Discipline [ edit ] Types of reconnaissance: Terrain-oriented reconnaissance is a survey of the terrain (its features, weather, and other natural observations).

Force-oriented reconnaissance focuses on the enemy forces (number, equipment, activities, disposition etc.) and may include target acquisition .

Civil-oriented reconnaissance focuses on the civil dimension of the battlespace (areas, structures, capabilities, organizations, people and events abbreviated ASCOPE).

The techniques and objectives are not mutually exclusive; it is up to the commander whether they are carried out separately or by the same unit.

Reconnaissance-in-force [ edit ] A Type 87 ARV armored reconnaissance vehicle from the JSDF Reconnaissance-in-force (RIF) is a type of military operation or military tactic used specifically to probe an enemy's combat ability.

While typical reconnaissance forces are small and armed only for self-defense, RIF use considerable (but not decisive) force in order to elicit a strong reaction by the enemy that more accurately reveals its own strength, deployment, preparedness, determination, and other tactical data. The RIF units can then fall back and report this data, or expand the conflict into a full engagement if enemy weaknesses are revealed.

Other methods consist of hit-and-run tactics using rapid mobility, and in some cases light-armored vehicles for added fire superiority, as the need arises.

Maintaining active RIF can be used to limit, or even deny, enemy reconnaissance.

The German Army's reconnaissance during World War II is described in the following way: The purpose of reconnaissance and the types of units employed to obtain information are similar in the U.S. and the German Armies. German tactical principles of reconnaissance, however, diverge somewhat from those of the U.S. The Germans stress aggressiveness, attempt to obtain superiority in the area to be reconnoitered, and strive for continuous observation of the enemy. They believe in employing reconnaissance units in force as a rule. They expect and are prepared to fight to obtain the desired information. Often they assign supplementary tasks to their reconnaissance units, such as sabotage behind enemy lines, harassment, or counter-reconnaissance.

Only enough reconnaissance troops are sent on a mission to assure superiority in the area to be reconnoitred. Reserves are kept on hand to be committed when the reconnaissance must be intensified, when the original force meets strong enemy opposition, or when the direction and area to be reconnoitred are changed. The Germans encourage aggressive action against enemy security forces. When their reconnaissance units meet superior enemy forces, they fight a delaying action while other units attempt to flank the enemy.

[ 4 ] Reconnaissance-by-fire [ edit ] Main article: Reconnaissance by fire Reconnaissance-by-fire (or speculative fire ) is the act of firing at likely enemy positions to cause the enemy force to reveal their location by moving or by returning fire.

[ 5 ] Reconnaissance-pull [ edit ] Reconnaissance-pull is a tactic that is applied at the regiment to division level and defined as locating and rapidly exploiting enemy weaknesses. It is the ability to determine enemy positions and create exploitable gaps through which friendly forces can pass while avoiding obstacles and strong points.

[ 6 ] A textbook example of reconnaissance-pull was documented during the Tinian landings of World War II , utilized by the United States Marine Corps 's Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion , from V Amphibious Corps . Aerial photography and the confirmation by the amphibious reconnaissance platoons determined that the Japanese defenders had largely ignored the northern beaches of the island, focusing most of their defensive effort on beaches in the south-west which were more favorable for an amphibious landing. American forces quickly changed their landing location to the northern beaches and planned a small and hasty " deception " operation off the southern beach, which resulted in a complete surprise for the Japanese forces. As a result, American forces were able to fight the Japanese force on land, where they had the advantage, leading to light losses and a relatively short battle that lasted only 9 days.

[ 7 ] Types [ edit ] Night vision photograph of U.S. Marines of the 1st Marine Division during a night reconnaissance training mission, 2016 When referring to reconnaissance, a commander's full intention is to have a vivid picture of his battlespace . The commander organizes the reconnaissance platoon based on: mission, enemy, terrain, troops and support available, time available, and civil considerations.

This analysis determines whether the platoon uses single or multiple elements to conduct the reconnaissance, whether it pertains to area , zone , or route reconnaissance , the following techniques may be used as long as the fundamentals of reconnaissance are applied.

Scouts may also have different tasks to perform for their commanders of higher echelons, for example: the engineer reconnaissance detachments will try to identify difficult terrain in the path of their formation, and attempt to reduce the time it takes to transit the terrain using specialist engineering equipment such as a pontoon bridge for crossing water obstacles.

Sanitary epidemiological reconnaissance implies collection and transfer of all data available on sanitary and epidemiological situation of the area of possible deployment and action of armed forces , the same data for the neighboring and enemy armed forces. The aim for the reconnaissance is to clear up the reasons of the specific disease origin- sources of the infection in various extreme situations, including local wars and armed conflicts , the ways of the infection transfer and all factors promoting to the infestation .

After the armed forces have become stationary during wartime and emergency of peacetime the sanitary epidemiological reconnaissance turns into sanitary and epidemiological surveillance and medical control of vital and communal activity of the armed forces.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Area [ edit ] U.S. Army LRRP Montagnard scouts in Quang Tri Province , Vietnam Area reconnaissance refers to the observation, and information obtained, about a specified location and the area around it; it may be terrain-oriented and/or force-oriented.  Ideally, a reconnaissance platoon, or team, would use surveillance or vantage (static) points around the objective to observe, and the surrounding area. This methodology focuses mainly prior to moving forces into or near a specified area; the military commander may utilize his reconnaissance assets to conduct an area reconnaissance to avoid being surprised by unsuitable terrain conditions, or most importantly, unexpected enemy forces.  The area could be a town, ridge-line, woods, or another feature that friendly forces intend to occupy, pass through, or avoid.

[ 2 ] Within an area of operation (AO), area reconnaissance can focus the reconnaissance on the specific area that is critical to the commander.  This technique of focusing the reconnaissance also permits the mission to be accomplished more quickly.  Area reconnaissance can thus be a stand-alone mission or a task to a section or the platoon.  The commander analyzes the mission to determine whether the platoon will conduct these types of reconnaissance separately or in conjunction with each other.

[ 2 ] Civil [ edit ] Civil reconnaissance is the process of gathering a broad spectrum of civil information about a specific population in support of military operations. It is related to and often performed in conjunction with infrastructure reconnaissance (assessment and survey). Normally the focus of collection in the operational area for civil reconnaissance is collecting civil information relating to the daily interaction between civilians and military forces.  Civil information encompasses relational, temporal, geospatial and behavioral information captured in a socio-cultural backdrop.  It is information developed from data related to civil areas, structures, capabilities, organizations, people, and events, within the civil component of the commander's operational environment that can be processed to increase situational awareness and understanding. The type of civil information that is needed in order to support military operations varies based on the environment and situation.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Route [ edit ] U.S.

Seabee Engineer Reconnaissance Team on a mission to determine whether a bridge can be used to support troop and convoy movements.

Route reconnaissance is oriented on a given route (e.g., a road, a railway, a waterway; i.e., a narrow axis or a general direction of attack) to provide information on route conditions or activities along the route.  A military commander relies on information about locations along his determined route: which of those that would provide best cover and concealment; bridge by construction type, dimensions, and classification; or for landing zones or pickup zones, if the need arises.

[ 2 ] In many cases, the commander may act upon a force-oriented route reconnaissance by which the enemy could influence movement along that route. For the reconnaissance platoons, or squads, stealth and speed—in conjunction with detailed intelligence-reporting—are most important and crucial. The reconnaissance platoon must remain far enough ahead of the maneuver force to assist in early warning and to prevent the force from becoming surprised.

[ citation needed ] It is paramount to obtain information about the available space in which a force can maneuver without being forced to bunch up due to obstacles.

Terrain-oriented route reconnaissance allows the commander to obtain information and capabilities about the adjacent terrain for maneuvering his forces, to include, any obstacles (minefields, barriers, steep ravines, marshy areas, or chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear contamination) that may obstruct vehicle movement—on routes to, and in, his assigned area of operations. This requirement includes the size of trees and the density of forests due to their effects on vehicle movement. Route reconnaissance also allows the observation for fields of fire along the route and adjacent terrain. This information assists planners as a supplement to map information.

[ citation needed ] Zone [ edit ] Zone reconnaissance focuses on obtaining detailed information before maneuvering their forces through particular, designated locations. It can be terrain-oriented, force-oriented, or both, as it acquire this information by reconnoitering within—and by maintaining surveillance over—routes, obstacles (to include nuclear-radiological, biological, and chemical contamination), and resources within an assigned location.

[ 7 ] Also, force-oriented zone reconnaissance is assigned to gain detailed information about enemy forces within the zone, or when the enemy situation is vague by which the information concerning cross-country traffic-ability is desired.

[ 2 ] The reconnaissance provides the commander with a detailed picture of how the enemy has occupied the zone, enabling him to choose the appropriate course-of-action.

As the platoon conducts this type of zone reconnaissance, its emphasis is on determining the enemy's locations, strengths, and weaknesses. This is the most thorough and complete reconnaissance mission and therefore is very time-intensive.

Psychology [ edit ] A tracker needs to pay close attention to both the environment and the psychology of their enemy. Knowledge of human psychology, sociology, and cultural backgrounds is necessary to know the actions of the enemy and what they will do or where they will go next. Chief of Scouts Frederick Russell Burnham commented on reconnaissance and scouts, saying: [ 12 ] It is imperative that a scout should know the history, tradition, religion, social customs, and superstitions of whatever country or people he is called on to work in or among. This is almost as necessary as to know the physical character of the country, its climate and products. Certain people will do certain things almost without fail. Certain other things, perfectly feasible, they will not do. There is no danger of knowing too much of the mental habits of an enemy. One should neither underestimate the enemy nor credit him with superhuman powers. Fear and courage are latent in every human being, though roused into activity by very diverse means.

Gallery [ edit ] An Oste class ELINT and reconnaissance ship of the German Navy A Soviet convoy deploying intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, 1962, as first revealed by a Lockheed U-2 .

A U.S. Air Force Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird high-speed reconnaissance aircraft German Army Fennek reconnaissance vehicle See also [ edit ] Black reconnaissance Dismounted reconnaissance troop Exploration Espionage Intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance List of reconnaissance units Pathfinder (military) – airborne pathfinders Special reconnaissance ( recon team ) Surveillance Surveillance aircraft U.S. military doctrine for reconnaissance Notes [ edit ] ^ The dictionary definition of recce at Wiktionary ^ The dictionary definition of recon at Wiktionary References [ edit ] ^ Wragg, David W. (1974).

A Dictionary of Aviation (1st American ed.). New York: Frederick Fell, Inc. p. 222.

ISBN 0-85045-163-9 .

^ a b c d e Field Manual (FM) 7–92: The Infantry Reconnaissance Platoon and Squad (Airborne, Air Assault, Light Infantry) .

United States Army . 2001. p. 4.0.

^ Dictionary.com ^ WAR DEPARTMENT TECHNICAL MANUAL TM-E 30-451 HANDBOOK ON GERMAN MILITARY FORCES, WAR DEPARTMENT • 15 MARCH 1945 (chapter IV, section II, "Reconnaissance" ^ "reconnaissance by fire" .

TheFreeDictionary.com . Retrieved 16 November 2024 .

^ "Reconnaissance-pull"—seeking the path of least resistance Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine (monograph, US Command and General Staff College, 1991) ^ a b "Chap. 11".

Marine Corps Operations (MCDP 1-0) . Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication. 2007. pp.

11– 10.

^ Beliakov VD Military Epidemiology. Textbook in Russian. Leningrad, 1976 p153.

^ Mel'nichenko P. I., Ogarkov O. I., Lizunov Yu. V.

Military Hygiene and Military Epidemiology . 400 pp., ill. 2005 ISBN 5-225-04849-8 ^ Burke, Kevin.

"Civil Reconnaissance; Separating the Insurgent from the Population" (PDF) . NPS. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2017 .

^ "Joint Publication 3-57" (PDF) . US Government . Retrieved 29 December 2017 .

^ Burnham, Frederick Russell (1926).

Scouting on Two Continents . Garden City, New York: Doubleday, Page & Company. p.

19 .

ISBN 978-0-86920-126-8 .

OCLC 407686 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Look up reconnaissance in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Halsall, Christine, Women of Intelligence: Winning the Second World War with Air Photos , The History Press, 2012.

ISBN 978-0-7524-6477-0 .

v t e Military and war Concepts Military Service History Technology Occupational roles Recruitment National security Roles: Soldier Sailor Airman Enlisted rank Officer Commanding officer Executive officer Protocols and structure: Ranks List Uniforms Awards and decorations By country Highest Categories: Ranks Forces Command and control Defense ministry Armed Forces : Army Navy Air force Marines Space force Special forces Airborne forces Commando Frogman Militia Reserves Functional specialties: Communications Engineers Intelligence Reconnaissance List Medical Military police Gendarmerie Security forces Border guard Coast guard Logistics By country Categories: Combat occupations Development: Basic training Military maneuvers Combat training Branches Land units: Combat arms Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special reconnaissance Signal corps Naval units: Warships Surface Littoral Patrol Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ship Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Structure Organization By country Armies by country Chain of command Unified combatant command General staff Land: Army group Field army Corps List Division List Brigade By type Regiment By country By type Battalion By country By type Platoon Squad Naval: Naval fleet Task force Carrier strike group Division Flotilla Squadron Air: Combat box Special units by nation: Battle Fleet; U.S. Navy Front; Russian land forces Vehicles Ground: Ground List Combat Tracked vehicles Wheeled vehicles Armor Tank Infantry fighting vehicle Lists By country Armored car Scout car Truck List Gun truck Self-propelled artillery List Anti-aircraft Rail Weapons Land Weapons List Artillery: Artillery List By country Battery Field gun List Howitzer List Rocket List Infantry guns : Pistols Machine guns List Service rifles : Battle rifles List Assault rifle List Sniper rifle Other infantry weapons: Bazooka Anti-tank gun List Grenade List Flamethrower Bayonet Combat knife List Missiles : Shoulder-fired Anti-tank List By country Mortar Lists: Infantry Heavy Other: Land mine Shells Sea/Air: Guided missiles List Naval : Naval artillery List Anti-ship missiles Torpedoes Depth charges Close-in weapons Aerial : Guns Missiles Bombs Equipment Military equipment Lists By country Helmet List Camouflage List Body armor Facilities: Military base Lists Field hospital Combat systems Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo Data Computer Warfare War Battle Strategy Tactics Combat Military science Diplomacy International law By era: Prehistoric Ancient Post-classical Early modern Late modern industrial fourth-gen By type: Armoured warfare Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Chemical Class Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone Electronic Infantry Lawfare Loitering Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Unconventional Battlespace Aerospace Air Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Jungle Mountain Urban Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Subterranean Tunnel Cyber Information Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Airbridge Airdrop Battle Cavalry Charge Counterattack Counterinsurgency Defeat in detail Foxhole Envelopment Guerrilla Morale Rapid dominance Siege Swarming Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Attrition Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Naval Offensive Scorched earth Policy Diplomacy : Alliances Peace treaty Cooperation Deterrence theory United Nations Mediation Public policy: Conscription Defense budget List Past Per capita Defense policy Related: Government Nation Lists Military lists Wars Weapons Military tactics History lists: Wars Battles Military occupations Operations Sieges Related lists: War crimes Writers Other namespace Templates {{ War }} {{ Weapons }} {{ Ranks }} Vehicles and weapons {{ Tanks }} {{ Weapons }} {{ Infantry fighting vehicles }} {{ Modern warships }} {{ Aircraft }} Specific modern wars {{ Napoleonic Wars }} {{ World War I }} {{ World War II }} {{ Cold War }} Categories Lists of wars by country Conflicts by time Related Peace Peace and conflict studies Peace movement Peace process Disarmament Pacifism Détente Global studies Conscientious objector Anti-war movement Idealism in international relations Humanitarianism International cooperation Crimes against humanity {{ International relations }} Categories: Peace organizations Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wlgkc
Cached time: 20250817234352
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.581 seconds
Real time usage: 0.786 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2707/1000000
Revision size: 21116/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 86317/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4442/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60499/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.313/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7513842/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  606.510      1 -total
 25.36%  153.840      2 Template:Reflist
 18.71%  113.467      1 Template:Military_and_war
 16.28%   98.739      4 Template:Cite_book
 12.11%   73.427      1 Template:Short_description
 10.21%   61.910      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.30%   56.417      1 Template:Ambox
  7.09%   42.993      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.74%   40.852      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.13%   25.050      1 Template:Wiktionary Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:146911:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817234352 and revision id 1295553680. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reconnaissance&oldid=1295553680 " Categories : Reconnaissance Maneuver tactics Military cartography Military intelligence collection Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2012 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 13:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reconnaissance 47 languages Add topic

