Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Color 3 Physical structure 4 References Toggle the table of contents Grand Prismatic Spring 28 languages العربية Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 44°31′30″N 110°50′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 44.52500°N 110.83806°W ﻿ / 44.52500; -110.83806 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Largest hot spring in the United States Grand Prismatic Spring Aerial view of the Grand Prismatic Spring Location Midway Geyser Basin , Yellowstone National Park , Teton County, Wyoming Coordinates 44°31′30″N 110°50′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 44.52500°N 110.83806°W ﻿ / 44.52500; -110.83806 [ 1 ] Elevation 7,270 ft (2,220 m) [ 2 ] Type Hot spring Discharge 560 US gal (2,100 L) per minute Temperature 160 °F (70 °C) Depth 160 ft (50 m) The Grand Prismatic Spring in Yellowstone National Park is the largest hot spring in the United States, and the third largest in the world, [ 3 ] after Frying Pan Lake in New Zealand and Boiling Lake in Dominica. It is located in the Midway Geyser Basin .

Grand Prismatic Spring was noted by geologists working in the Hayden Geological Survey of 1871 , and named by them for its striking coloration. Its colors match most of those seen in the rainbow dispersion of white light by an optical prism : red, orange, yellow, green, and blue.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The first records of the spring are from early European explorers and surveyors. In 1839, a group of four trappers from the American Fur Company crossed the Midway Geyser Basin and made note of a "boiling lake", most likely the Grand Prismatic Spring, [ 5 ] with a diameter of 300 feet (90 m). In 1870 the Washburn–Langford–Doane Expedition visited the spring, noting a 50-foot (15 m) geyser nearby (later named Excelsior ).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Color [ edit ] The bright, vivid colors in the spring are the result of microbial mats of thermophilic bacteria around the edges of the mineral-rich water. The mats produce colors ranging from green to red; the amount of color in the microbial mats depends on the ratio of chlorophyll to carotenoids and on the temperature gradient in the runoff. In the summer, the mats tend to be orange and red, whereas in the winter the mats are usually dark green.

[ 8 ] The deep blue color of the water in the center of the pool results from the intrinsic blue color of water . The effect is strongest in the center of the spring, because of its sterility and depth.

[ 9 ] Physical structure [ edit ] The spring is approximately 370 feet (110 m) in diameter and is 160 feet (50 m) deep. The spring discharges an estimated 560 US gallons (2,100 L) of 160 °F (70 °C) water per minute.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Grand Prismatic Spring Microbial mat Timelapse video of the Grand Prismatic Spring References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Grand Prismatic Spring .

Volcanoes portal Geology portal Wyoming portal United States portal ^ "Grand Prismatic Spring" . Yellowstone Geothermal Features Database.

Montana State University .

^ "Grand Prismatic Spring" .

Geographic Names Information System .

United States Geological Survey , United States Department of the Interior .

^ "Steam Explosions, Earthquakes, and Volcanic Eruptions—What's in Yellowstone's Future?" . U.S. Geological Survey.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2018 . Retrieved September 14, 2005 .

^ Traci Bryan; Leslie Machen; Joyce Heinsz; Peggy McCracken.

"Grand Prismatic Spring" . Lunar and Planetary Institute.

Archived from the original on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved December 4, 2015 .

^ " "The Fire Hole": Era of the American Fur Company, 1833-1840" .

Colter's Hell & Jackson's Hole .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on March 12, 2005.

^ "Notes" .

Yellowstone National Park: Its Exploration and Establishment . National Park Service. Archived from the original on February 8, 2006.

^ "Part II: Definitive Knowledge - The Washburn Party (1870)" .

Yellowstone National Park: Its Exploration and Establishment . National Park Service. Archived from the original on December 13, 2004.

^ Thomas D. Brock .

"Colorful Yellowstone" .

Life at High Temperature . Archived from the original on November 25, 2005.

^ a b Geiling, Natasha.

"The Science Behind Yellowstone's Rainbow Hot Spring" .

Smithsonian.com . Smithsonian Institution.

Archived from the original on August 7, 2015 . Retrieved August 17, 2015 .

^ "Grand Prismatic Spring" . Geyser Observation and Study Association.

v t e Yellowstone National Park - Lower and Midway Geyser Basins Geothermal features, geography, historic structures and other attractions in the Lower and Midway Geyser Basins Lower Geyser Basin A-0 Geyser Artesia Geyser Azure Spring Bead Geyser Botryoidal Spring Box Spring Clepsydra Geyser Dilemma Geyser Fountain Geyser Fountain Paint Pot Great Fountain Geyser Jet Geyser Labial Geyser Morning Geyser Narcissus Geyser Ojo Caliente Spring Pink Cone Geyser Pink Geyser Spindle Geyser Surprise Pool White Dome Geyser Young Hopeful and Grey Bulger Geysers Midway Geyser Basin Excelsior Geyser Grand Prismatic Spring Opal Pool Turquoise Pool Structures and history Firehole Village Grand Loop Road Historic District Marshall's Hotel Nez Perce National Historic Trail Nez Perce Flight Queen's Laundry Bath House Geography and geology Firehole Falls Firehole River Yellowstone National Park-related articles Commons v t e State of Wyoming Cheyenne (capital) Topics Bibliography Governors Delegations History People State symbols Radio stations Society Abortion Climate change Crime Demographics Economy Education Gun laws LGBT rights Politics Regions Black Hills Grand Teton Great Basin Powder River Country Red Desert Yellowstone Cities Buffalo Casper Cheyenne Cody Douglas Evanston Gillette Green River Jackson Kemmerer Lander Laramie Newcastle Powell Rawlins Riverton Rock Springs Sheridan Torrington Worland Counties Albany Big Horn Campbell Carbon Converse Crook Fremont Goshen Hot Springs Johnson Laramie Lincoln Natrona Niobrara Park Platte Sheridan Sublette Sweetwater Teton Uinta Washakie Weston Wyoming portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grand_Prismatic_Spring&oldid=1297187717 " Categories : Geothermal features of Yellowstone National Park Hot springs of Wyoming Geothermal features of Teton County, Wyoming Hot springs of Teton County, Wyoming Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2024 Use American English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Grand Prismatic Spring 28 languages Add topic

