Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Edge, suction, and external vacuum sealers 1.2 Single-chamber vacuum sealers 1.3 Double-chamber vacuum sealers 1.4 Rotary belt type vacuum sealers 1.5 Automatic belt vacuum chamber machines 1.6 Thermoforming HFFS vacuum packaging machines 2 Food storage Toggle Food storage subsection 2.1 Food safety 2.2 Shelf life 2.3 High barrier-chamber vacuum shrink bags 2.4 Freezer burn 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Vacuum packing 22 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Suomi ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of removing air from a package prior to sealing Sealed food alongside a home vacuum sealer and plastic rolls used for sealing Vacuum packing is a method of packaging that removes air from the package prior to sealing. This method involves placing items in a plastic film package, removing air from inside and sealing the package.

[ 1 ] Shrink film is sometimes used to have a tight fit to the contents. The intent of vacuum packing is usually to remove oxygen from the container to extend the shelf life of foods and, with flexible package forms, to reduce the volume of the contents and package.

[ 2 ] Vacuum packing reduces atmospheric oxygen, limiting the growth of aerobic bacteria or fungi , and preventing the evaporation of volatile components. It is also commonly used to store dry foods over a long period of time, such as cereals , nuts , cured meats , cheese , smoked fish , coffee , and potato chips ( crisps ). On a more short-term basis, vacuum packing can also be used to store fresh foods, such as vegetables, meats, and liquids, because it inhibits bacterial growth.

Vacuum packing greatly reduces the bulk of non-food items. For example, clothing and bedding can be stored in bags evacuated with a domestic vacuum cleaner or a dedicated vacuum sealer. This technique is sometimes used to compact household waste , for example where a charge is made for each full bag collected.

Vacuum packaging products, using plastic bags , canisters , bottles , or mason jars , are available for home use.

For delicate food items that might be crushed by the vacuum packing process (such as potato chips), an alternative is to replace the interior gas with nitrogen. This has the same effect of inhibiting deterioration due to the removal of oxygen.

Types [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Vacuum packing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Vacuum packaged ready-to-sell Jamón products Edge, suction, and external vacuum sealers [ edit ] External vacuum sealers involve a bag being attached to the vacuum-sealing machine externally. The machine will remove the air and seal the bag, which is all done outside the machine. A heat sealer is often used to seal the pack. Typically these units use a dry piston vacuum pump which is often considered a "maintenance-free" pump. For sealing dry goods only, this is the preferred method. Moist foods are known to cause internal corrosion on these dry piston pumps.

Single-chamber vacuum sealers [ edit ] This video shows vacuum packaging of rice.

Tabletop vacuum packaging machine Single-chamber sealers require the entire product to be placed within the machine. Like external sealers, a plastic bag is typically used for packaging. Once the product is placed in the machine, the lid is closed and air is removed. Then, there is a heat seal inside the chamber that will seal the bag, after sealing the bag the chamber is refilled with air by the automatic opening of a vent to the outside. This oncoming pressure squeezes all remaining air in the bag. The lid is then opened and the product removed. Chamber sealers are typically used for low-to-medium-volume packaging. This style of vacuum machine is also capable of sealing liquids due to equal pressure in the chamber and the bag eliminating the risk of the liquid being sucked out of the open edge of the bag.

Double-chamber vacuum sealers [ edit ] Double-chamber vacuum packaging machine Double-chamber sealers require the entire product to be placed in a plastic bag within the machine. Once the product is placed in the machine on the seal bar, the lid is closed and air is removed. Then a seal bar inside the chamber seals the product in the bag, after sealing the bag the chamber is refilled with air by the automatic opening of a vent to the outside. This oncoming pressure squeezes all remaining air in the bag. The lid is then opened and the product removed. Double-chamber sealers are typically used for medium-volume packaging, and also have the capability to vacuum seal liquids. The lid generally swings from one side to another, increasing production speed over a single-chamber model. Double-chamber vacuum packaging machines generally have either spring-weighted lids or fully automatic lids.

Double-chamber vacuum packaging machines are commonly used for: Fresh meat Processed meat Cheese (hard and soft) Candy and chocolate Rotary belt type vacuum sealers [ edit ] Rotary belt type vacuum packaging machine or vacuum sealer features the same function as the double-chamber vacuum packaging machine as a 'vacuum bag sealer'. But the rotary belt vacuum packaging machine is more convenient, as the belt rotates automatically while the bags are placed to the sealing bar and vacuum sealing process completed. The vacuumed and sealed bags are automatically unloaded, which obviously is more convenient.
The packaging plate of the machine is adjustable to 4 degrees, which allows the vacuum packaging of food with soup and liquid.

Rotary belt type packaging machines are commonly used for: Fresh meat Processed meat Seafood Pickles Cheese (hard and soft) Candy and chocolate Any other packs that needs vacuum sealing, and the size of the pack is not too big.

Automatic belt vacuum chamber machines [ edit ] Automatic Belt Vacuum Chamber Machine. Automatic belt vacuum chamber machines offer vastly increased speed and automation and accommodate large products.

Automatic belt chamber sealers require the entire product to be placed in a plastic bag or flow wrapped pouch within the machine. The product travels on the conveyor belt, it is automatically positioned in the machine on the seal bar, the lid is closed and air is removed. Then a seal bar inside the chamber seals the product in the bag. After sealing the bag, the chamber is refilled with air by the automatic opening of a vent to the outside. This oncoming pressure squeezes all remaining air in the bag. The lid is then opened and the product removed. Automatic belt vacuum chamber machines are typically used for high-speed packaging of large items, and also have the capability to vacuum seal liquids. The lid generally travels straight up and down.

Automatic belt vacuum chamber packaging machines are commonly used for: Fresh meat (large portions) Processed meat Large sausage logs Cheese (hard and soft) Next-generation machines look similar but are much easier to operate and maintain.

Thermoforming HFFS vacuum packaging machines [ edit ] Thermoform packaging machines are used in larger production facilities for vacuum packaging products.

Vacuum packaging in large production facilities can be done with thermoforming machines. These are Form-Fill-Seal style machines that form the package from rolls of packaging film (webbing). Products are loaded into the thermoformed pockets, the top web is laid and sealed under a vacuum, MAP (modified atmosphere), or skin packaging producing rapidly packaged products. Thermoforming can greatly increase packaging production speed.
Thermoformed plastics can be customized for size, color, clarity, and shape to fit products perfectly, creating a consistent appearance. One of the most commonly used thermoformed plastics is PET, known for a high-strength barrier resistant to outside tampering and an ease of molding into designated designs and shapes. Some common uses for Thermoforming in vacuum packaging include: Fresh and marinated meat Sausage Cheese Candy and chocolate Grain Grab-and-go snacks (beef jerky, snack sticks) Pharmaceutical and medical products Coins and collectables Food storage [ edit ] Food safety [ edit ] A cut of wild-caught elk meat in a vacuum sealed bag In an oxygen-depleted environment, anaerobic bacteria can proliferate, potentially causing food-safety issues. Some pathogens of concern in vacuum packed foods are spore-forming non-proteolytic Clostridium botulinum , Yersinia enterocolitica , and Listeria monocytogenes .

[ 3 ] Vacuum packing is often used in combination with other food processing techniques, such as retorting or refrigeration, to inhibit the growth of anaerobic organisms.

[ 3 ] Shelf life [ edit ] Depending on the product, atmosphere, temperature, and the barrier properties of the package, vacuum packaging extends the shelf life of many foods.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The shelf life of meats can be extended by vacuum packaging, particularly when used with modified atmosphere packaging .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] High barrier-chamber vacuum shrink bags [ edit ] The amount of shelf life enhanced by a vacuum bag is dependent on the structure in the material. A standard vacuum bag is composed of a PA/PE structure where PA is for puncture resistance and PE is for sealing. The high barrier category includes the usage of more layers focused on the prevention of oxygen permeability , and therefore shelf life protection.

[ citation needed ] There are two materials used in high barrier structures, polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC) and ethylene vinyl alcohol ( EVOH ).

[ citation needed ] Shelf life indication can be effectively measured by how many cubic centimeters of oxygen can permeate through 1 square meter of material over a 24-hour period. A standard PA/PE bag allows on average 100 cubic centimeters, PVDC allows on average over 10, and EVOH on average 1 cubic centimeter. Multi-layer structures allow the ability to use strong oxygen-barrier materials for enhanced shelf life protection.

[ citation needed ] Freezer burn [ edit ] When foods are frozen without preparation, freezer burn can occur.

[ citation needed ] It happens when the surface of the food is dehydrated, and this leads to a dried and leathery appearance. Freezer burn also changes the flavor and texture of foods. Vacuum packing reduces freezer burn by preventing the food from exposure to the cold, dry air.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Perdue, R (2009), "Vacuum Packaging", in Yam, K L (ed.), Encyclopedia of Packaging Technology , Wiley (published 2010), ISBN 978-0-470-08704-6 ^ Soroka, W.

Illustrated Glossary of Packaging Terminology (Second ed.). Institute of Packaging Professionals.

^ a b Mills, John; Donnison, Andrea; Brightwell, Gale (2014). "Factors affecting microbial spoilage and shelf-life of chilled vacuum-packed lamb transported to distant markets: A review".

Meat Science .

98 (1): 71– 80.

doi : 10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.05.002 .

PMID 24875594 .

^ Gorris, L G M (1992).

"Modified Atmosphere and Vacuum Packaging to Extend the Shelf Life of Respiring Food Products" .

HortTechnology .

2 (3): 303– 309.

doi : 10.21273/HORTTECH.2.3.303 . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Beltran, David (2005).

"Effect of different sanitizers on microbial and sensory quality of fresh-cut potato strips stored under modified atmosphere or vacuum packaging" (PDF) .

Postharvest Biology and Technology .

37 : 37– 46.

doi : 10.1016/j.postharvbio.2005.02.010 . Retrieved August 14, 2018 .

^ Garcia-Esteban, Marta (2004).

"Comparison of modified atmosphere packaging and vacuum packaging for long period storage of dry-cured ham: effects on colour, texture and microbiological quality" .

Meat Science .

67 (1): 57– 63.

doi : 10.1016/j.meatsci.2003.09.005 .

hdl : 10171/22986 .

PMID 22061116 . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Seidman, S C (1983). "Vacuum Packaging of Fresh Beef: A Review".

Journal of Food Quality .

6 (1): 29– 47.

doi : 10.1111/j.1745-4557.1983.tb00755.x .

Further reading [ edit ] Robertson, G.L., Food Packaging: Principles and Practice , 3rd edition, 2013, ISBN 978-1-4398-6241-4 Yam, K. L., Encyclopedia of Packaging Technology , John Wiley & Sons, 2009, ISBN 978-0-470-08704-6 The Colonel In The Kitchen: A Surprising History Of Sous Vide at National Public Radio v t e Packaging General topics Active packaging Child-resistant packaging Contract packager Edible packaging Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging Overpackaging Package delivery Package pilferage Package testing Package theft Packaging engineering Resealable packaging Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Shelf life Shelf-ready packaging Shelf-stable Sustainable packaging Tamper-evident Tamper resistance Wrap rage Product packages Alternative wine closure Ammunition box Banana box Beer bottle Box wine Case-ready meat Coffee bag Cosmetic packaging Currency packaging Disposable food packaging Drink can Egg carton Evidence packaging Field ration Flour sack Foam food container Food packaging Fuel container Gas cylinder Glass milk bottle Growler Juicebox Low plastic water bottle Luxury packaging Milk bag Optical disc packaging Oyster pail Popcorn bag Pharmaceutical packaging Pizza box Plastic milk container Purdue Improved Crop Storage bags Sand bag Seasonal packaging Self-heating food packaging Screw cap (wine) Single-serve coffee container Spray paint Toothpaste pump dispenser Unit dose Water bottle Wine bottle Containers Aerosol spray dispenser Aluminium bottle Aluminum can Ampoule Antistatic bag Bag-in-box Bag Barrel Biodegradable bag Blister pack Boil-in-bag Bottle Box Bulk box Cage Case Carboy Carton Chub Clamshell Corrugated box design Crate Disposable cup Drum Endcap Envelope Euro container Flexible intermediate bulk container Flexible tank Folding carton Glass bottle Gunny sack Inhaler Insulated shipping container Intermediate bulk container Jar Jerrycan Jug Keg Mesh bag Multilayered packaging Multi-pack Packet (container) Padded envelope Pail Paper bag Paper sack Plastic bag Plastic bottle Retort pouch Salvage drum Sachet Water sachet Security bag Shipping container Shipping tube Skin pack Spray bottle Squround Stand-up pouch Steel and tin cans Tetra Brik Thermal bag Tub (container) Tube Unit load Vial Wooden box Materials and components Adhesive Aluminium foil Bail handle Bioplastic Biodegradable plastic BoPET Bubble wrap Bung Cellophane Closure Coated paper Coating Coextrusion Container glass Corrugated fiberboard Corrugated plastic Cushioning Desiccant Double seam Flip-top Foam peanut Gel pack Hot-melt adhesive Humidity indicator card Kraft paper Label Lid Linear low-density polyethylene Liquid packaging board Living hinge Low-density polyethylene Meat absorbent pad Metallised film Modified atmosphere Molded pulp Nonwoven fabric Overwrap Oxygen scavenger Package handle Packaging gas Pallet Paper Paper pallet Paperboard Plastic-coated paper Plastic film Plastic pallet Plastic wrap Polyester Polyethylene Polypropylene Pressure-sensitive tape Pump dispenser Screw cap Screw cap (wine) Security printing Security tape Shock detector Shock and vibration data logger Shrink wrap Slip sheet Staple (fastener) Strapping Stretch wrap Susceptor Tamper-evident band Tear tape Temperature data logger Time temperature indicator Tinplate Velostat Processes Aseptic processing Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Blow fill seal Blow molding Calendering Canning Coating Containerization Converting Corona treatment Curtain coating Die cutting Die forming (plastics) Electronic article surveillance Extrusion Extrusion coating Flame treatment Glass production Graphic design Hazard analysis and critical control points Hermetic seal Induction sealing Injection moulding Lamination Laser cutting Molding Package tracking Papermaking Plastic extrusion Plastic welding Printing Product development Production control Quality assurance Radio-frequency identification Roll slitting Shearing (manufacturing) Thermoforming Track and trace Ultrasonic welding Vacuum forming Vacuum packaging Verification and validation Machinery Barcode printer Barcode reader Bottling line Calender Can seamer Cap torque tester Cartoning machine Case sealer Check weigher Conveyor system Drum pump Extended core stretch wrapper Filler Heat gun Heat sealer Industrial robot Injection molding machine Label printer applicator Lineshaft roller conveyor Logistics automation Material-handling equipment Mechanical brake stretch wrapper Multihead weigher Orbital stretch wrapper Packaging machinery Pallet inverter Palletizer Rotary wheel blow molding systems Seed-counting machine Shrink tunnel Staple gun Tape dispenser Turntable stretch wrapper Vertical form fill sealing machine Environment, post-use Biodegradation Can collecting Closed-loop box reuse Environmental engineering Extended producer responsibility Glass recycling Industrial ecology Life-cycle assessment Litter Packaging waste Paper recycling PET bottle recycling Plastic recycling Recycling Reusable packaging Reverse logistics Source reduction Sustainable packaging Waste management Category: Packaging v t e Food preservation Biopreservation Burying in ground Canning Cold chain Curing Drying Fermentation Freeze-drying Freezing Hurdle technology Irradiation Jamming Jellying Jugging Modified atmosphere Pascalization Pickling Potting Confit Potjevleesch Rillettes Salting Smoking Sugaring Tyndallization Vacuum packing Food portal Category: Food preservation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vacuum_packing&oldid=1303717368 " Categories : Food preservation Packaging Vacuum Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 17:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vacuum packing 22 languages Add topic

