Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Processes and effects Toggle Processes and effects subsection 2.1 Agriculture 2.2 Urban development 2.3 Industry and technology 2.3.1 Science 2.3.2 Energy 3 Evolution of anthropization 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Anthropization 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Чӑвашла Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conversion of natural environments by human action Not to be confused with Anthropogeny .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Anthropization" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An example of advanced anthropization: the cultivation of rice in terraces in Vietnam In geography and ecology , anthropization is the conversion of open spaces, landscapes, and natural environments by human action.

[ 1 ] Anthropic erosion is the process of human action degrading terrain and soil .

An area may be classified as anthropized even though it looks natural, such as grasslands that have been deforested by humans. It can be difficult to determine how much a site has been anthropized in the case of urbanization because one must be able to estimate the state of the landscape before significant human action.

[ citation needed ] Origin [ edit ] The earliest known stages of anthropization can be found as early as the Neolithic era and the basic farmland created in that time.

[ 2 ] With the continually-growing population of humans, the land that the Earth provides has been appropriated over the years.  The ecological footprint created by anthropization is continually growing despite efficiency and technique improvements made in anthropization..

Whether anthropized or not, all land seldom a few locations has been claimed.  Outside of the largely inhospitable Arctic and Antarctic circles and large portions of other uninhabitable landscapes, much of the globe has been used or altered in some direct way by humans.  Land has been appropriated for many different reasons, but ultimately the outcome is typically a short-term benefit for humans.  An area is anthropized is some way to make land available for housing, to harvest the resources, to create space for some anthropological reason, or many other possibilities.

Processes and effects [ edit ] An example of land that has been appropriated for cultivation in Hainan , China .

Agriculture [ edit ] The root of many early forms of civilization, agriculture has been a primary reason for anthropization. To cultivate food or breed animals, humans must alter land—till soil or build structures—to facilitate agriculture.  This can lead to soil erosion and pollution ( pesticides , greenhouse gas emissions , etc.), and subsequently habitat fragmentation and overall an increased ecological footprint . Agriculture and industry often overlap, and industry produces many of these effects too.

Urban development [ edit ] Especially with approximately 7.5 Billion humans inhabiting the Earth , [ 3 ] this typically aligns with an increase in residences worldwide.  Over the years, humans have built on land to meet their needs and wants. These actions range from small villages to massive factories, water parks, and apartments.

Urbanization and development of human residences can significantly affect the environment .  Not only does the physical space of buildings fragment habitats and possibly endanger species , but it fundamentally alters the habitat for any other living being.  For some species, this effect can be inconsequential, but for many this can have a dramatic impact.  The biosphere is very much interconnected, and this means that if one organism is affected, then as a result the other organisms within this ecosystem and food chain are also affected.

The Athabasca oil sands are an example of anthropization as a result of the harvest and transport of a non-renewable resource, oil sands .

As well, within the last century, any urbanized area requires roads for transportation.  This transportation is a continued source of pollution, and the roads can be a source of soil erosion.

Industry and technology [ edit ] To support humans, industrial buildings and processes are apparently essential. Urban development and agriculture require that people produce, refined, or construct many things. Key to this is that factories require that people gather the materials they need to create a product. The wide range of products in this anthropological age use a plethora of substances that must be harvested or produced.  Many of these materials are non-renewable (e.g., fossil fuel, metal ores, etc.) and the harvest of these results in relatively permanent anthropization. For resources that depend on in high quantity, this can also mean temporary depletion or damage to the source of the resource (e.g., depletion or pollution of fresh water reserves, [ 4 ] improper or inefficient silviculture , etc.).  Even sustainable or renewable industrial anthropization still affects the environment.  While the resource in question may not be in jeopardy, the harvest and processing can still change and damage the environment.

Science [ edit ] Anthropization can also be a result of scientific endeavours.  This can manifest as construction of structures to aid in scientific discovery and observation.  This can range from structures such as observatories , or on the opposite scale the Large Hadron Collider .  These and many other things are built and used to enhance knowledge of sciences. They do however require space and energy.

Energy [ edit ] To power the ever-growing human race, energy is needed.  Power-harvesting structures are built to harness energy, such as dams, windmills, and nuclear reactors.  These sources of energy ultimately fuel the rest of anthropological activity and are essential in this way.  However many of these methods have consequences.  With dams, construction aside, they can cause flooding, habitat fragmentation, and other effects.  With nuclear reactors, they have a lasting effect in that typically a lifespan of one of these is around 50 years [ 5 ] and afterwards the nuclear waste must be dealt with, and the structure itself must be shut down and cannot be used further.  To safely dispose of this even low-level waste can take hundreds of years, ranging upwards with increased radioactivity.

[ 6 ] To produce and as a result of this production of energy, it requires a lot of anthropized land.

Evolution of anthropization [ edit ] An example of ancient anthropization; Giza pyramid complex, Egypt.

Changes in population directly effect anthropological impact—but changes in technology and knowledge have greatly changed anthropization throughout the Holocene . The tools and methods that humans use to anthropize have changed drastically.  For examples, the great pyramids in Egypt were not constructed by some large machine, but instead by thousands of humans.  They were still able to build massive monuments, but the efficiency of their efforts and environmental damage was very different from what would be possible today.  This shows that the environmental effect of modern anthropization is generally greater, not just because of the increase in population. Pollution and loss of biodiversity in Egypt was largely natural, not man-made, and anthropization existed on a much lower level.

As the human population of Earth increase, this anthropization will continue to evolve.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Ecological footprint Land use Wilderness Artificialization References [ edit ] ^ "Anthropization - Hypergéo" .

www.hypergeo.eu . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

^ "Anthropization - Hypergéo" .

www.hypergeo.eu . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

^ "World Population Clock: 7.5 Billion People (2017) - Worldometers" .

www.worldometers.info . Retrieved 2017-01-30 .

^ "How Water Sources are Being Depleted" .

PureDrinkableWater . Retrieved 2017-01-31 .

^ Voosen, Paul.

"How Long Can a Nuclear Reactor Last?" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 2017-01-31 .

^ Miller, G. Tyler, David F. Hackett, and Carl Eric Wolfe.

Living in the Environment . 4th ed. Toronto: Nelson Education, 2017. 454-55. Print.

External links [ edit ] Look up anthropization in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Anthropization at Wikimedia Commons v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anthropization&oldid=1284428539 " Categories : Biogeography Ecological processes Ethnobiology Geography terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from August 2019 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 April 2025, at 14:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anthropization 12 languages Add topic

