Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Research 3 Notable alumni and staff 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Department of Geography, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′06″N 0°07′25″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2018°N 0.1236°E ﻿ / 52.2018; 0.1236 ﻿ ( Department of Geography, University of Cambridge ) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic department of the University of Cambridge Department of Geography Established 1888 ( 1888 ) Head of Department Professor Emma Mawdsley Location Cambridge , United Kingdom 52°12′06″N 0°07′25″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2018°N 0.1236°E ﻿ / 52.2018; 0.1236 ﻿ ( Department of Geography, University of Cambridge ) Website www .geog .cam .ac .uk The Department of Geography is one of the constituent departments of the University of Cambridge and is located on the Downing Site .

The department is consistently rated amongst the best Geography departments in the world, in rankings tables.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] There is a long tradition of geography at Cambridge stretching back to the first University Lecturer in Geography, Henry Guillemard , appointed in 1888 which was funded by the Royal Geographical Society , which was keen to promote the teaching of Geography at Oxford and Cambridge.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Teaching was initially for a special examination leading to a diploma in geography. The Geographical Tripos - the examination for a B.A. degree - was established in 1919.

[ 3 ] In 1931 the first professor, Frank Debenham OBE , was appointed [ 4 ] and in 1933 the department moved into its own accommodation. That building, which now constitutes the eastern end of the department, was considerably extended in the 1930s, with the construction of new lecture theatres and laboratories.

[ 3 ] In the 1980s, the building was further extended with the addition of a top floor to provide a new laboratory for computing, remote sensing and geographical information systems. In 1999 the department expanded again, to occupy two floors in an adjacent building where new laboratories, seminar rooms and offices are housed.

Since then, the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure (CAMPOP) has been integrated into the teaching and research activities of the Department (2001), and the Scott Polar Research Institute became a sub-department in 2002. Today, the Department has 35 academic staff including ten professors and four readers.

Research [ edit ] Scott Polar Research Institute , a sub-department of the Department of Geography Research in the department is organised in the following thematic research groups: Vital Geographies Infrastructural Geographies Geographies of Knowledge Biogeography and Biogeomorphology Climate and Environmental Dynamics Glaciology and Glacial Geology Notable alumni and staff [ edit ] The department has produced a range of notable alumni, including David Harvey , the world's most cited academic geographer, and winner of the Lauréat Prix International de Géographie Vautrin Lud .
Other notable alumni and staff include: Richard Chorley , leading figure in the late 20th century for his work in quantitative geography Frank Debenham , first director of the Scott Polar Research Institute Sir Peter Hall ,  town planner and urbanist David Harvey , the world's most cited academic geographer Sir James Wordie , Scottish polar explorer and geologist Bill Adams Dawn Airey Ash Amin John Barrett Anthony Bebbington Piers Blaikie William Maurice Brown Paul Brummell Sylvia Chant Richard Chorley Miles Clark Roger Clarke Mark Cleary John Terence Coppock Bernie Cotton Kevin R. Cox Philip Cox Mike Crang Gabriel Crouch Frank Debenham Hugh Dennis Robin Donkin Julian A. Dowdeswell George Freeman Phil Gibbard Andrew Goudie Derek Gregory A. T. (Dick) Grove Jean Grove Peter Haggett Peter Hall John Heap Michael Heffernan Bronwyn Hill Mike Hulme Mike Kirkby William Vaughan Lewis Hal Lister Sylvia Law Huw Lewis-Jones Linda McDowell Paul Madden Gordon Manley Ron Martin Ann Mather Michael Mortimore John Noble James Oldfield Joe Painter Chris Philo Luke Piper Matthew Price Sarah A. Radcliffe Phil Rees Chris Robinson John Rymill Susan J. Smith Oskar Spate Alfred Steers Ken Sykora Sam Toy Piers Vitebsky Andrew Warren George T. Whitesides David Wilshire Charles W. J. Withers James Wordie Tony Wrigley See also [ edit ] Professor of Geography (Cambridge) References [ edit ] ^ "Geography & Environmental Science 2025" .

The Complete University Guide . The Complete University Guide . Retrieved 9 December 2024 .

^ "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2024: Geography" .

QS World University Rankings . QS . Retrieved 9 December 2024 .

^ a b c "A brief history of the early years of the Department 1888–1960" .

Department of Geography . Uni of Cam . Retrieved 14 August 2024 .

^ a b Stoddart, D. R. (1989).

"A Hundred Years of Geography at Cambridge" .

The Geographical Journal .

155 (1): 24– 32.

Bibcode : 1989GeogJ.155...24S .

doi : 10.2307/635378 .

JSTOR 635378 .

External links [ edit ] Official department website v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Department_of_Geography,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1296898019 " Categories : Department of Geography, University of Cambridge Departments in the Faculty of Earth Sciences and Geography, University of Cambridge Geography departments in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 00:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Department of Geography, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

