Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Use in medical hypothesis testing Toggle Use in medical hypothesis testing subsection 1.1 Confidence interval 1.2 P value 2 Pharmaceutical statistics 3 Clinical biostatistics 4 Basic concepts 5 Related statistical theory 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Medical statistics 9 languages العربية Български Español فارسی Italiano Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Applications of statistics to medicine and the health sciences "Statistics in Medicine" redirects here. For the journal, see Statistics in Medicine (journal) .

This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( September 2014 ) Medical statistics (also health statistics ) deals with applications of statistics to medicine and the health sciences , including epidemiology , public health , forensic medicine , and clinical research .

[ 1 ] Medical statistics has been a recognized branch of statistics in the United Kingdom for more than 40 years, but the term has not come into general use in North America, where the wider term ' biostatistics ' is more commonly used.

[ 2 ] However, "biostatistics" more commonly connotes all applications of statistics to biology .

[ 2 ] Medical statistics is a subdiscipline of statistics.

It is the science of summarizing, collecting, presenting and interpreting data in medical practice, and using them to estimate the magnitude of associations and test hypotheses. It has a central role in medical investigations. It not only provides a way of organizing information on a wider and more formal basis than relying on the exchange of anecdotes and personal experience, but also takes into account the intrinsic variation inherent in most biological processes.

[ 3 ] Use in medical hypothesis testing [ edit ] In medical hypothesis testing, the medical research is often evaluated by means of the confidence interval , the P value , or both.

[ 4 ] Confidence interval [ edit ] This probability distribution presents two different confidence intervals .

[ 1 ] Frequently reported in medical research studies is the confidence interval (CI), which indicates the consistency and variability of the medical results of repeated medical trials. In other words, the confidence interval shows the range of values where the expected true estimate would exist within this specific range, if the study was performed many times.

[ 1 ] Most biomedical research is not able to use a total population for a study. Instead, samples of the total population are what are often used for a study. From the sample, inferences can be made of the total population by means of a sample statistic and the estimation of error, presented as a range of values.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] P value [ edit ] Frequently used in medical studies is the statistical significance of P < 0.05.

[ 4 ] The P value is the probability of no effect or no difference ( null hypothesis ) of obtaining a result essentially equal to what was actually observed. The P stands for probability and measures how likely it is that any observed difference between groups is due to chance. The P value function between 0 and 1. The closer to 0, the less likely the results are due to chance. The closer to 1, the higher the probability that the results are actually due to chance.

[ 4 ] Pharmaceutical statistics [ edit ] Pharmaceutical statistics is the application of statistics to matters concerning the pharmaceutical industry .  This can be from issues of design of experiments , to analysis of drug trials, to issues of commercialization of a medicine.

[ 1 ] There are many professional bodies concerned with this field including: European Federation of Statisticians in the Pharmaceutical Industry Statisticians In The Pharmaceutical Industry Clinical biostatistics [ edit ] Clinical biostatistics is concerned with research into the principles and methodology used in the design and analysis of clinical research and to apply statistical theory to clinical medicine .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Clinical biostatistics is taught in postgraduate biostatistical and applied statistical degrees, for example as part of the BCA Master of Biostatistics program in Australia.

Basic concepts [ edit ] For describing situations Incidence (epidemiology) vs.

Prevalence vs.

Cumulative incidence Many medical tests (such as pregnancy tests ) have two possible results: positive or negative. However, tests will sometimes yield incorrect results in the form of false positives or false negatives . False positives and false negatives can be described by the statistical concepts of type I and type II errors , respectively, where the null hypothesis is that the patient will test negative. The precision of a medical test is usually calculated in the form of positive predictive values (PPVs) and negative predicted values (NPVs) . PPVs and NPVs of medical tests depend on intrinsic properties of the test as well as the prevalence of the condition being tested for. For example, if any pregnancy test was administered to a population of individuals who were biologically incapable of becoming pregnant, then the test's PPV will be 0% and its NPV will be 100% simply because true positives and false negatives cannot exist in this population.

Mortality rate vs.

standardized mortality ratio vs.

age-standardized mortality rate Pandemic vs.

epidemic vs.

endemic vs.

syndemic Serial interval vs.

incubation period Cancer cluster Sexual network Years of potential life lost Maternal mortality rate Perinatal mortality rate Low birth weight ratio For assessing the effectiveness of an intervention Absolute risk reduction Control event rate Experimental event rate Number needed to harm Number needed to treat Odds ratio Relative risk reduction Relative risk Relative survival Minimal clinically important difference Related statistical theory [ edit ] Survival analysis Proportional hazards models Active control trials: clinical trials in which a kind of new treatment is compared with some other active agent rather than a placebo.

ADLS(Activities of daily living scale): a scale designed to measure physical ability/disability that is used in investigations of a variety of chronic disabling conditions, such as arthritis. This scale is based on scoring responses to questions about self-care, grooming, etc.

[ 6 ] Actuarial statistics: the statistics used by actuaries to calculate liabilities, evaluate risks and plan the financial course of insurance, pensions, etc.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Herd immunity False positives and false negatives Rare disease Hilda Mary Woods – the first author (with William Russell) of the first British textbook of medical statistics, published in 1931 References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "Finding and Using Health Statistics" . US National Library of Medicine . Retrieved 2024-03-15 .

^ a b Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms , OUP.

ISBN 0-19-850994-4 ^ Kirkwood, Betty R. (2003).

Essential Medical Statistics . Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-86542-871-3 .

^ a b c d Shreffler, Jacob; Huecker, Martin R. (2024).

"Hypothesis Testing, P Values, Confidence Intervals, and Significance" .

StatPearls . Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 32491353 . Retrieved 2024-03-16 .

^ "Our aims" . International Society For Clinical Biostatistics. 22 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 March 2024 .

^ S, KATZ; FORD A B; MOSKOWITZ R W; JACKSON B A; JAFFE M W (1963). "Studies of Illness in the Aged".

Journal of the American Medical Association .

185 (12): 914– 9.

doi : 10.1001/jama.1963.03060120024016 .

PMID 14044222 .

^ Benjamin, Bernard (1993).

The analysis of mortality and other actuarial statistics . England, Institute of Actuaries: Oxford.

ISBN 0521077494 .

Further reading [ edit ] Altman, D.G.

(1991), Practical Statistics for Medical Research , CRC Press, ISBN 978-0-412-27630-9 Armitage, P.

; Berry, G.; Matthews, J.N.S. (2002), Statistical Methods in Medical Research , Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-632-05257-8 Bland, J. Martin (2000), An Introduction to Medical Statistics (3rd ed.), Oxford: OUP, ISBN 978-0-19-263269-2 Kirkwood, B.R.; Sterne, J.A.C. (2003), Essential Medical Statistics (2nd ed.), Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-86542-871-3 Petrie, Aviva; Sabin, Caroline (2005), Medical Statistics at a Glance (2nd ed.), WileyBlackwell, ISBN 978-1-4051-2780-6 Onwude, Joseph (2008), Learn Medical Statistics (2nd ed.), DesignsOnline.co.uk External links [ edit ] Health-EU Portal EU health statistics v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Medical_statistics&oldid=1300842555 " Categories : Medical statistics Biostatistics Medical specialties Applied statistics Pharmaceutical statistics Clinical research Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from September 2014 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from September 2014 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 17:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Medical statistics 9 languages Add topic

