Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Voices of the Manhattan Project 2 Site preservation 3 Museum exhibits Toggle Museum exhibits subsection 3.1 Race for atomic power exhibit at Idaho Falls 3.2 B Reactor exhibits at Hanford 4 Books 5 Films 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Atomic Heritage Foundation 1 language Čeština Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nonprofit for Atomic Age history The Atomic Heritage Foundation Formation 2002 Founder Cynthia Kelly Focus History and veterans of the Manhattan Project and Atomic Age .

Headquarters National Museum of Nuclear Science & History Location Albuquerque, New Mexico President Cynthia Kelly Website ahf .nuclearmuseum .org The Atomic Heritage Foundation ( AHF ) is a nonprofit organization originally based in Washington, DC , dedicated to the preservation and interpretation of the Manhattan Project , the Atomic Age , and its legacy. Founded by Cynthia Kelly in 2002, the Foundation's stated goal is, "to provide the public not only a better understanding of the past but also a basis for addressing scientific, technical, political, social and ethical issues of the 21st century." [ 1 ] AHF works with Congress, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] the Department of Energy , [ 4 ] the National Park Service , state and local governments, nonprofit organizations and the former Manhattan Project communities to preserve and interpret historic sites and develop useful and accessible educational materials for veterans, teachers, and the general public. In June 2019, the Atomic Heritage Foundation and the National Museum of Nuclear Science & History signed an agreement that granted stewardship of the Atomic Heritage Foundation website and all of the AHF's physical collections to the museum. The Atomic Heritage Foundation website is now run by the National Museum of Nuclear Science & History. Additionally, the museum now houses the Atomic Heritage Foundation's physical collections which have been integrated into the Nuclear Museum's own collection.

Voices of the Manhattan Project [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research . Specific statements but only source is project itself Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In November 2012, the Atomic Heritage Foundation (AHF) and the Los Alamos Historical Museum launched the "Voices of the Manhattan Project" website to feature their oral history collections. Together the AHF and the Los Alamos Historical Museum worked to collect oral histories until the historical society discontinued their participation. Sometime after 2020, the Los Alamos Historical Society removed access to several of the interviews in their original collection of twelve oral histories that were housed on their YouTube channel. Attempts by the National Museum of Nuclear Science & History to regain this access have so far been unsuccessful.

[ 5 ] The interviews offer a variety of perspectives on the project. Some Native Americans discuss the government's displacement of the tribes from their ancestral lands in Hanford, Washington . In others, Pueblo Indians in New Mexico talk about the impact of the government project on their ancestral traditions and economy. Veterans recall blowing off steam by hiking and skiing in Los Alamos , dancing and bowling in Oak Ridge , and engaging in a meatball mess hall battle in Hanford. The veterans recalls the top scientists and personnel involved in the project, including J. Robert Oppenheimer , Leslie R. Groves , Enrico Fermi , and Leo Szilard .

The site features interviews with a number of well-known Manhattan Project veterans, including General Leslie Groves and Edward Teller .

Site preservation [ edit ] The Atomic Heritage Foundation is working in collaboration with the National Parks Conservation Association , the National Trust for Historic Preservation , local communities, and other organizations to urge Congress to establish a Manhattan Project National Historical Park. In March 2013, Senators Maria Cantwell and Lamar Alexander introduced S. 507 to create a park, [ 6 ] and Representatives Doc Hastings , Ben Ray Lujan , and Chuck Fleischmann introduced a companion bill in the House, H.R. 1208.

[ 7 ] The Los Alamos , V-Site was the site of assembly for the Trinity device , the first atomic weapon ever detonated.  In October 2006, the AHF co-hosted several days of events to commemorate the successful restoration of the High Bay building.

[ 8 ] Museum exhibits [ edit ] The Atomic Heritage Foundation has created several museum exhibits.  They are: Race for atomic power exhibit at Idaho Falls [ edit ] The first nuclear reactor capable of producing usable amounts of electricity was Experimental Breeder Reactor I , which lit up four light bulbs on December 20, 1951. This historical milestone is one of many captured in the Race for Atomic Power exhibit that opened on May 24, 2005, at the EBR-I. Upon entering the EBR-I, visitors can relax in a 1950s living room and watch TV. Clips from the 1950s as well as Nuclear Pioneers, a brief history of the EBR-I produced by the Atomic Heritage Foundation. Throughout the exhibit are kiosks with video recordings of the veterans explaining aspects of the reactor's operations. In the control room, Kirby Whitham explains when the misunderstanding of the command, "Take it down," resulted in a partial meltdown of the reactor core. Blackboards present the fundamentals of nuclear fission and a cut-away diagram shows the inner workings of the reactor.  The exhibit was created under the supervision of the AHF and is now run by the Museum of Idaho.

B Reactor exhibits at Hanford [ edit ] This exhibit focuses on the Hanford Site and its role in the Manhattan Project .  It feature exhibits on the B Reactor — the world's first plutonium production reactor — and its importance, models of the reactor and surrounding buildings, a documentary film ( Hanford's  Secret Wartime Mission ), and vignettes and education materials on the history of the Hanford site. The exhibit was developed in partnership with the B Reactor Museum Association, the Hanford Reach National Monument Heritage and Visitor Center, and the Columbia River Exposition on History, Science and Technology.

Books [ edit ] The Atomic Heritage Foundation has created several books dealing with the Manhattan Project.  They are: The Manhattan Project: The Birth of the Atomic Bomb in the Words of Its Creators, Eyewitnesses, and Historians : An anthology that collects the writings and thoughts of the original participants in the Manhattan Project, along with pieces by the most important historians and interpreters of the subject.

The Manhattan Project Guidebook Series : A series of four guides to the Manhattan Project in Manhattan , New Mexico , Tennessee , and Washington state . The guidebooks relate the history and significance of the Manhattan Project in these areas.

Oppenheimer and the Manhattan Project : Edited by Cynthia Kelly, this book provides a spectrum of interpretations of J. Robert Oppenheimer 's life and scientific achievements. Contributors include the Hon. Senator Jeff Bingaman , authors and historians Richard Rhodes , Martin Sherwin , Kai Bird and Robert S. Norris, and Andy Oppenheimer .

Remembering the Manhattan Project : Edited by Cynthia Kelly, part I of this book, comprising papers from the Atomic Heritage Foundation's Symposium on the Manhattan Project in Washington, DC on April 27, 2002, recounts the history of this remarkable effort and reflects upon its legacy. Contributors include Richard Rhodes , Robert S. Norris, Martin Sherwin and Kai Bird , Gregg Herken , James R. Schlesinger , and others. Part II proposes a strategy for preserving the historical properties and artifacts of the Manhattan Project for the public and future generations.

Race for Atomic Power : A companion book to the museum exhibit of the same name.

Films [ edit ] Hanford's Secret Wartime Mission : This documentary film chronicles the story of the Manhattan Project at Hanford where the world's first plutonium production facilities were built along the Columbia River in eastern Washington state. The undertaking paired the University of Chicago's team of extraordinary physicists led by Enrico Fermi with the DuPont Company 's industrial expertise led by Crawford Greenewalt . The film highlights the determination, commitment, and scientific ingenuity of the men and women who took on the seemingly impossible task of producing plutonium in time to contribute to the war effort.

A Handful of Soldiers : features three Manhattan Project veterans who describe their experiences at Los Alamos working on the plutonium-based bomb. The twelve-minute film shows the remains of the "V Site" where the first atomic bomb was assembled.

Nuclear Pioneers : The 28-minute documentary film on the Experimental Breeder Reactor I (EBR-I) tells the story of the first nuclear reactor built by the Atomic Energy Commission. With first-hand accounts from scientists and engineers, the film explores the challenges of creating the world's first reactor to produce usable quantities of electricity and "breed" more fuel than it consumed. Completed in 1951, the EBR-I paved the way for future generations of "peaceful" reactors and was named a National Historic Landmark in 1966 by President Johnson.

Interviews with Manhattan Project Veterans, Vol. I-III : These films features interviews with seven Manhattan Project veterans. Complete with pictures from the Department of Energy's archives and short biographies of the veterans, the films describe what it was like to work on the top-secret project that changed world history and created a revolution in science and technology.

The Race for Atomic Power : This documentary film traces the history of the National Reactor Testing Station in Idaho Falls, with interviews of former and current employees of NRTS and Idaho National Laboratory. These vignettes discuss the innovations developed at NRTS during its first 25 years.

General Leslie R. Groves : A brief biography of General Leslie Groves, who built the Pentagon and then became the Manhattan Project's "indispensable man." References [ edit ] ^ "About Us | Atomic Heritage Foundation" . Atomicheritage.org . Retrieved 2014-07-07 .

^ "Manhattan Project Park Progress | Atomic Heritage Foundation" . Atomicheritage.org. 2014-05-23 . Retrieved 2014-07-07 .

^ Broad, William J. (2012-12-03).

"Bid to Preserve Manhattan Project Sites in a Park Stirs Debate" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 2018-08-27 . Retrieved 2020-05-21 .

^ a b Fears, Darryl (2012-07-28).

"Officials want to turn World War II nuclear-weapon development sites into national parks" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2014-07-07 .

^ "Oral Histories - Nuclear Museum" .

ahf.nuclearmuseum.org/ . Retrieved 2023-08-07 .

^ "Cantwell Bill to Preserve Historic Hanford B Reactor Clears Key Committee - Press Releases - Senator Maria Cantwell" . Cantwell.senate.gov. 2013-05-16 . Retrieved 2014-07-07 .

^ "H.R.1208 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): Manhattan Project National Historical Park Act | Congress.gov | Library of Congress" . Beta.congress.gov . Retrieved 2014-07-07 .

^ "AHF Hosts Event to Commemorate 65th Anniversary of the Manhattan Project | Atomic Heritage Foundation" . Atomicheritage.org. 2008-01-02 . Retrieved 2014-07-07 .

External links [ edit ] Atomic Heritage Foundation Homepage Voices of the Manhattan Project News stories William J. Broad (December 3, 2012).

"Bid to Preserve Manhattan Project Sites in a Park Stirs Debate" .

The New York Times .

Darryl Fears (July 28, 2012).

"Officials want to turn World War II nuclear-weapon development sites into national parks" .

The Washington Post .

Dan Frosch (October 6, 2006).

"Atomic Pioneers Gather Again to Recall Manhattan Project" .

The New York Times .

v t e Mid-Atlantic U.S. historical societies Delaware Wilmington Business History Conference Delaware Historical Society Maryland Baltimore Baltimore Heritage Community College Humanities Association Maryland Center for History and Culture Society for the History of Authorship, Reading and Publishing Others Association of Black Women Historians ( Silver Spring ) Berkshire Conference of Women Historians ( Clarksville ) C.V. Starr Center for the Study of the American Experience ( Chestertown ) Early American Industries Association ( Hebron ) Frederick and Pennsylvania Line Railroad Museum ( Walkersville ) Historical Society of Baltimore County ( Cockeysville ) National History Day ( College Park ) New Jersey Boonton Boonton Historical Society and Museum United Railroad Historical Society of New Jersey Trenton New Jersey Historic Trust New Jersey Historical Commission Others Hunterdon County Historical Society ( Flemington ) Monmouth County Historical Association ( Freehold ) Montclair Historical Society ( Montclair ) New Jersey Historical Society ( Newark ) Sussex County Historical Society ( Newton ) The Historical Society of the Somerset Hills ( Basking Ridge ) Vineland Historical and Antiquarian Society ( Vineland ) New York Albany Academy of Certified Archivists New Netherland Institute Preservation League of New York State New York City The Bronx The Bronx County Historical Society Brooklyn Brooklyn Historical Society Manhattan American Irish Historical Society American Jewish Historical Society Association for the Study of Nationalities Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History Historians of American Communism Historic Districts Council Leo Baeck Institute New York Morgan Library & Museum Municipal Art Society New York Historical New York Landmarks Conservancy New York Military Affairs Symposium The Renaissance Society of America Royal Oak Foundation Society of American Historians Veteran Corps of Artillery of the State of New York World Monuments Fund Queens Greater Astoria Historical Society Queens Historical Society Staten Island Staten Island Historical Society Others Adirondack Architectural Heritage ( Keeseville ) American Society for Eighteenth-Century Studies ( Buffalo ) Brunswick Historical Society ( Brunswick ) Chemung County Historical Society ( Elmira ) Clinton Historical Society ( Clinton ) Columbia County Historical Society ( Hudson ) Dutchess County Historical Society ( Poughkeepsie ) Historic Palmyra, Palmyra Historical Society ( Palmyra ) Historic Saranac Lake ( Saranac Lake ) Jay Heritage Center ( Rye ) Rensselaer County Historical Society ( Troy ) Schenectady County Historical Society ( Schenectady ) Social Science History Association ( Ithaca ) St. Lawrence County Historical Association ( Canton ) Theodore Roosevelt Association ( Oyster Bay ) Thomas Paine National Historical Association ( New Rochelle ) Ulster & Delaware Railroad Historical Society ( Roxbury ) Yates County Genealogical and Historical Society ( Penn Yan ) Pennsylvania Philadelphia German Society of Pennsylvania Historical Society of the Episcopal Church Historical Society of Frankford Historical Society of Pennsylvania Pennsylvania German Society Presbyterian Historical Society Society for Classical Studies Society for Historians of the Early American Republic Pittsburgh Historical Society of Western Pennsylvania Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation Waynesboro Antietam Historical Association Waynesboro Historical Society Others Bellefonte Historical Railroad Society ( Bellefonte ) Carbondale Historical Society and Museum ( Carbondale ) Chester County History Center ( West Chester ) Gettysburg Battlefield Memorial Association ( Gettysburg ) Historical Society of Berks County ( Reading ) Johnny Reb Gaming Society ( York ) Lehigh County Historical Society ( Allentown ) Luzerne County Historical Society ( Wilkes-Barre ) Moravian Historical Society ( Nazareth ) Peace History Society ( Gwynedd Valley ) Pennsylvania Historical Association ( Mansfield ) Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission ( Harrisburg ) Pennsylvania Railroad Technical and Historical Society Rough and Tumble Engineers Historical Association ( Kinzers ) Washington County History & Landmarks Foundation ( Washington ) Washington, D.C.

Northeast Florida House on Capitol Hill Supreme Court Historical Society United States Capitol Historical Society Northwest Advisory Council on Historic Preservation American Battlefield Trust American Historical Association American Institute for Conservation Association for the Study of African American Life and History Atomic Heritage Foundation German Historical Institute Historic Preservation Fund Historical Society of Washington, D.C.

National Society of the Colonial Dames of America National Trust for Historic Preservation United States Committee of the International Council on Monuments and Sites White House Historical Association Southeast Naval Historical Foundation Naval History and Heritage Command Others American Studies Association Society for History in the Federal Government Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atomic_Heritage_Foundation&oldid=1305066383 " Categories : Historic preservation organizations in the United States Educational foundations based in the United States History of the Manhattan Project Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from August 2025 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 21:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atomic Heritage Foundation 1 language Add topic

