Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Islamic decoration 1.2 Purpose 2 Pattern formation 3 Evolution Toggle Evolution subsection 3.1 Early stage 3.2 Middle stage 3.3 Late stage 4 Artforms Toggle Artforms subsection 4.1 Ceramics 4.2 Girih tilings and woodwork 4.3 Jali 4.4 Kilim 4.5 Leather 4.6 Metalwork 4.7 Muqarnas 4.8 Stained glass 4.9 Zellij 4.10 Illustrations 5 Outside Islamic art Toggle Outside Islamic art subsection 5.1 In Western culture 5.2 Influence on the sciences 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Islamic geometric patterns 13 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Deutsch Español Euskara Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Simple English Slovenščina اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geometric pattern characteristic of Muslim art Detail of minaret socle of the Bibi Khanum Mosque , Samarkand , Uzbekistan .The arched vertical panels are decorated with different geometric patterns, featuring 10-, 8- and 5-pointed stars.

A doorway in Ben Youssef Madrasa , Marrakech . The Atlas cedar doors have carved strapwork with a 16-point star. The arch is surrounded with arabesques ; to either side is a band of Islamic calligraphy , above zellij tilework.

Part of a series on Arabic culture Architecture Styles Islamic Yemeni Nabataean Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Moorish Mamluk Features Ablaq Alfiz Arabesque Arabic dome Banna'i Gardens Girih Horseshoe arch Howz Hypostyle Islamic calligraphy Islamic geometric patterns Islamic ornament Iwan Liwan Mashrabiya Riad Mosaic Multifoil arch Muqarnas Nagash painting Qadad Reflecting pool Riwaq Sahn Socarrat Stucco decoration Tadelakt Vaulting Voussoir Windcatcher Zellij Types Albarrana tower Alcázar Bazaar Caravanserai Bimaristan Hammam Kasbah Madrasa Maqam Mazar Mosque Medina quarter Qalat Ribat Sabil Shadirvan Tekyeh Well house Zawiya Art Styles Ancient South Arabian art Nabataean art Islamic art Fatimid art Mamluk art Types Arabic calligraphy Arabic graffiti Arab carpet Arabic miniature Arabic pottery Palestinian wood carving Islamic embroidery Islamic hardstone carving Islamic garden Islamic glass Islamic ivory carving Islamic Metalwork Features Arabesque Arabic geometric patterns Banna'i Damascus steel Damask Girih tiles Hedwig glass Kiswah Muqarnas Pseudo-Arabic Zellij Cuisine Khalij (Arabian Peninsula) Arab Mashriq (Levant) Mashriq (Mesopotamia) Mawset (Egypt) Mawset (Sudan) Arab Maghreb (North Africa) Dress Headwear Agal Battoulah Haik Keffiyeh Litham Madhalla Sidara Taqiyah Tantour Tarboush (fez) Turban Clothing Abaya Bisht Burnous Djellaba Durra'ah Fouta towel Izaar Jellabiya Kaftan Macawis Robe of honour Sirwal Takchita Thawb Tiraz Music Theory Arabic maqam Arab tone system Algerian scale Jins Lazma Quarter tone Rhythm in Arabic music Tarab Teslim Arabic musical instruments Great Book of Music Kitab al-Aghani Genres Arabic pop Arabic hip hop Arabic rock Arabic jazz Classical Arab music Opera Al Jeel Khaliji Raï Art music Andalusian classical music Andalusi nubah Bashraf Dawr Dulab Layali Malhun Iraqi maqam Mawwal Muwashshah Qasidah Qudud Halabiya Sama'i Tahmilah Taqsim Waslah Folk Ataaba Algerian Raï Bedouin Chaabi (Algeria) Chaabi (Morocco) Egyptian folk Fann at-Tanbura Fijiri Gnawa (North Africa) Liwa Mawwal Mezwed Samri Sawt Shaabi Zajal Dance Ardah Belly dance Dabke Deheyeh Guedra Hagallah Khaleegy Liwa Mizmar Ouled Nail Raqs Sharqi Samri Shamadan Schikhatt Tahtib Tanoura Yowlah Zār Scripts Old Arabic Nabataean Arabic Paleo-Arabic Classical Arabic Modern Standard Arabic Literature Prose Epic literature Saj (ryhmed prose) Maqama Love in Arabic literature Arabic erotic literature Arabic grimoires Literary_criticism Arabic short story Tabaqat Tezkire Rihla Mirrors for princes Islamic Quran Tafsir Hadith Sīra Fiqh Aqidah Poetry Anthologies Poets Pre-Islamic Arabic poetry Modern Arabic poetry Genres Madih Hija Rithā' Waṣf Ghazal Khamriyyah Tardiyyah Khawal Fakhr Hamasah Forms Diwan Qasida Muwashshah Urjūza Mathnawi Ruba'i Nasīb Riddles Kharja Zajal Mawwal Nabati Ghinnawa Humayni Arabic prosody Bayt Ṭawīl Madīd Basīṭ Kamil Wāfir Hazaj Rajaz Ramal Munsariħ Khafīf Muqtaḍab Mujtathth Muḍāriʿ Sarīʿ Mutaqārib Mutadārik National literatures of Arab States Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Sudan Syria Tunisia U.A.E.

Yemen Science Arabic chemistry Arabic astrology Arabic astronomy Arabic geography Arabic Golden Age Arabic mathematics Arabic medicine Arabic psychology Arabic technology Philosophy Early Arabic Philosophy Islamic Aristotelianism Islamic  Platonism Islamic Logic Kalam Sufi metaphysics Sufi philosophy Farabism Avicennism Averroism Concepts Al-aql al-faal Aql bi-l-fi'l Al-Insān al-Kāmil Dhati Peace Arcs of Descent and Ascent Asabiyyah Hal Irfan Nafs Qadar Qalb Texts Liber de Causis The Theology of Aristotle Al-isharat The Book of the Apple Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity The Incoherence of the Philosophers The Incoherence of the Incoherence Hayy ibn Yaqdhan Theologus Autodidactus On the Harmony of Religions and Philosophy Muqaddimah Sicilian Questions Fusus al-Hikam Mythology Ababil Atlantis of the Sands Bahamut Beast of the Earth Book of Idols Book of Wonders Buraq Dandan Falak Ghoul Hinn Houri Ifrit Iram of the Pillars Jinn Karkadann Kujata Luqman Magic carpet Marid Mount Qaf Nasnas One Thousand and One Nights Qareen Qutrub Roc Shaddad Shadhavar Shams al-Ma'arif She-Camel of God Wāḳwāḳ Zulfiqar Zarqa al Yamama Fictional Arab people Aladdin Abdul Alhazred Ali Baba Altaïr Ibn-La'Ahad Battal Gazi Hayy ibn Yaqdhan Kara Ben Nemsi King Marsile Layla and Majnun Othello Palamedes Princess Jasmine Ra's al Ghul Sindbad Talia al Ghul Spirituality North Arabian deities Allah Al-‘Uzzá Al-Lat Manāt Dushara Chaabou Manaf Nuha Al-Kutbay Asira Awal Azizos Bajir Quzah Manāt Manāt A'ra Abgal Aglibol Al-Qaum Atarsamain Baalshamin Bēl Hubal Suwa' Theandrios Wadd Malakbel Orotalt Ruda Sa'd Yarhibol Isāf and Nā'ila South Arabian  deities Almaqah Amm Anbay Athtar Dhat-Badan Haubas Ta'lab Qaynan Basamum Dhul Khalasa Haukim Nasr Sīn Ya'uq Yaghūth Yatha v t e Islamic geometric patterns are one of the major forms of Islamic ornament , which tends to avoid using figurative images, as it is forbidden to create a representation of an important Islamic figure according to many holy scriptures .

The geometric designs in Islamic art are often built on combinations of repeated squares and circles, which may be overlapped and interlaced , as can arabesques (with which they are often combined), to form intricate and complex patterns, including a wide variety of tessellations . These may constitute the entire decoration, may form a framework for floral or calligraphic embellishments, or may retreat into the background around other motifs. The complexity and variety of patterns used evolved from simple stars and lozenges in the ninth century, through a variety of 6- to 13-point patterns by the 13th century, and finally to include also 14- and 16-point stars in the sixteenth century.

Geometric patterns occur in a variety of forms in Islamic art and architecture . These include kilim carpets, Persian girih and Moroccan zellij tilework, muqarnas decorative vaulting, jali pierced stone screens, ceramics , leather , stained glass , woodwork, and metalwork.

Interest in Islamic geometric patterns is increasing in the West, both among craftsmen and artists like M. C. Escher in the twentieth century, and among mathematicians and physicists such as Peter J. Lu and Paul Steinhardt .

Background [ edit ] Islamic decoration [ edit ] Islamic geometric patterns are derived from simpler designs used in earlier cultures: Greek , Roman , and Sasanian . They are one of three forms of Islamic decoration , the others being the arabesque based on curving and branching plant forms, and Islamic calligraphy ; all three are frequently used together.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] From the 9th century onward, a range of sophisticated geometric patterns based on polygonal tessellation began to appear in Islamic art, eventually becoming dominant.

[ 3 ] Islamic art mostly avoids figurative images to avoid becoming objects of worship.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] This aniconism in Islamic culture caused artists to explore non-figural art, and created a general aesthetic shift toward mathematically based decoration .

[ 6 ] Purpose [ edit ] Authors such as Keith Critchlow [ a ] argue that Islamic patterns are created to lead the viewer to an understanding of the underlying reality, rather than being mere decoration, as writers interested only in pattern sometimes imply.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In Islamic culture, the patterns are believed to be the bridge to the spiritual realm, the instrument to purify the mind and the soul.

[ 9 ] David Wade [ b ] states that "Much of the art of Islam, whether in architecture, ceramics, textiles or books, is the art of decoration – which is to say, of transformation." [ 10 ] Wade argues that the aim is to transfigure, turning mosques "into lightness and pattern", while "the decorated pages of a Qur’an can become windows onto the infinite." [ 10 ] Against this, Doris Behrens-Abouseif [ c ] states in her book Beauty in Arabic Culture that a "major difference" between the philosophical thinking of Medieval Europe and the Islamic world is exactly that the concepts of the good and the beautiful are separated in Arabic culture. She argues that beauty, whether in poetry or in the visual arts, was enjoyed "for its own sake, without commitment to religious or moral criteria".

[ 11 ] Styles of Islamic geometric decoration Tiles inside the Jame Mosque of Yazd , Persia, with geometric and vegetal patterns Bou Inania Madrasa , Fes , Morocco, originally c. 1350, with geometric patterns in zellij tilework A variety of vernacular decorative Islamic styles in Morocco : wooden panels, zellij tilework, stucco calligraphy, and floral door panels Arch in the Alhambra with Mocárabe stalactite work Ayyubid Raqqa ware stoneware glazed jar with overlapping circles grid pattern. Syria, 12th/13th century An archway in the Ottoman Green Mosque , Bursa , Turkey (1424), with girih 10-point stars and pentagons Pattern formation [ edit ] The Shah Nematollah Vali Shrine , Mahan, Iran , 1431. The blue girih -tiled dome contains stars with, from the top, 5, 7, 9, 12, 11, 9 and 10 points in turn. 11-point stars are rare in Islamic art .

[ 12 ] Further information: Mathematics and art and Girih Many Islamic designs are built on squares and circles, typically repeated, overlapped and interlaced to form intricate and complex patterns.

[ 1 ] A recurring motif is the 8-pointed star, often seen in Islamic tilework; it is made of two squares, one rotated 45 degrees with respect to the other. The fourth basic shape is the polygon , including pentagons and octagons . All of these can be combined and reworked to form complicated patterns with a variety of symmetries including reflections and rotations. Such patterns can be seen as mathematical tessellations , which can extend indefinitely and thus suggest infinity .

[ 1 ] [ 13 ] They are constructed on grids that require only ruler and compass to draw.

[ 14 ] Artist and educator Roman Verostko argues that such constructions are in effect algorithms , making Islamic geometric patterns forerunners of modern algorithmic art .

[ 15 ] The circle symbolizes unity and diversity in nature, and many Islamic patterns are drawn starting with a circle.

[ 16 ] For example, the decoration of the 15th-century mosque in Yazd , Persia is based on a circle, divided into six by six circles drawn around it, all touching at its centre and each touching its two neighbours' centres to form a regular hexagon. On this basis is constructed a six-pointed star surrounded by six smaller irregular hexagons to form a tessellating star pattern. This forms the basic design which is outlined in white on the wall of the mosque. That design, however, is overlaid with an intersecting tracery in blue around tiles of other colours, forming an elaborate pattern that partially conceals the original and underlying design.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] A similar design forms the logo of the Mohammed Ali Research Center.

[ 18 ] One of the early Western students of Islamic patterns, Ernest Hanbury Hankin , defined a "geometrical arabesque" as a pattern formed "with the help of construction lines consisting of polygons in contact." [ 2 ] He observed that many different combinations of polygons can be used as long as the residual spaces between the polygons are reasonably symmetrical. For example, a grid of octagons in contact has squares (of the same side as the octagons) as the residual spaces. Every octagon is the basis for an 8-point star, as seen at Akbar's tomb, Sikandra (1605–1613). Hankin considered the "skill of the Arabian artists in discovering suitable combinations of polygons .. almost astounding." [ 2 ] He further records that if a star occurs in a corner, exactly one quarter of it should be shown; if along an edge, exactly one half of it.

[ 2 ] The Topkapı Scroll , made in Timurid dynasty Iran in the late-15th century or beginning of the 16th century, contains 114 patterns including coloured designs for girih tilings and muqarnas quarter or semidomes.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] The mathematical properties of the decorative tile and stucco patterns of the Alhambra palace in Granada, Spain have been extensively studied. Some authors have claimed on dubious grounds to have found most or all of the 17 wallpaper groups there.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Moroccan geometric woodwork from the 14th to 19th centuries makes use of only 5 wallpaper groups, mainly p4mm and c2mm, with p6mm and p2mm occasionally and p4gm rarely; it is claimed that the "Hasba" (measure) method of construction, which starts with n -fold rosettes, can however generate all 17 groups.

[ 24 ] Methods of construction Two-dimensional designs for two quarter-dome muqarnas – as a seashell (top), as a fan (bottom).

Topkapı Scroll , 15th century Girih tiling in the decagonal pattern on a spandrel from the Darb-e Imam shrine Construction of girih pattern in Darb-e Imam spandrel (yellow line). Construction decagons blue, bowties red. The strapwork cuts across the construction tessellation .

Analysis of octagonal patterns in Mughal architecture by Ernest Hanbury Hankin , 1925. 8-pointed stars emerge (lower right) where heavy black lines cross.

Decoration in Tomb of I'timād-ud-Daulah , Agra , showing correct treatment of sides and corners. A quarter of each 6-point star is shown in each corner; half stars along the sides.

Architectural drawing for brick vaulting, Iran, probably Tehran, 1800–70 Evolution [ edit ] Early stage: simple geometric patterns on lustre tiles in the Great Mosque of Kairouan , Tunisia . 836 onwards Early stage [ edit ] The earliest geometrical forms in Islamic art were occasional isolated geometric shapes such as 8-pointed stars and lozenges containing squares. These date from 836 in the Great Mosque of Kairouan , Tunisia, and since then have spread all across the Islamic world.

[ 25 ] Middle stage [ edit ] Middle stage patterns on geometric borders around a Mihrab in the Alâeddin Mosque , Konya , Turkey . 1220 onwards The next development, marking the middle stage of Islamic geometric pattern usage, was of 6- and 8-point stars, which appear in 879 at the Ibn Tulun Mosque, Cairo, and then became widespread.

[ 25 ] A wider variety of patterns were used from the 11th century. Abstract 6- and 8-point shapes appear in the Tower of Kharaqan at Qazvin , Persia in 1067, and the Al-Juyushi Mosque, Egypt in 1085, again becoming widespread from there, though 6-point patterns are rare in Turkey.

[ 25 ] In 1086, 7- and 10-point girih patterns (with heptagons, 5- and 6-pointed stars, triangles and irregular hexagons) appear in the Jameh Mosque of Isfahan . 10-point girih became widespread in the Islamic world, except in the Spanish Al-Andalus .

[ 25 ] Soon afterwards, sweeping 9-, 11-, and 13-point girih patterns were used in the Barsian Mosque , also in Persia, in 1098; these, like 7-point geometrical patterns, are rarely used outside Persia and central Asia.

[ 25 ] Finally, marking the end of the middle stage, 8- and 12-point girih rosette patterns appear in the Alâeddin Mosque at Konya , Turkey in 1220, and in the Abbasid palace in Baghdad in 1230, going on to become widespread across the Islamic world.

[ 25 ] Late stage [ edit ] Late stage: geometric, vegetal, and calligraphic patterns around the Mihrab at the Jama Masjid, Fatehpur Sikri . 1571-5 The beginning of the late stage is marked by the use of simple 16-point patterns at the Hasan Sadaqah mausoleum in Cairo in 1321, and in the Alhambra in Spain in 1338–1390. These patterns are rarely found outside these two regions. More elaborate combined 16-point geometrical patterns are found in the Sultan Hassan complex in Cairo in 1363, but rarely elsewhere. Finally, 14-point patterns appear in the Jama Masjid at Fatehpur Sikri in India in 1571–1596, but in few other places.

[ 25 ] [ d ] Artforms [ edit ] Several artforms in different parts of the Islamic world make use of geometric patterns. These include ceramics, [ 27 ] girih strapwork, [ 28 ] jali pierced stone screens, [ 29 ] kilim rugs, [ 30 ] leather, [ 31 ] metalwork, [ 32 ] muqarnas vaulting, [ 33 ] shakaba stained glass, [ 34 ] woodwork, [ 28 ] and zellij tiling.

[ 35 ] Ceramics [ edit ] Further information: Islamic pottery Ceramics lend themselves to circular motifs, whether radial or tangential. Bowls or plates can be decorated inside or out with radial stripes; these may be partly figurative, representing stylised leaves or flower petals, while circular bands can run around a bowl or jug. Patterns of these types were employed on Islamic ceramics from the Ayyubid period, 13th century. Radially symmetric flowers with, say, 6 petals lend themselves to increasingly stylised geometric designs which can combine geometric simplicity with recognisably naturalistic motifs, brightly coloured glazes, and a radial composition that ideally suits circular crockery. Potters often chose patterns suited to the shape of the vessel they were making.

[ 27 ] Thus an unglazed earthenware water flask [ e ] from Aleppo in the shape of a vertical circle (with handles and neck above) is decorated with a ring of moulded braiding around an Arabic inscription with a small 8-petalled flower at the centre.

[ 36 ] Girih tilings and woodwork [ edit ] Main article: Girih Girih are elaborate interlacing patterns formed of five standardized shapes. The style is used in Persian Islamic architecture and also in decorative woodwork.

[ 28 ] Girih designs are traditionally made in different media including cut brickwork, stucco , and mosaic faience tilework. In woodwork, especially in the Safavid period, it could be applied either as lattice frames, left plain or inset with panels such as of coloured glass; or as mosaic panels used to decorate walls and ceilings, whether sacred or secular. In architecture, girih forms decorative interlaced strapwork surfaces from the 15th century to the 20th century. Most designs are based on a partially hidden geometric grid which provides a regular array of points; this is made into a pattern using 2-, 3-, 4-, and 6-fold rotational symmetries which can fill the plane. The visible pattern superimposed on the grid is also geometric, with 6-, 8-, 10- and 12-pointed stars and a variety of convex polygons, joined by straps which typically seem to weave over and under each other.

[ 28 ] [ 37 ] The visible pattern does not coincide with the underlying construction lines of the tiling.

[ 28 ] The visible patterns and the underlying tiling represent a bridge linking the invisible to the visible, analogous to the "epistemological quest" in Islamic culture, the search for the nature of knowledge.

[ 38 ] Jali [ edit ] Mosque of Ibn Tulun : window with girih-style 10-point stars (at rear), with floral roundels in octagons forming a frieze at front Main article: Jali Jali are pierced stone screens with regularly repeating patterns. They are characteristic of Indo-Islamic architecture , for example in the Mughal dynasty buildings at Fatehpur Sikri and the Taj Mahal . The geometric designs combine polygons such as octagons and pentagons with other shapes such as 5- and 8-pointed stars. The patterns emphasized symmetries and suggested infinity by repetition. Jali functioned as windows or room dividers, providing privacy but allowing in air and light.

[ 29 ] Jali forms a prominent element of the architecture of India.

[ 39 ] The use of perforated walls has declined with modern building standards and the need for security. Modern, simplified jali walls, for example made with pre-moulded clay or cement blocks, have been popularised by the architect Laurie Baker.

[ 40 ] Pierced windows in girih style are sometimes found elsewhere in the Islamic world, such as in windows of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo.

[ 41 ] Kilim [ edit ] Main article: Kilim Somewhat geometric motifs such as the Wolf 's Mouth (Kurt Aǧzi), to protect the flocks against wolves, are often woven into tribal kilims .

A kilim is an Islamic [ 30 ] flatwoven carpet (without a pile), whether for household use or a prayer mat . The pattern is made by winding the weft threads back over the warp threads when a colour boundary is reached. This technique leaves a gap or vertical slit, so kilims are sometimes called slit-woven textiles. Kilims are often decorated with geometric patterns with 2- or 4-fold mirror or rotational symmetries. Because weaving uses vertical and horizontal threads, curves are difficult to generate, and patterns are accordingly formed mainly with straight edges.

[ 17 ] [ 42 ] Kilim patterns are often characteristic of specific regions.

[ 43 ] Kilim motifs are often symbolic as well as decorative. For example, the wolf's mouth or wolf's foot motif (Turkish: Kurt Aǧzi, Kurt İzi) expresses the tribal weavers' desires for protection of their families' flocks from wolves .

[ 44 ] Leather [ edit ] Islamic leather is often embossed with patterns similar to those already described. Leather book covers, starting with the Quran where figurative artwork was excluded, were decorated with a combination of kufic script, medallions and geometric patterns, typically bordered by geometric braiding .

[ 31 ] Metalwork [ edit ] Metal artefacts share the same geometric designs that are used in other forms of Islamic art. However, in the view of Hamilton Gibb , the emphasis differs: geometric patterns tend to be used for borders, and if they are in the main decorative area they are most often used in combination with other motifs such as floral designs, arabesques, animal motifs, or calligraphic script. Geometric designs in Islamic metalwork can form a grid decorated with these other motifs, or they can form the background pattern.

[ 32 ] Even where metal objects such as bowls and dishes do not seem to have geometric decoration, still the designs, such as arabesques, are often set in octagonal compartments or arranged in concentric bands around the object. Both closed designs (which do not repeat) and open or repetitive patterns are used. Patterns such as interlaced six-pointed stars were especially popular from the 12th century.

Eva Baer notes that while this design was essentially simple, it was elaborated by metalworkers into intricate patterns interlaced with arabesques, sometimes organised around further basic Islamic patterns, such as the hexagonal pattern of six overlapping circles.

[ 45 ] Muqarnas [ edit ] Main article: Muqarnas Muqarnas are elaborately carved ceilings to semi-domes , often used in mosques. They are typically made of stucco (and thus do not have a structural function), but can also be of wood, brick, and stone. They are characteristic of Islamic architecture of the Middle Ages from Spain and Morocco in the west to Persia in the east. Architecturally they form multiple tiers of squinches , diminishing in size as they rise. They are often elaborately decorated.

[ 33 ] Stained glass [ edit ] Main article: Shabaka (window) Geometrically patterned stained glass is used in a variety of settings in Islamic architecture. It is found in the surviving summer residence of the Palace of Shaki Khans , Azerbaijan , constructed in 1797. Patterns in the "shabaka" windows include 6-, 8-, and 12-point stars. These wood-framed decorative windows are distinctive features of the palace's architecture. Shabaka are still constructed the traditional way in Sheki in the 21st century.

[ 34 ] [ 46 ] Traditions of stained glass set in wooden frames (not lead as in Europe) survive in workshops in Iran as well as Azerbaijan.

[ 47 ] Glazed windows set in stucco arranged in girih-like patterns are found both in Turkey and the Arab lands; a late example, without the traditional balance of design elements, was made in Tunisia for the International Colonial Exhibition in Amsterdam in 1883.

[ 48 ] The old city of Sana'a in Yemen has stained glass windows in its tall buildings.

[ 49 ] Zellij [ edit ] Main article: Zellij Zellij ( Arabic : الزَّلِيْج ) is geometric tilework with glazed terracotta tiles set into plaster, forming colourful mosaic patterns including regular and semiregular tessellations . The tradition is characteristic of Morocco , but is also found in Moorish Spain.

Zellij is used to decorate mosques, public buildings and wealthy private houses.

[ 35 ] Illustrations [ edit ] Media used for Islamic geometric patterns Safavid bowl with radial and circular motifs, Persia, 17th century Lustre tiles from Iran, probably Kashan , 1262, in the shapes of the Sufi symbols for the divine breath Glazed tilework Girih at Shah-i-Zinda in Samarkand , Uzbekistan Side of a wooden Minbar (pulpit) with 12-point stars. 14th century.

Turkish and Islamic Arts Museum Jali pierced stone screens at the tomb of Salim Chishti , Fatehpur Sikri , India Woven wool Kilim from Turkey Leather prayer book cover, Persia, 16th century Iron gate with 10-point stars and kites at Al-Rifa'i Mosque , Cairo (1869–1912) Detail of bronze door, Mosque-Madrassa of Sultan Hassan , Cairo , decorated with strapwork Muqarnas in Shah Mosque , Isfahan , Iran Geometric shabaka stained glass in the 1797 Palace of Shaki Khans , Azerbaijan Traditional Window, Sana'a , Yemen Glazed tile Zellij at Place el-Hedim in Meknes , Morocco Outside Islamic art [ edit ] In Western culture [ edit ] A tessellation of glazed ceramic tiles forming colourful geometric patterns in the Alhambra , Spain, which inspired M. C. Escher [ 50 ] Further information: Islamic influences on Western art It is sometimes supposed in Western society that mistakes in repetitive Islamic patterns such as those on carpets were intentionally introduced as a show of humility by artists who believed only Allah can produce perfection, but this theory is denied.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Tessellations , arabesques and calligraphy on a wall of the Myrtle court, Alhambra , Granada , Spain Major Western collections hold many objects of widely varying materials with Islamic geometric patterns. The Victoria and Albert Museum in London holds at least 283 such objects, of materials including wallpaper, carved wood, inlaid wood, tin- or lead-glazed earthenware, brass, stucco, glass, woven silk, ivory, and pen or pencil drawings.

[ 54 ] The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York has among other relevant holdings 124 mediaeval (1000–1400 A.D.) objects bearing Islamic geometric patterns, [ 55 ] including a pair of Egyptian minbar (pulpit) doors almost 2 m. high in rosewood and mulberry inlaid with ivory and ebony; [ 56 ] and an entire mihrab (prayer niche) from Isfahan , decorated with polychrome mosaic, and weighing over 2,000 kg.

[ 57 ] Wooden box inlaid with ivory with zellij-like geometrical motifs. Italy (Florence or Venice) 15th century.

Islamic decoration and craftsmanship had a significant influence on Western art when Venetian merchants brought goods of many types back to Italy from the 14th century onwards.

[ 58 ] The Dutch artist M. C. Escher was inspired by the Alhambra 's intricate decorative designs to study the mathematics of tessellation , transforming his style and influencing the rest of his artistic career.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] In his own words it was "the richest source of inspiration I have ever tapped." [ 61 ] Influence on the sciences [ edit ] Cultural organisations such as the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute and the Institute for Advanced Study run events on geometric patterns and related aspects of Islamic art.

[ 62 ] In 2013 the Istanbul Center of Design and the Ensar Foundation ran what they claimed was the first ever symposium of Islamic Arts and Geometric Patterns, in Istanbul. The panel included the experts on Islamic geometric pattern Carol Bier, [ f ] Jay Bonner, [ g ] [ 65 ] Eric Broug, [ h ] Hacali Necefoğlu [ i ] and Reza Sarhangi.

[ j ] [ 69 ] In Britain, The Prince's School of Traditional Arts runs a range of courses in Islamic art including geometry, calligraphy, and arabesque (vegetal forms), tile-making, and plaster carving.

[ 70 ] Tomb towers of two Seljuk princes at Kharaghan, Qazvin province , Iran, covered with many different brick patterns like those that inspired Ahmad Rafsanjani to create auxetic materials Computer graphics and computer-aided manufacturing make it possible to design and produce Islamic geometric patterns effectively and economically. Craig S. Kaplan explains and illustrates in his Ph.D. thesis how Islamic star patterns can be generated algorithmically .

[ 71 ] Two physicists, Peter J. Lu and Paul Steinhardt , attracted controversy in 2007 by claiming [ 72 ] that girih designs such as that used on the Darb-e Imam shrine [ k ] in Isfahan were able to create quasi-periodic tilings resembling those discovered by Roger Penrose in 1973. They showed that rather than the traditional ruler and compass construction, it was possible to create girih designs using a set of five "girih tiles", all equilateral polygons, secondarily decorated with lines (for the strapwork).

[ 73 ] In 2016, Ahmad Rafsanjani described the use of Islamic geometric patterns from tomb towers in Iran to create auxetic materials from perforated rubber sheets. These are stable in either a contracted or an expanded state, and can switch between the two, which might be useful for surgical stents or for spacecraft components. When a conventional material is stretched along one axis, it contracts along other axes (at right angles to the stretch). But auxetic materials expand at right angles to the pull. The internal structure that enables this unusual behaviour is inspired by two of the 70 Islamic patterns that Rafsanjani noted on the tomb towers.

[ 74 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Critchlow is a professor of architecture, and the author of a book on Islamic patterns.

^ Wade is the author of a series of books on pattern in various artforms.

^ Behrens-Abouseif is a professor of the history of art and architecture at SOAS .

^ One such place is the Mustansiriyya Madrasa in Baghdad, as illustrated by Broug.

[ 26 ] ^ Leaving the flask porous allowed evaporation, keeping the water cool.

[ 36 ] ^ Bier is a historian of Islamic art who studies pattern.

[ 63 ] ^ Bonner is an architect specialising in Islamic ornament.

[ 64 ] ^ Broug writes books and runs courses on Islamic geometric design.

[ 66 ] ^ Necefoğlu is a professor of chemistry at Kafkas University interested in pattern and crystallography.

[ 67 ] ^ Sarhangi is the founder of The Bridges Organization . He studies the mathematics of Persian architecture and mosaic design.

[ 68 ] ^ Illustrated above.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Geometric Patterns in Islamic Art" .

Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History . Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 1 December 2015 .

^ a b c d Hankin, Ernest Hanbury (1925).

The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art. Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India No. 15 . Government of India Central Publication Branch.

^ Bonner, Jay (2017-08-17).

Islamic Geometric Patterns: Their Historical Development and Traditional Methods of Construction . Springer. p. 6.

ISBN 978-1-4419-0217-7 .

^ Bouaissa, Malikka (27 July 2013).

"The crucial role of geometry in Islamic art" . Al Arte Magazine. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 December 2015 .

^ Bonner, Jay (2017).

Islamic geometric patterns : their historical development and traditional methods of construction . New York: Springer. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-4419-0216-0 .

OCLC 1001744138 .

^ Bier, Carol (Sep 2008). "Art and Mithãl: Reading Geometry as Visual Commentary".

Iranian Studies .

41 (4): 491– 509.

doi : 10.1080/00210860802246176 .

JSTOR 25597484 .

S2CID 171003353 .

^ Critchlow, Keith (1976).

Islamic Patterns : an analytical and cosmological approach . Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 0-500-27071-6 .

^ Field, Robert (1998).

Geometric Patterns from Islamic Art & Architecture . Tarquin Publications.

ISBN 978-1-899618-22-4 .

^ Ahuja, Mangho; Loeb, A. L. (1995). "Tessellations in Islamic Calligraphy".

Leonardo .

28 (1): 41– 45.

doi : 10.2307/1576154 .

JSTOR 1576154 .

S2CID 191368443 .

^ a b Wade, David.

"The Evolution of Style" .

Pattern in Islamic Art . Archived from the original on 19 May 2022 . Retrieved 12 April 2016 .

Much of the art of Islam, whether in architecture, ceramics, textiles or books, is the art of decoration – which is to say, of transformation. The aim, however, is never merely to ornament, but rather to transfigure. ... The vast edifices of mosques are transformed into lightness and pattern; the decorated pages of a Qur'an can become windows onto the infinite. Perhaps most importantly, the Word, expressed in endless calligraphic variations, always conveys the impression that it is more enduring than the objects on which it is inscribed.

^ Behrens-Abouseif, Doris (1999).

Beauty in Arabic Culture . Markus Wiener. pp.

7– 8.

ISBN 978-1-558-76199-5 .

^ Broug, Eric (2008).

Islamic Geometric Patterns .

Thames and Hudson . pp.

183– 185, 193.

ISBN 978-0-500-28721-7 .

^ Hussain, Zarah (30 June 2009).

"Introduction to Islamic art" . BBC . Retrieved 1 December 2015 .

^ Bellos, Alex; Broug (Illustrator), Eric (10 February 2015).

"Muslim rule and compass: the magic of Islamic geometric design" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 1 December 2015 .

^ Verostko, Roman (1999) [1994].

"Algorithmic Art" .

^ a b Henry, Richard.

"Geometry – The Language of Symmetry in Islamic Art" .

Art of Islamic Pattern . Retrieved 1 December 2015 .

^ a b Lockerbie, John.

"Islamic Design: Arabic / Islamic geometry 01" .

Catnaps.org .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ "Islamic Art and Geometric Design" . MOHA. 2014. Archived from the original on 3 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

The logo's construction is demonstrated in an animation on the MOHA website.

^ Gülru Necipoğlu (1992).

Geometric Design in Timurid/Turkmen Architectural Practice: Thoughts on a Recently Discovered Scroll and Its Late Gothic Parallels (PDF) . E.J. Brill. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-12-22 . Retrieved 2015-12-02 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Saliba, George (1999). "Artisans and Mathematicians in Medieval Islam. The Topkapi Scroll: Geometry and Ornament in Islamic Architecture by Gülru Necipoğlu (Review)".

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

119 (4): 637– 645.

doi : 10.2307/604839 .

JSTOR 604839 .

(subscription required) ^ van den Hoeven, Saskia, van der Veen, Maartje.

"Muqarnas-Mathematics in Islamic Arts" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 15 January 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Perez-Gomez, R. (1987).

"The Four Regular Mosaics Missing in the Alhambra" (PDF) .

Comput. Math. Applic .

14 (2): 133– 137.

doi : 10.1016/0898-1221(87)90143-x .

^ Grünbaum, Branko (June 2006).

"What Symmetry Groups Are Present in the Alhambra?" (PDF) .

Notices of the AMS .

53 (6): 670– 673.

^ Aboufadil, Y.; Thalal, A.; Raghni, M. A. E. I. (2013).

"Symmetry groups of Moroccan geometric woodwork patterns" .

Journal of Applied Crystallography .

46 (6): 1834– 1841.

doi : 10.1107/S0021889813027726 .

^ a b c d e f g Abdullahi, Yahya; Bin Embi, Mohamed Rashid (2013).

"Evolution of Islamic geometric patterns" .

Frontiers of Architectural Research .

2 (2): 243– 251.

doi : 10.1016/j.foar.2013.03.002 .

^ Broug, Eric (2013).

Islamic Geometric Design .

Thames and Hudson . p. 173.

ISBN 978-0-500-51695-9 .

^ a b "Geometric Decoration and the Art of the Book. Ceramics" . Museum with no Frontiers . Retrieved 7 December 2015 .

^ a b c d e Gereh-Sāzī . Encyclopaedia Iranica . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ a b "For Educators: Geometric Design in Islamic Art: Image 15" . Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ a b Thompson, Muhammad; Begum, Nasima.

"Islamic Textile Art and how it is Misunderstood in the West – Our Personal Views" . Salon du Tapis d'Orient . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ a b "Geometric Decoration and the Art of the Book. Leather" . Museum with no Frontiers . Retrieved 7 December 2015 .

^ a b Gibb, Sir Hamilton Alexander Rosskeen (1954).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam . Brill Archive. pp.

990– 992. GGKEY:N71HHP1UY5E.

^ a b Tabbaa, Yasser.

"The Muqarnas Dome: Its Origin and Meaning" (PDF) .

Archnet . pp.

61– 74. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ a b King, David C. King (2006).

Azerbaijan . Marshall Cavendish. p.

99 .

ISBN 978-0-7614-2011-8 .

^ a b Njoku, Raphael Chijioke (2006).

Culture and Customs of Morocco . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-313-33289-0 .

^ a b "Flask" .

Victoria and Albert Museum . Retrieved 7 December 2015 .

^ "Gereh-Sazi" . Tebyan. 20 August 2011 . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ Hooman, Koliji (April 2016).

"Gazing Geometries: Modes of Design Thinking in Pre-Modern Central Asia and Persian Architecture" .

Nexus Network Journal .

18 : 105– 132.

doi : 10.1007/s00004-016-0288-6 .

^ "intypes. perforate" . Cornell University . Retrieved 18 January 2016 .

^ Varanashi, Satyaprakash (30 January 2011).

"The multi-functional jaali" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 18 January 2016 .

^ Mozzati, Luca (2010).

Islamic Art . Prestel. p. 27.

ISBN 978-3-7913-4455-3 .

^ "CARPETS v. Flat-woven carpets: Techniques and structures" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ "Turkish Kilim Rug" .

Through the Collector's Eye . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ Erbek, Güran (1998).

Kilim Catalogue No. 1 . May Selçuk A. S. Edition=1st.

^ Baer, Eva (1983).

Metalwork in Medieval Islamic Art . SUNY Press. pp.

122– 132.

ISBN 978-0-87395-602-4 .

^ Sharifov, Azad (1998).

"Shaki Paradise in the Caucasus Foothills" .

Azerbaijan International .

6 (2): 28– 35.

^ Alin, Marina (21 January 2014).

"Wood, glass, geometry – stained glass in Iran and Azerbaijan" . Islamic Arts & Architecture. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016 . Retrieved 18 January 2016 .

^ "Carved stucco and stained glass window" . Islamic Arts & Architecture. 16 December 2011. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016 . Retrieved 18 January 2016 .

^ Hansen, Eri c (21 December 2011).

"Sana'a Rising – "a Venice built on sand." " . Islamic Arts & Architecture. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016 . Retrieved 18 January 2016 .

^ Locher, J. L. (1971).

The World of M. C. Escher .

Abrams . p. 17.

ISBN 0-451-79961-5 .

^ Thompson, Muhammad; Begum, Nasima.

"Islamic Textile Art: Anomalies in Kilims" .

Salon du Tapis d'Orient . TurkoTek . Retrieved 25 August 2009 .

^ Alexenberg, Melvin L. (2006).

The future of art in a digital age: from Hellenistic to Hebraic consciousness . Intellect. p.

55 .

ISBN 1-84150-136-0 .

^ Backhouse, Tim.

"Only God is Perfect" .

Islamic and Geometric Art . Retrieved 25 August 2009 .

^ "Search the Collections "Islamic geometric pattern" " .

Victoria and Albert Museum . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ "Islamic geometric pattern A.D. 1000–1400" .

Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ "Pair of Minbar Doors" .

Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ "Mihrab (Prayer Niche)" .

Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ Mack, Rosamond E. (2001).

Bazaar to Piazza: Islamic Trade and Italian Art, 1300-1600 . University of California Press. pp. Chapter 1.

ISBN 0-520-22131-1 .

^ Roza, Greg (2005).

An Optical Artist: Exploring Patterns and Symmetry . Rosen Classroom. p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-4042-5117-5 .

^ Monroe, J. T. (2004).

Hispano-Arabic Poetry: A Student Anthology . Gorgias Press LLC. p. 65.

ISBN 978-1-59333-115-3 .

^ O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (May 2000).

"Maurits Cornelius Escher" .

Biographies . University of St Andrews . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

which cites Strauss, S. (9 May 1996). "M C Escher".

The Globe and Mail .

^ "Geometric Patterns in Islamic Art" .

National Math Festival . Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ "Selected Works of Carol Bier" .

SelectedWorks . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ Bonner, Jay.

"About" . Bonner Design. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ Bonner, Jay (2017).

Islamic geometric patterns : their historical development and traditional methods of construction . New York: Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4419-0216-0 .

OCLC 1001744138 .

^ "School of Islamic Geometric Design" . Eric Broug. Archived from the original on 8 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 December 2015 .

^ "Prof.Dr. Hacali Necefoğlu (Fen Edebiyat Fakültesi)" .

Akademik Bilgi Sistemi (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 5 May 2018 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ "Reza Sarhangi" . Towson University. Archived from the original on 27 November 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ "Istanbul hosts first ever Islamic geometric arts symposium" .

World Bulletin . 25 September 2013. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ "Introduction to Islamic Art" . The Prince's School of Traditional Arts. Archived from the original on 3 December 2015 . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ Kaplan, Craig S. (2002).

"Computer Graphics and Geometric Ornamental Design: Chapter 3. Islamic Star Patterns" . University of Waterloo (PhD thesis). Archived from the original on 30 December 2015 . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ Lu, P. J.; Steinhardt, P. J. (2007).

"Decagonal and Quasi-crystalline Tilings in Medieval Islamic Architecture" .

Science .

315 (5815): 1106– 1110.

Bibcode : 2007Sci...315.1106L .

doi : 10.1126/science.1135491 .

PMID 17322056 .

S2CID 10374218 . Archived from the original on 2015-12-08 . Retrieved 2015-12-04 .

^ Ball, Philip (22 February 2007).

"Islamic tiles reveal sophisticated maths" .

Nature : news070219–9.

doi : 10.1038/news070219-9 .

S2CID 178905751 . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ Webb, Jonathan (16 March 2016).

"Islamic art inspires stretchy, switchable materials" .

British Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Islamic geometric patterns .

Museum with no Frontiers: Geometric Decoration Victoria and Albert Museum: Teachers' resource: Maths and Islamic art & design v t e Islamic architecture Styles Abbasid Anatolian Seljuk Ayyubid Chinese Fatimid Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Deccan Qutb Shahi Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Ilkhanid Iranian Great Seljuk Ilkhanid Timurid Safavid Mamluk Moorish Aghlabid Almoravid Almohad Hafsid Zayyanid Ottoman Somali Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Umayyad Yemeni Elements Materials Qadad Tadelakt Arches Chahartaq Discharging arch Four-centred arch Horseshoe arch Lambrequin arch Multifoil arch Ogee arch Pointed arch Squinch Vaulting Roofs Dome ( Arabic dome / Onion dome / Persian dome / South Asian dome ) Semi-dome Tajug Chhajja Religious objects Anaza Bedug Dikka (or müezzin mahfili) Gonbad Hussainiya Imamzadeh Kiswah Loudspeakers Maqsurah Mihrab Minaret Minbar Qibla Zarih Decorations ( For overview, see Islamic ornament ) Ablaq Āina-kāri Alfiz Arabesque Banna'i Girih Girih tiles Haft-rang Islamic calligraphy Islamic geometric patterns Jali Mo'araq Mosque lamp Muqarnas Nagash painting Qashani Sebka (Darj-wa-ktaf) Shabaka Shamsa Sitara Socarrat Stucco decoration Zellij Rooms Andaruni Harem Iwan Liwan Mirador Hosh Qa’a Zenana Gardens Bagh Charbagh Islamic garden Mughal garden Paradise garden Persian gardens Reflecting pool Riad Outdoor objects Chhatri Eidgah Fina Mechouar Sebil Shadirvan Passive cooling Hypostyle Howz Jharokha Kucheh Mashrabiya Riwaq Sahn Salsabil Shabestan Shading Umbrellas Windcatcher Types Religious Congregational mosque Dar al-Muwaqqit Dargah Gongbei Jama'at Khana Külliye Kuttab (or maktab) Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Surau Sufi lodge (khanqah) Takyeh Türbe Zawiya Civilian Baradari Bazaar Caravanserai Bimaristan Ghorfa Hammam Hasht-Bihisht Kasbah Mahal Medina quarter Souq Well house Military Albarrana tower Alcázar Amsar Kasbah Ksar Qalat Ribat Resources Aga Khan Award for Architecture ArchNet Museum with No Frontiers Influences Indo-Saracenic Revival Influences on Western architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Part of Islamic arts • Architecture portal • Islam portal v t e Islamic art Architecture Regional styles Abbasid Ayyubid Anatolian Seljuk Chinese Fatimid Great Seljuk Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Bahmani and Deccan Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Iranian Mamluk Moorish Ottoman Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Timurid Umayyad Yemeni Elements Ablaq Banna'i Iwan Jali Mashrabiya Mihrab Minaret Mocárabe Muqarnas Sitara Stucco decoration See also Decoration Arts Periods and regional styles Abbasid art Fatimid art Mudéjar Bangladeshi Persian ( Early , Qajar , Safavid ) Turkish ( Ottoman ) Carpets Gul Kilim Motifs Persian Turkish Prayer Pottery Fritware Hispano-Moresque Iznik Lustreware Mina'i ware Persian Chinese influence Textiles Batik Damask Ikat Embroidery Soumak Suzani Woodwork Khatam Minbar Other media Music Brass Damascus steel Enamelled glass Haft-rang Glass Hardstone carving Ivory carving Mo'araq Mosque lamp Stained glass Shabaka Arts of the book Miniatures Arabic Mughal Ottoman Persian Calligraphy Arabic Diwani Indo-Muslim Kufic Muhaqqaq Naskh Nastaliq Persian Sini Taliq Thuluth Tughra Other arts Muraqqa Hilya Ottoman illumination Decoration Arabesque Geometric patterns Girih ( tiles ) Zellij See also Calligraphy The garden Charbagh Mughal Ottoman Paradise Persian Museums, collections Berlin Cairo Doha Ghazni Istanbul ( Arts , Calligraphy Art ) Jerusalem ( Islamic Museum , Museum for Islamic Art, Jerusalem ) Kuala Lumpur London ( British Museum , V&A , Khalili Collection ) Los Angeles Marrakech ( Museum , Majorelle Garden ) Melbourne Paris ( Arab World Institute , Louvre ) Singapore Toronto (Aga Khan) Tripoli Exhibitions Empire of the Sultans Heaven on Earth: Art from Islamic Lands Hajj: Journey to the Heart of Islam Principles, influences Islamic Art: Mirror of the Invisible World Aniconism in Islam Indo-Saracenic Revival Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe Influences on Western art Grotesque Moresque Mathematics and architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Oriental carpets in Renaissance painting Pseudo-Kufic Stilfragen Topkapı Scroll v t e Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Gardens Geometric pattern Literature Music Poetry Pottery Influences on Western art Economics History Agency Banking Capitalism Poverty Socialism Trust Usury Welfare History Timeline Historiography Early social change Early conquests Golden Age Contributions to Medieval Europe Reception in early modern Europe Law and politics Democracy consensus consultation Feminism Jurisprudence use of analogy decision-making schools Peace Quietism Secularism Early social change State Philosophy Early Contemporary Theology dialectic Ethics Logic Astrology Early sociology solidarity Medieval science Timeline Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy cosmology Geography and cartography Inventions Mathematics Medicine ophthalmology Physics Psychology Other fields Arab Agricultural Revolution Education Ijazah elementary school Sufi studies mysticism cosmology philosophy v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Mathematics Sculpture String art String figure Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica: A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Kresge Auditorium Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Família Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Dürer Parmigianino Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror 19th–20th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au café L'Oiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall René Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dalí Crucifixion The Swallow's Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh István Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimiņa Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Dürer Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali d'architettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dell'architettura Romantic Samuel Colman Nature's Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematician's Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Gödel, Escher, Bach Nikos Salingaros The 'Life' of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints: Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islamic_geometric_patterns&oldid=1301369444 " Categories : Islamic architectural elements Islamic art Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles Use British English from October 2016 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 12:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Islamic geometric patterns 13 languages Add topic

