Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Relations to corporate social responsibility 3 Main elements 4 Drivers and challenges 5 Worldwide perspectives on corporate environmental responsibility 6 Benefits of corporate environmental responsibility 7 Summary 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Corporate environmental responsibility 2 languages العربية Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Climate change and society Effects · Risk Climate change mitigation Cities Urban heat island Eco-anxiety Ecological footprint Ecological grief Effects of climate change on human health Environmental Conflict Degradation Effects of aviation Impacts of agriculture Extreme weather Drought Flood Heat wave Storm surge Tropical cyclones Wildfire Food security Agriculture Desertification Fisheries Livestock Infectious diseases Mental health / Psychology List of environmental conflicts Sea level rise Coastal erosion Coastal flooding Small island countries Water security Water cycle Water scarcity Economics · Finance Autonomous building Bright green environmentalism Carbon footprint Carbon accounting Carbon offsets and credits Global warming potential Greenhouse gas inventory Net zero emissions Carbon price Carbon bubble Carbon emission trading Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Social cost of carbon Circular economy Clean growth Climate change scenario Climate finance Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate sociopolitical activism Corporate sustainability Degrowth Eco-city Ecological economics Ecovillage Energy economics Environmental design Environmental finance ESG Ethical banking Green accounting Green bank Green bond Green bubble Green building Green building and wood Green economy Green home Green recovery Greening Insurance Act of God Extreme event attribution Resilience Risk management Vulnerability Low-carbon economy Mitigation economics Natural building Reuse Sustainable Agriculture Architecture Capitalism City Consumer behaviour Diet Finance Industries Livelihood Sourcing Used good Zero-energy building Zero heating building Social issues · Ethics Children Climate justice Debt Cyclability Deep ecology Dirty hands Ecosophy Environmental racism Environmentalism Ethical consumerism Fossil fuel divestment Gender Greenwashing Human rights Indigenous peoples Just transition List of climate change controversies Migration Mitigation co-benefits Poverty Psychology of climate change denial Public interest design Queer ecology Security Social ecology (ethics) Social responsibility Stewardship (theology) Urban forest inequity Walkability Women Communication Climate crisis Education Greenwashing Media coverage Popular culture fiction art Psychology of denial Public opinion Scientific consensus on climate change Politics Climate movement Eco-capitalism Green left Green liberalism Eco-socialism Green politics History Political economy Climate governance Climate movement Conspiracy theories Denial Global warming controversy Litigation Individual actions UNFCCC UN conferences Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Portal Glossary Index v t e Corporate environmental responsibility ( CER ) refers to a company's duties to abstain from damaging natural environments . The term derives from corporate social responsibility (CSR).

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] The environmental aspect of corporate social responsibility has been debated over the past few decades, as stakeholders increasingly require organizations to become more environmentally aware and socially responsible.

[ 2 ] In the traditional business model, environmental protection was considered only in relation to the " public interest ". Hitherto, governments had maintained principal responsibility for ensuring environmental management and conservation.

The public sector has been focused on the development of regulations and the imposition of sanctions as a means to facilitating environmental protection. Recently, the private sector has adopted the approach of co-responsibility towards the prevention and alleviation of environmental damage.

[ 3 ] The sectors and their roles have been changing, with the private sector becoming more active in the protection of the environment. Many governments, corporations, and big companies are now providing strategies for environmental protection and economic growth.

The World Commission on Environment published the Brundtland Report in 1987 to address sustainable development. Since then, managers, scholars , and business owners have tried to determine why and how big corporations should incorporate environmental aspects into their own policies. In recent years, an increasing number of companies have pledged to protect natural environments.

Relations to corporate social responsibility [ edit ] There are different perceptions of corporate social responsibility between government, the private sector, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and society in general, and thus, the concept has no single definition.

Corporate social responsibility may cover: A company running its business responsibly in relation to internal stakeholders ( shareholders , employees , customers and suppliers) The role of business in relation to the state (locally and nationally) as well as to inter-state institutions or standards Business performance as a responsible member of the society in which it operates and the global community." [ citation needed ] The European Union defines corporate social responsibility as "...the concept that an enterprise is accountable for its impact on all relevant stakeholders. It is the continuing commitment by a business to behave fairly and responsibly and contribute to economic development while
improving the quality of life of the workforce and their families as well as of the local community and society at large." [ 4 ] According to this definition, a CSR strategy is more focused on social aspects, particularly the interests of stakeholders.

Corporate environmental responsibility (CER) is, in many ways, connected to CSR, as both of them influence environmental protection. CER, however, is strictly about the consideration of environmental implications and protection within corporate strategy. The understanding of CER cannot be separated from CSR—both are interconnected and based on environmental protection. There are three major areas related to these two concepts—economic, environmental and social. CER is focused more on economic and environmental while CSR relates to social and environmental aspects. Economy, society, and environment all play significant roles in the development of an efficient and effective company strategy.

Main elements [ edit ] These cover the environmental implications of a company's operations: Eliminate waste and emissions Maximize the efficient use of resources and productivity Minimize activities that might impair the enjoyment of resources by future generations.

Drivers and challenges [ edit ] Among the main drivers for CER are government policies and regulations. Many states provide their own legislation, regulations and policies, which are important in creating a positive environmental attitude within companies. Subsidies, tariffs and taxes play a vital role in the implementation of these policies. Another significant factor is the competitive environment among companies generated by media, public, shareholder and NGO awareness, which are also major drivers of CER. Another significant driver of corporate responsibility is that the private sector is largely responsible for the development of green technology and renewable energy sources meaning they are contributing towards climate change mitigation while still operating as a business.

[ 5 ] Challenges include the cost of regulation and difficulties in predicting economic gains, which could become problematic for a company's management. Additionally, new technologies are frequently too expensive for a lot of companies.

[ 6 ] Another challenge is the lack of harmonization of regulations among different states—often there is a mosaic of propositions, leading to unclear strategies for environmental behavior, especially in multinational corporations . Further challenges of CES are whether corporations have a responsibility to go further than the current governmental legislation and Corporation a firstly responsible to produce profit for shareholders and producing goods for customers. Furthermore Companies work within the framework of the society and country that they operate in meaning that corporations cannot be held solely responsible for lack of legislation on pollution and emissions.
Corporations emissions are also fractured between different sectors such as supply and outsourcing which can make it unclear what emissions the corporation is responsible. Further challenges is the argument of whether corporations should be held responsible for past emissions when the negative impacts were not known.

[ 5 ] Worldwide perspectives on corporate environmental responsibility [ edit ] The majority of international CSR studies focus on business practices and its aspects, such as business economics and the legality of environmental law . Most companies are noticing the importance of taking into account one of its most important stakeholders: employees and customers and their commitment to sustainability. Studies have demonstrated that once companies place sustainability practices they can be directly linked to financial success and customer satisfaction, which in turn can be used as a marketing tool.

[ 7 ] An additional study highlighted that these practices are in effect at larger firms with more resources to fund environmental responsibility.

[ 8 ] Although every country has a different culture, and each country determines their own scale of environmental responsibility, research has shown that there is a standard global human values that drive customer needs and wants. Companies have taken initiatives to take sustainability and align it with each company's economic goals. Part of this initiative has included publishing sustainability reports, offering more transparency of company operations to customers.

[ 8 ] Managers and other people at the top, play the key role in decision-making and implementing the firm's sustainability practices.

[ 9 ] Benefits of corporate environmental responsibility [ edit ] Corporate social responsibility can prove to be more profitable for companies and to extend it survivability in markets because greater awareness on this topic, in both social and business markets, has been in higher demand. Customers have responded with overall satisfaction and loyalty when companies have a better CSR, especially in countries like Spain and Brazil. Culture has an impact on the CSR ratings and studies, as well as human values across different nations.

[ 9 ] This topic can also be found under sustainable development . This area is concerned with not only protecting the environment but maintaining economical growth. There were several agreements internationally to help adopt new business practices that held these standards, but they were considered individual and there was no law-abiding body to regulate nor implement them.

[ 7 ] One of the other factors that is considered an integral part of sustainable development are human beings, and specific groups and their habitat. Counties and companies that more developed would lead, and other small countries and business would slowly make gains. It is important to recognize that just because corporate environmental responsibility is being recognized that consumption is something that is not discouraged.

[ 10 ] The idea of corporate environmental responsibility is for humans to be more aware of the environmental impact and counteract their pollution/ carbon footprint on the natural resources.

[ 9 ] One of the main factors is to reduce carbon footprint and carbon emissions.

[ 10 ] Many of the studies focus on trying to find a balance between economic growth and reducing waste and cleaner environments.

[ 10 ] Furthermore, many firms are discovering that there is an advantage to advocating for environmental regulations and preparing for them to be implemented before they become law. In a recent study, the researcher found that firms support climate change legislation as a means of gaining power over their competitors. Essentially, even if a new regulation hurts a firm in the short term, the firm may embrace it because they know that it will hurt their competitors even more. This allows them to come out on top in the long run.

[ 11 ] Summary [ edit ] The environmental aspects of security have increasingly become a major issue being considered by states.

Globalization also plays a key role in the adoption of new environmental strategies as a multi-faceted process influencing modern societies, and creating interconnected and multidimensional environments.

Corporate environmental responsibility is used by multinational corporations as well as small, local organizations. It is highlighted and more institutionalized because of stakeholders' awareness of the huge impacts of business activities on the environment. To understand CER, its relations with CSR strategies need to be recognized. CER and CSR are the main strategies that help in the creation of efficient and environmentally sustainable businesses.

See also [ edit ] Triple bottom line References [ edit ] ^ Mazurkiewicz, Piotr.

"Corporate Environmental Responsibility: Is a common CSR framework possible?" (PDF) .

siteresources.worldbank.org . Retrieved 2016-12-12 .

^ John Duker; Michael Olugunna.

"CORPORATE ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES (CER): A Case of Logistic Companies in Sweden" (PDF) .

diva-portal.org .

^ Piotr Mazurkiewicz.

"Corporate environmental responsibility: Is a common CSR framework possible?" (PDF) .

siteresources.worldbank.org .

^ "Promoting a European framework for Corporate Social Responsibility" (PDF) .

europa.eu.int (Green paper). European Commission. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 11, 2003.

^ a b Hormio, Säde (2017).

"Can Corporations Have (Moral) Responsibility Regarding Climate Change Mitigation?" .

Ethics, Policy & Environment .

20 (3): 314– 332.

doi : 10.1080/21550085.2017.1374015 .

^ Przychodzen, J.; Przychodzen, W. (2013). "Corporate sustainability and shareholder wealth".

Journal of Environmental Planning and Management .

56 (4): 474– 493.

Bibcode : 2013JEPM...56..474P .

doi : 10.1080/09640568.2012.685927 .

^ a b Nawaz, Waqas; Linke, Patrick; Koҫ, Muammer (2019). "Safety and sustainability nexus: A review and appraisal".

Journal of Cleaner Production .

216 : 74– 87.

Bibcode : 2019JCPro.216...74N .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.167 .

S2CID 159054464 .

^ a b Batista, Alamo; Francisco, Antonio (January 2018).

"Organizational Sustainability Practices: A Study of the Firms Listed by the Corporate Sustainability Index" .

Sustainability .

10 (1): 226.

Bibcode : 2018Sust...10..226B .

doi : 10.3390/su10010226 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ a b c González-Rodríguez, M. Rosario; Díaz-Fernández, M. Carmen; Biagio, Simonetti (2019). "The perception of socially and environmentally responsible practices based on values and cultural environment from a customer perspective".

Journal of Cleaner Production .

216 : 88– 98.

Bibcode : 2019JCPro.216...88G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.189 .

S2CID 159362122 .

^ a b c Zhang, Tongbin (2019). "Which policy is more effective, carbon reduction in all industries or in high energy-consuming Industries?——From dual perspectives of welfare effects and economic effects".

Journal of Cleaner Production .

216 : 184– 196.

Bibcode : 2019JCPro.216..184Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.183 .

S2CID 159112717 .

^ Kennard, Amanda (2020). "The Enemy of My Enemy: When Firms Support Climate Change Regulation".

International Organization .

74 (2): 187– 221.

doi : 10.1017/S0020818320000107 .

v t e Social and environmental accountability Ethics and principles Aarhus Convention Climate justice Corporate accountability / behaviour / environmental responsibility / responsibility / social responsibility Dirty hands Environmental racism / in Russia / in the United States / in Western Europe / inequality in the UK / injustice in Europe Ethical banking Ethical code Extended producer responsibility Externality Harm Little Eichmanns Loss and damage Organizational ethics Organizational justice Pollution Principles for Responsible Investment Racism Social impact assessment Social justice Social responsibility Stakeholder theory Sullivan principles Transparency (behavioral social) UN Global Compact Social accounting Corporate crime Double bottom line Ethical positioning index Higg Index Impact assessment ( environmental equality social ) ISO 26000 ISO 45001 Genuine progress indicator Performance indicator SA 8000 OHSAS 18001 Social return on investment Whole-life cost Environmental accounting Carbon accounting Eco-Management and Audit Scheme Emission inventory Environmental full-cost accounting / Environmental conflict / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account ISO 14000 ISO 14031 Life-cycle assessment Pollutant release and transfer register Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain Toxics Release Inventory Triple bottom line Reporting Global Reporting Initiative GxP guidelines Sustainability reporting Auditing Community-based monitoring Environmental ( certification ) Fair trade ( certification ) ISO 19011 Related Bangladesh Accord Benefit corporation Child labour Community interest company Conflict of interest Disasters Disinvestment Eco-labeling Environmental degradation Environmental pricing reform Environmental, social, and corporate governance Ethical consumerism Euthenics Global justice movement Health impact assessment Market governance mechanism Product certification Public participation SDG Publishers Compact Social enterprise Socially responsible business Socially responsible investing Socially responsible marketing Stakeholder ( engagement ) Supply chain management Environment portal Category Commons Organizations Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Corporate_environmental_responsibility&oldid=1291107877 " Categories : Corporate social responsibility Environmental protection Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 04:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Corporate environmental responsibility 2 languages Add topic

