Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Astronomy 2.2 Music 2.3 Medicine (pharmacobotany) 2.4 Description of Egypt 2.5 Logic 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Abu as-Salt 13 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Hausa Italiano Jawa Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Abu al-Salt ) Andalusian-Arab polymath Abū al-Ṣalt Born c.

1068 Dénia , Taifa of Dénia Died October 23, 1134 Béjaïa , Hammadid dynasty Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age Main interests Quadrivium , Astronomy , Music Influenced Samuel of Marseilles, Profiat Duran Abū aṣ-Ṣalt Umayya ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Abī aṣ-Ṣalt ad-Dānī al-Andalusī ( Arabic : أبو الصلت ) ( c.

1068 —October 23, 1134), known in Latin as Albuzale , was an Andalusian - Arab [ 1 ] [ 2 ] polymath who wrote about pharmacology , geometry , Aristotelian physics , and astronomy .

[ 3 ] His works on astronomical instruments were read both in the Islamic world and Europe. He also occasionally traveled to Palermo and worked in the court of Roger I of Sicily as a visiting physician .

[ 4 ] He became well known in Europe through translations of his works made in the Iberian Peninsula and in southern France.

[ 4 ] He is also credited with introducing Andalusi music to Tunis, which later led to the development of the Tunisian ma'luf .

[ 4 ] Life [ edit ] Abu as-Salt was born in Dénia , al-Andalus .  After the death of his father while he was a child, he became a student of al-Waqqashi (1017—1095) of Toledo (a colleague of Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm az-Zarqālī ). Upon completing his mathematical education in Seville , and because of the continuing conflicts during the reconquista , he set out with his family to Alexandria and then Cairo in 1096.

In Cairo, he entered the service of the Fatimid ruler Abū Tamīm Ma'add al-Mustanṣir bi-llāh and the Vizier Al-Afdal Shahanshah . His service continued until 1108, when, according to Ibn Abī Uṣaybiʿa , his attempt to retrieve a very large Felucca laden with copper, that had capsized in the Nile , ended in failure. Abu as-Salt had built a mechanical tool to retrieve the Felucca, and was close to success when the machine's silk ropes fractured. The Vizier Al-Afdal ordered Abu as-Salt's arrest, and he was imprisoned for more than three years, only to be released in 1112.

Abu al-Salt then left Egypt for Mahdia in Tunisia , the capital of the Zirids in Ifriqiya where he entered the service of king Yaḥyā ibn Tamīm as-Ṣanhājī and where his son, ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz was born.

[ 5 ] He also occasionally traveled to Palermo and worked in the court of Roger I of Sicily as a visiting physician .

[ 4 ] He also sent poems to the Palermitan poet Abū ḍ-Ḍawʾ . He died, probably of dropsy, in Béjaïa , Algeria . He is buried in the Ribat of Monastir , Tunisia.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Abu as-Salt wrote [ 6 ] an encyclopedic work of many treatises on the scientific disciplines known as quadrivium . This work was probably known in Arabic as Kitāb al-kāfī fī al-ʿulūm . His poetry is preserved in the anthology of Imad al-Din al-Isfahani .

[ 7 ] His interests also included alchemy as well as the study of medicinal plants. He was keen to discover an elixir able to transmute copper into gold and tin into silver .

Astronomy [ edit ] Risāla fī al-amal bi-l-astrulab ("On the construction and use of the astrolabe ") A description of the three instruments known as the Andalusian equatoria.

Ṣifat ʿamal ṣafīḥa jāmiʿa taqawwama bi-hā jamīʿ al-kawākib al-sabʿa ("Description of the construction and Use of a Single Plate with which the totality of the motions of the seven planets"), [ 4 ] where the seven planets refer to Mercury , Venus , earth , Moon , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn .

Kitāb al-wajīz fī ʿilm al-hayʾa ("Brief treatise on cosmology") Ajwiba ʿan masāʾil suʾila ʿan-ha fa-ajāba or Ajwiba ʿan masāʾil fī al-kawn wa-ʾl-ḥabīʿa wa-ʾl-ḥisāb ("Solution to questions on cosmology, physics, and arithmetic").

An introduction to astronomy.

A Summary of Ptolemy 's Almagest .

Music [ edit ] Risāla fī l-musiqa ("Epistle about music") - a manuscript translated in Hebrew is kept in Paris [ 8 ] Medicine (pharmacobotany) [ edit ] Kitab al-adwiya al-mufrad - this book (known both by a 1311 Latin translation by Almado de Vilanova and a Hebrew translation by Yehuda Nathan) is unique in organizing drugs not by alphabetical order of the medicinal plants of which they are made, but by the part of the body they are used to cure.

[ 9 ] Description of Egypt [ edit ] Risāla al-misriyya (Epistle about Egypt) a report written for the Zirid prince Yahya, precious for its description of 13th century Egypt [ 10 ] Logic [ edit ] Taqwim al-dhikr (assessing memory) a summary of Porphyry 's Isagoge and the first four books of Aristotles ' Organon . The manuscript has been translated in Spanish by C. Angel GONZALEZ PALENCIA.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Roger I of Sicily Ibn Jubayr Muhammad al-Idrisi Ibn al-Saffar Notes [ edit ] Comes, Mercè (2007).

"Abū al-Ṣalt: Umayya ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Abī al-Ṣalt al-Dānī al-Andalusī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) References [ edit ] ^ The Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 1967.

^ Marcorini, Edgardo (1988).

Prehistory . Facts On File, Incorporated.

ISBN 9780871964755 .

^ Selin, Helaine (2008). Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 9.

^ a b c d e Comes 2007 .

^ a b "Abū al-Ṣalt: Umayya ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Abī al-Ṣalt al-Dānī al-Andalusī | ISMI" .

ismi.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de . Retrieved 2022-06-23 .

^ Fontaine, Jean.

Histoire de la littérature tunisienne, Tome 1 (in French) (1988, 1999 ed.). Tunis: Cérès Editions. pp.

216– 219.

ISBN 9973-19-403-9 .

^ Umayya Abu L-Salt poetry, reported by Imad al-Din al-Isfahani (1974).

edited by Muhammad al Marzouqi (in Arabic). Tunis: Librairie Orientale. pp. 172 p.

^ Avenari, Hanoch, Vol 3 (1974).

"The Hebrew version of Abul LSalt's treatise on Music, 80 p pdf document, English intro and Hebrew manuscript" .

Jewish Music Research Center .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Umayya Abu L-Salt (1979). Ibrahim Ben Mrad (ed.). "Kitab al-adwiya al-mufrada".

Al-Hayat Al-Thaqafiyya .

3 : 153– 167.

^ Umayya, Abu L-Salt (1951).

al-Risala al-misriyya (manuscript edited by) (in Arabic) (Cairo ed.). Abdessalam HAROUN. pp. 50 pages.

^ AbuSalt de Denia (1915).

Rectificacion de la Mente - tratato de logica (PDF) . Translated by C. Angel GONZALEZ PALENCIA. Madid.

v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy v t e Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Alchemists 8th century pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana 9th century Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) 10th century Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya Maslama al-Qurṭubī Abū Manṣūr al-Muwaffaq al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) 11th century pseudo-Avicenna al-Khawārizmī al-Kāthī al-Muʿizz ibn Bādīs Aḥmad ibn ʿImād al-Dīn Ibn al-Wāfid (pharmacist) 12th century al-Ṭughrāʾī Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Artephius 13th century al-Simāwī Ibn al-Bayṭār (pharmacist) Abū l-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī (pharmacist) Ḥasan al-Rammāḥ (engineer) 14th century al-Jildakī Ibn al-Rassām Abū l-Ashbā ibn Tammām Concepts Takwin Philosopher's stone al-iksīr Alembic Athanor Works Book of Mercy Books of the Balances al-Burhān fī asrār ʿilm al-mīzān Masāʾil Khālid li-Maryānus al-rāhib Emerald Tablet Five Hundred Books al-ʿIlm al-muktasab fī zirāʿat al-dhahab Mifthāḥ al-ḥikma ( Clavis sapientiae ) al-Miṣbāḥ fī ʿilm al-miftāḥ Nabataean Agriculture One Hundred and Twelve Books Seventy Books Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Turba Philosophorum Nihāyat al-rutba fī ṭalab al-ḥisba (al-Nabarawi) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Vatican Israel People DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abu_as-Salt&oldid=1301382658 " Categories : 1060s births 1134 deaths 11th-century people from al-Andalus 12th-century people from Ifriqiya People from Marina Alta Alchemists of the medieval Islamic world Inventors of the medieval Islamic world 12th-century inventors 11th-century inventors Astronomers from al-Andalus Medieval Egyptian astronomers Physicians from al-Andalus Mathematicians from al-Andalus Philosophers from al-Andalus Scholars from the Fatimid Caliphate 12th-century astronomers Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 14:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abu as-Salt 13 languages Add topic

