Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Pierre Prevost (physicist) 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Magyar مصرى Norsk bokmål Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pierre Prévost (physicist) ) Swiss physicist (1751–1839) For the French painter, see Pierre Prévost (painter) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Pierre Prevost" physicist – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2012 ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Scientist Pierre Prevost in the Journal Officiel Illustré De L'Exposition Nationale , Suisse Genève 1896 Pierre Prevost ( French: [pʁevo] ; 3 March 1751 – 8 April 1839) was a Genevan philosopher and physicist . In 1791 he explained Pictet's experiment by arguing that all bodies radiate heat , no matter how hot or cold they are.

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Son of a Protestant clergyman in Geneva in the Republic of Geneva , he was born in that city and was educated for a clerical career. However, he abandoned it for law, and this too he quickly deserted to devote himself to education and to travelling. He became close friends with Jean Jacques Rousseau and, a little later, with Dugald Stewart , having previously distinguished himself as a translator of and commentator on Euripides .

Frederick II of Prussia secured him in 1780 as professor of philosophy and made him member of the Akademie der Wissenschaften in Berlin. He there became acquainted with Joseph Louis Lagrange and was thus led to turn his attention to physical science .

After some years spent on political economy and on the principles of the fine arts (in connection with which he wrote, for the Berlin Memoirs , a remarkable dissertation on poetry) he returned to Geneva and began his work on magnetism and on heat. Interrupted occasionally in his studies by political duties in which he was often called to the front, he remained professor of philosophy at Geneva until he was called in 1810 to the chair of physics.

He died at Geneva in 1839.

Work [ edit ] Prévost published much on philology , philosophy, and political economy, but he will be remembered mainly for having published, with additions of his own, the Traité de physique by Georges-Louis Le Sage , and for his enunciation of the law of exchange in radiation .

His scientific publications included De l'Origine des forces magnetiques , [ 2 ] Mémoire sur l'Equilibre du feu , [ 1 ] Recherches physico-mecaniques sur la chaleur , [ 3 ] and Essai sur le calorique rayonnant .

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Radiative equilibrium References [ edit ] ^ a b Prevost, Pierre (April 1791).

"Mémoire sur l'équilibre du feu" .

Observations Sur la Physique (in French).

XXXVIII (1): 314– 323.

^ Prevost, Pierre (1788).

De l'origine de forces magnétiques . Chez Barde, Manget.

^ Prevost, Pierre (1792).

Recherches physico-mécaniques sur la chaleur (in French). Aux dépens de l'auteur. Chez Barde, Manget & Compagnie, chez Mérichot le jeune, Librairie, quai des Augufins.

^ Prevost, Pierre (1809).

Du calorique rayonnant (in French). Paris: J.J. Paschoud.

Pierre Prévost.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Prévost, Pierre ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Greece Poland Vatican Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pierre_Prevost_(physicist)&oldid=1245494688 " Categories : 1751 births 1839 deaths 18th-century physicists from the Republic of Geneva 19th-century physicists from the Republic of Geneva Philosophers from the Republic of Geneva Swiss physicists Foreign members of the Royal Society Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages with French IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 13 September 2024, at 09:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pierre Prevost (physicist) 11 languages Add topic

