Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In construction Toggle In construction subsection 1.1 Compaction methods 1.2 Test methods in laboratory 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Soil compaction 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Монгол Nederlands Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For soil compaction in agriculture and compaction effects on soil biology, see soil compaction (agriculture) , for natural compaction on a geologic scale, see compaction (geology) ; for consolidation near the surface, see consolidation (soil) .

Process in geotechnical engineering to increase soil density In geotechnical engineering , soil compaction is the process in which stress applied to a soil causes densification as air is displaced from the pores between the soil grains. When stress is applied that causes densification due to water (or other liquid) being displaced from between the soil grains, then consolidation , not compaction, has occurred.  Normally, compaction is the result of heavy machinery compressing the soil , but it can also occur due to the passage of, for example, animal feet.

In soil science and agronomy , soil compaction is usually a combination of both engineering compaction and consolidation, so may occur due to a lack of water in the soil, the applied stress being internal suction due to water evaporation [ 1 ] as well as due to passage of animal feet.  Affected soils become less able to absorb rainfall , thus increasing runoff and erosion . Plants have difficulty in compacted soil because the mineral grains are pressed together, leaving little space for air and water, which are essential for root growth. Burrowing animals also find it a hostile environment, because the denser soil is more difficult to penetrate.  The ability of a soil to recover from this type of compaction depends on climate, mineralogy and fauna. Soils with high shrink–swell capacity , such as vertisols , recover quickly from compaction where moisture conditions are variable (dry spells shrink the soil, causing it to crack).  But clays such as kaolinite , which do not crack as they dry, cannot recover from compaction on their own unless they host ground-dwelling animals such as earthworms —the Cecil soil series is an example.

Before soils can be compacted in the field, some laboratory tests are required to determine their engineering properties. Among various properties, the maximum dry density and the optimum moisture content are vital and specify the required density to be compacted in the field.

[ 2 ] A 10 tonne excavator is here equipped with a narrow sheepsfoot roller to compact the fill over newly placed sewer pipe, forming a stable support for a new road surface.

A compactor / roller fitted with a sheepsfoot drum, operated by U.S. Navy Seabees Vibrating roller with plain drum as used for compacting asphalt and granular soils Vibratory rammer in action In construction [ edit ] Soil compaction is a vital part of the construction process.  It is used for support of structural entities such as building foundations, roadways, walkways, and earth retaining structures to name a few.  For a given soil type certain properties may deem it more or less desirable to perform adequately for a particular circumstance.  In general, the preselected soil should have adequate strength, be relatively incompressible so that future settlement is not significant, be stable against volume change as water content or other factors vary, be durable and safe against deterioration, and possess proper permeability .

[ 3 ] When an area is to be filled or backfilled the soil is placed in layers called lifts.  The ability of the first fill layers to be properly compacted will depend on the condition of the natural material being covered.  If unsuitable material is left in place and backfilled, it may compress over a long period under the weight of the earth fill, causing settlement cracks in the fill or in any structure supported by the fill.

[ 4 ] In order to determine if the natural soil will support the first fill layers, an area can be proofrolled.  Proofrolling consists of utilizing a piece of heavy construction equipment to roll across the fill site and watching for deflections to be revealed.  These areas will be indicated by the development of rutting , pumping, or ground weaving .

[ 5 ] To ensure adequate soil compaction is achieved, project specifications will indicate the required soil density or degree of compaction that must be achieved.  These specifications are generally recommended by a geotechnical engineer in a geotechnical engineering report.

The soil type —that is, grain-size distributions, shape of the soil grains, specific gravity of soil solids, and amount and type of clay minerals, present—has a great influence on the maximum dry unit weight and optimum moisture content.

[ 6 ] It also has a great influence on how the materials should be compacted in given situations. Compaction is accomplished by use of heavy equipment. In sands and gravels, the equipment usually vibrates, to cause re-orientation of the soil particles into a denser configuration. In silts and clays , a sheepsfoot roller is frequently used, to create small zones of intense shearing , which drives air out of the soil.

Determination of adequate compaction is done by determining the in-situ density of the soil and comparing it to the maximum density determined by a laboratory test. The most commonly used laboratory test is called the Proctor compaction test and there are two different methods in obtaining the maximum density.  They are the standard Proctor and modified Proctor tests; the modified Proctor is more commonly used.  For small dams, the standard Proctor may still be the reference.

[ 5 ] While soil under structures and pavements needs to be compacted, it is important after construction to decompact areas to be landscaped so that vegetation can grow.

Compaction methods [ edit ] There are several means of achieving compaction of a material.  Some are more appropriate for soil compaction than others, while some techniques are only suitable for particular soils or soils in particular conditions.  Some are more suited to compaction of non-soil materials such as asphalt .  Generally, those that can apply significant amounts of shear as well as compressive stress, are most effective.

The available techniques can be classified as: Static – a large stress is slowly applied to the soil and then released.

Impact – the stress is applied by dropping a large mass onto the surface of the soil.

Vibrating – a stress is applied repeatedly and rapidly via a mechanically driven plate or hammer. Often combined with rolling compaction (see below).

Gyrating – a static stress is applied and maintained in one direction while the soil is a subjected to a gyratory motion about the axis of static loading.  Limited to laboratory applications.

Rolling – a heavy cylinder is rolled over the surface of the soil.  Commonly used on sports pitches.

Roller-compactors are often fitted with vibratory devices to enhance their effectiveness.

Kneading – shear is applied by alternating movement in adjacent positions.  An example, combined with rolling compaction, is the 'sheepsfoot' roller used in waste compaction at landfills .

The construction plant available to achieve compaction is extremely varied and is described elsewhere .

Test methods in laboratory [ edit ] Soil compactors are used to perform test methods which cover laboratory compaction methods used to determine the relationship between molding water content and dry unit weight of soils. Soil placed as engineering fill is compacted to a dense state to obtain satisfactory engineering properties such as, shear strength, compressibility, or permeability. In addition, foundation soils are often compacted to improve their engineering properties. Laboratory compaction tests provide the basis for determining the percent compaction and molding water content needed to achieve the required engineering properties, and for controlling construction to assure that the required compaction and water contents are achieved. Test methods such as EN 13286-2, EN 13286-47, ASTM D698, ASTM D1557, AASHTO T99, AASHTO T180, AASHTO T193, BS 1377:4 provide soil compaction testing procedures.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil degradation Compactor Earthwork Soil structure Aeration Shear strength (soil) Multiquip RX1575 Rammax Sheepsfoot Trench Compaction Roller on the jobsite in San Diego, California References [ edit ] ^ Soil compaction due to lack of water in soil ^ Jia, Xiaoyang; Hu, Wei; Polaczyk, Pawel; Gong, Hongren; Huang, Baoshan (2019). "Comparative Evaluation of Compacting Process for Base Materials using Lab Compaction Methods".

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board .

2673 (4): 558– 567.

doi : 10.1177/0361198119837953 .

ISSN 0361-1981 .

^ McCarthy, David F. (2007).

Essentials of Soil Mechanics and Foundations . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 595.

ISBN 978-0-13-114560-3 .

^ McCarthy, David F. (2007).

Essentials of Soil Mechanics and Foundations . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. pp.

601– 602.

ISBN 978-0-13-114560-3 .

^ a b McCarthy, David F. (2007).

Essentials of Soil Mechanics and Foundations . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 602.

ISBN 978-0-13-114560-3 .

^ Das, Braja M. (2002).

Principles of Geotechnical Engineering . Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. p. 105.

ISBN 0-534-38742-X .

^ "Automatic Soil Compactor" .

cooper.co.uk . Cooper Research Technology. Archived from the original on 27 August 2014 . Retrieved 8 September 2014 .

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_compaction&oldid=1289434613 " Categories : Soil science Earthworks (engineering) Soil degradation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 16:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil compaction 17 languages Add topic

