Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 From Liberal Party to Democratic Party 2.2 Progressive Liberal Party 2.3 People's Liberal Party 2.4 Radoslavist Liberal Party / National Liberal Party 2.5 Tonchevist Young Liberal Party 2.6 Radical (Democratic) Party 2.7 Movement for Rights and Freedoms 2.8 National Movement for Simeon II 2.9 "Blue" Parties/Urban Right 2.10 We Continue the Change 3 Liberal leaders 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and radicalism in Bulgaria 1 language Български Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( June 2024 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism and radicalism in Bulgaria" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism and radicalism in Bulgaria . It is limited to liberal and radical parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had a representation in parliament. The sign ⇒ denotes another party in that scheme. For inclusion in this scheme it is not necessary that parties label themselves as a liberal party.

Background [ edit ] Liberalism was a dominant political force at the end of the nineteenth century. The current got strongly divided.

History [ edit ] After the restoration of democracy in 1990, some parties got a liberal character.
Liberalism is now represented by the mainly Turkish minority party Movement for Rights and Freedoms ( Dviženie za prava i svobodi , observer LI , member ELDR ), the National Movement for Simeon II ( Nacionalno Dviženie Simeon Vtori , member LI , ELDR ) and Democratic Bulgaria ( Demokratichna Balgariya ), both taking a more or less liberal position.

From Liberal Party to Democratic Party [ edit ] 1879: Liberal forces united in the Liberal Party ( Liberalna Partija ) [ 1 ] 1884: A right-wing faction formed the ⇒ Progressive Liberal Party 1886: Another right-wing faction formed the ⇒ People's Liberal Party 1887: A third faction formed the ⇒ Radoslav Liberal Party 1896: The party is renamed into Democratic Party ( Demokratičeska Partija ) 1905: A radical faction seceded as the ⇒ Radical Democratic Party 1923: A faction joined the Democratic Alliance ( Demokratičeski Sgovor ) 1934: The party is banned by the dictatorship 1945: The party is revived 1947: The party is banned by the communist dictatorship 1989: The party is revived as a Christian conservative party Progressive Liberal Party [ edit ] 1884: A right-wing faction of the ⇒ Liberal Party formed the Progressive Liberal Party ( Progresivnoliberalna Partija ) 1920: The party merged into the United People's Progressive Party ( Obedinena Narodnoprogresivna Partija ) People's Liberal Party [ edit ] 1886: A right-wing faction of the ⇒ Liberal Party formed the People's Liberal Party ( Narodnoliberalna Partija ) 1920: The party merged into the ⇒ National Liberal Party Radoslavist Liberal Party / National Liberal Party [ edit ] 1887: A right-wing faction of the ⇒ Liberal Party formed the Radoslav Liberal Party ( Liberalna-Radoslavistka Partija ) 1904: A right-wing faction seceded as the ⇒ Tonchevist Young Liberal Party 1920: The party merged with the ⇒ Tonchevist Young Liberal Party and the ⇒ People's Liberal Party into the National Liberal Party ( Nacionalliberalna Partija ) 1934: The party is banned by the dictatorship Tonchevist Young Liberal Party [ edit ] 1904: A right-wing faction of the ⇒ Radoslav Liberal Party seceded as the Tonchevist Young Liberal Party ( Mladoliberalna Partija-Tončevisti ) 1920: The party merged into the ⇒ National Liberal Party Radical (Democratic) Party [ edit ] 1905: A radical faction of the ⇒ Democratic Party seceded as the Radical Democratic Party ( Radikaldemokratičeska Partija ) 1922: The party is renamed Radical Party ( Radikalna Partija ) 1923: A faction joined the Democratic Alliance ( Demokratičeski Sgovor ) 1934: The party is banned by the dictatorship 1945: The party is revived 1949: The party is banned by the communist dictatorship 1989: The party is refounded as the Radical Democratic Party ( Radikaldemokratičeska Partija ) 1990s: The party took part in various electoral alliances with decreasing success Movement for Rights and Freedoms [ edit ] 1990: Representatives of the Turkish minority formed the Movement for Rights and Freedoms ( Dviženie za Prava i Svobodi ), that develops in a more or less liberal direction National Movement for Simeon II [ edit ] 2001: Followers of the ex-king formed the personalist National Movement for Simeon II ( Nacionalno Dviženie Simeon Vtori ), that takes a more or less liberal position in the spectrum 2006: GERB split from NDSV, which adopted more conservative position than NDSV.

"Blue" Parties/Urban Right [ edit ] 1989: Centre-right and conservative forces form the Union of Democratic Forces (SDS).

1997: SDS forms with minor parties such as ⇒ Democratic Party, National DPS (split from ⇒ DPS), Union of Free Democrats (split from SDS) and ⇒ RDP the United Democratic Forces .

2005: The conservative-liberal Democrats for a Strong Bulgaria ( Демократи за силна България ) split from the conservative SDS.

2007: Mariya Kapon leaves ⇒ Democratic Party and forms the United People's Party ( Единна народна партия ).

2008: Gospodin Tonev leaves SDS and forms the Bulgarian Democratic Community ( Българска демократична общност ).

2009: The conservative SDS, DSB, the social democratic Bulgarian Social Democratic Party , the agrarian United Agrarians and ⇒ Radical Democratic Party formed the centre-right Blue Coalition , leading to a series of centre-right coalitions which take a more or less liberal position in the spectrum.

2012: Meglena Kuneva leaves ⇒ NDSV and formed Bulgaria for Citizens Movement ( Движение „България на гражданите“ ).

2012: Nadezhda Neynsky leaves SDS and formed Blue Unity ( Синьо единство ).

2014: BNG, DSB and SDS formed the Reformist Bloc . SE and ENP formed The Rights.

2014: Movement for European Unification and Solidarity ( Движение за европейско обединение и солидарност ) was formed and the Democratic Action Movement ( Движение „Демократично действие“ ) split from SDS.

2015: DSB leaves the Reformist Bloc.

2017: Former Minister of Justice Hristo Ivanov formed Yes, Bulgaria!

( Да, България!

) and joins forces with DEOS. DSB and BDO form the "New Republic".

2018: Blue Unity and DEOS dissolve.

Coalition for you Bulgaria ( Коалиция за теб България ) was formed.

2018: DSB, the green-liberal Green Movement and Yes, Bulgaria! form Democratic Bulgaria .

2019: ENP and DS form "Rise".

2021: ENP and DBG join Stand Up! Mafia, Get Out!

. KztB and BDO form "We, the Citizens". DS dissolves.

Dignity of United People ( Достойнството на един народ ) split from DBG to join Democratic Bulgaria.

2021: Republicans for Bulgaria leaves GERB.

2021: BZNS, KOD, Republicans dor Bulgaria and European Middle Class (SEK) for National Union of the Right (NOD). SEK leaves to join We Continue the Change .

2023: We Continue the Change, SEK, DSB, Yes Bulgaria, BZNS, United Agrarians, as well as the green parties Volt and Green Movement form the PP-DB coalition.

2023: Regional liberal organization „ Save Sofia (Spasi Sofia) “ officially becomes a party and runs in a coalition with PP-DB.

2023: Unity (Единение) splits from We Continue the Change.

[ 2 ] We Continue the Change [ edit ] 2021: Kiril Petkov and Asen Vasilev and formed We Continue the Change , that takes a more or less liberal position in the spectrum.

2022: We Continue the Change ( Продължаваме промяната ) became a party.

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Pre-communist period Democratic Party: Petko Karavelov - Aleksandar Malinov - Nikola Mushanov Progressive Liberal Party: Dragan Tsankov - Stoyan Danev People's Liberal Party: Stefan Stambolov - Dimitar Petkov Radoslavist Liberal Party: Vasil Radoslavov Post-communist period Zhelyu Zhelev - Ahmed Dogan - Simeon Sakskoburggotski - Ognyan Gerdzhikov See also [ edit ] History of Bulgaria Politics of Bulgaria List of political parties in Bulgaria References [ edit ] ^ Crampton, R.J.

Bulgaria . OUP Oxford, 2007. 450.

^ "Регистър на българските политически партии" .

Регистър на политическите партии . Retrieved 2024-02-20 .

v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_and_radicalism_in_Bulgaria&oldid=1293288488 " Categories : Politics of Bulgaria Liberalism and radicalism by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2024 All articles with style issues Articles needing cleanup from June 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from June 2024 Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 21:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and radicalism in Bulgaria 1 language Add topic

