Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Description 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Trivium 46 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano Latina Lingua Franca Nova Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Novial Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Русский سرائیکی Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia First three liberal arts of traditional education This article is about the educational syllabus. For other uses, see Trivium (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with trivia .

Allegory of Grammar and Logic/Dialectic. Perugia, Fontana Maggiore.

Allegory of Grammar.

Priscian on the left teaches Latin grammar to his students on the right. Relief by Luca della Robbia . Florence, Museo dell'Opera del Duomo.

The trivium is the lower division of the seven liberal arts and comprises grammar , logic , and rhetoric .

[ 1 ] The trivium is implicit in De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii (" On the Marriage of Philology and Mercury ") by Martianus Capella , but the term was not used until the Carolingian Renaissance , when it was coined in imitation of the earlier quadrivium .

[ 2 ] Grammar, logic, and rhetoric were essential to a classical education, as explained in Plato 's dialogues. The three subjects together were denoted by the word trivium during the Middle Ages , but the tradition of first learning those three subjects was established in ancient Greece , by rhetoricians such as Isocrates .

[ 3 ] : 12–23 Contemporary iterations have taken various forms, including those found in certain British and American universities (some being part of the Classical education movement ) and at the independent Oundle School in the United Kingdom .

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] Etymologically, the Latin word trivium means "the place where three roads meet" ( tri + via ); hence, the subjects of the trivium are the foundation for the quadrivium , the upper (or "further") division of the medieval education in the liberal arts , which consists of arithmetic (numbers as abstract concepts), geometry (numbers in space), music (numbers in time), and astronomy (numbers in space and time). Educationally, the trivium and the quadrivium imparted to the student the seven liberal arts of classical antiquity .

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] Grammar teaches the mechanics of language to the student. This is the step where the student "comes to terms", defining the objects and information perceived by the five senses. Hence, the law of identity : a tree is a tree, and not a cat .

Logic (also dialectic ) is the "mechanics" of thought and of analysis , the process of composing sound arguments and identifying fallacious arguments and statements, and so systematically removing contradictions, thereby producing factual knowledge that can be trusted. Its aim is to calculate what is certainly true or false.

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Rhetoric is the application of language in order to instruct and to persuade the listener and the reader. It is the knowledge (grammar) now understood (logic) and being transmitted outwards as wisdom (rhetoric). Its aim is to identify what is most probably true or false where logical certainty is not possible.

[ 5 ] Aristotle defined rhetoric as "the power of perceiving in every thing that which is capable of producing persuasion".

[ 6 ] Sister Miriam Joseph , in The Trivium: The Liberal Arts of Logic, Grammar, and Rhetoric (2002), described the trivium as follows: [ 7 ] Grammar is the art of inventing symbols and combining them to express thought; logic is the art of thinking; and rhetoric is the art of communicating thought from one mind to another, the adaptation of language to circumstance.

...

Grammar is concerned with the thing as-it-is-symbolized. Logic is concerned with the thing as-it-is-known. Rhetoric is concerned with the thing as-it-is-communicated.

John Ayto wrote in the Dictionary of Word Origins (1990) that study of the trivium (grammar, logic, and rhetoric) was requisite preparation for study of the quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy). For the medieval student, the trivium was the curricular beginning of the acquisition of the seven liberal arts ; as such, it was the principal undergraduate course of study. The word trivial arose from the contrast between the simpler trivium and the more difficult quadrivium.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Classical education movement Quadrivium The three Rs Vyākaraṇa References [ edit ] ^ a b Onions, C. T., ed. (1991).

The Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology . p. 944.

^ Marrou, Henri-Irénée (1969). "Les arts libéraux dans l'Antiquité classique". pp. 6–27 in Arts libéraux et philosophie au Moyen Âge . Paris: Vrin; Montréal: Institut d'études médiévales). pp. 18–19.

^ Stahl, W. H. (6 November 1978).

Roman Science: Origins, Development, and Influence to the Later Middle Ages . Praeger.

ISBN 978-0-313-20473-9 .

^ See Martin Robinson, Trivium 21st century . Each of these iterations was discussed in a conference at King's College London on the future of the liberal arts at schools and universities; see "The Future of Liberal Arts" . Archived from the original on 2016-05-25.

and Boarding Schools Oundle School – improving intellectual challenge ( Archived 2020-08-15 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ Nauert, Charles.

"Desiderius Erasmus" .

plato.stanford.edu .

^ Taylor, Thomas (1811).

The Rhetoric, Poetic and Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle . London: Robert Wilks. p. 6.

^ Joseph, Sister Miriam (2002).

"1. The Liberal Arts" .

The Trivium: The Liberal Arts of Logic, Grammar, and Rhetoric . Paul Dry Books. pp. 3, 9.

ISBN 9781589882737 .

^ Ayto, John (1990).

Dictionary of Word Origins . University of Texas Press. p. 542.

ISBN 1-55970-214-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] McLuhan, Marshall (2006).

The Classical Trivium: The Place of Thomas Nashe in the Learning of His Time . (McLuhan's 1942 doctoral dissertation.) Gingko Press.

ISBN 1-58423-067-3 .

Michell, John, Rachel Holley, Earl Fontainelle, Adina Arvatu, Andrew Aberdein, Octavia Wynne, and Gregory Beabout.

Trivium: The Classical Liberal Arts of Grammar, Logic, & Rhetoric . New York: Bloomsbury, 2016. Print. Wooden Books.

Robinson, Martin (2013).

Trivium 21c: Preparing Young People for the Future with Lessons from the Past . London: Independent Thinking Press.

ISBN 978-178135054-6 .

Sayers, Dorothy L.

(1947).

The Lost Tools of Learning . Essay presented at Oxford University.

Winterer, Caroline (2002).

The Culture of Classicism: Ancient Greece and Rome in American Intellectual Life, 1780–1910 . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Classical education movement Main articles Classical education movement Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Western canon History Education in ancient Greece Education in ancient Rome Christian views on the classics Medieval university Ramism Dorothy L. Sayers Great Books of the Western World Mortimer J. Adler Robert Maynard Hutchins Classic book Sister Miriam Joseph E. D. Hirsch Douglas Wilson Christopher Perrin Organizations Association of Classical Christian Schools Canon Press Classical Academic Press Classic Learning Test Great Hearts Academies Colleges Gutenberg College Harrison Middleton University Hillsdale College Magdalen College of the Liberal Arts New Saint Andrews College Patrick Henry College Shimer Great Books School St. John's College (Annapolis/Santa Fe) Thomas Aquinas College Thomas More College of Liberal Arts Wyoming Catholic College Schools Academy of Classical Christian Studies Cair Paravel Latin School Highlands Latin School Logos School Trinity School at Greenlawn Trivium School Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trivium&oldid=1290412671 " Categories : Cultural lists Philosophy of education History of education Alternative education Medieval European education Liberal arts education Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 17:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trivium 46 languages Add topic

