Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Compared to other feminisms Toggle Compared to other feminisms subsection 2.1 Common foundations 2.2 Differences 2.2.1 Access to feminist spaces 2.2.2 Lesbian feminism and transfeminism 2.2.3 Radical feminism and transfeminism 2.2.4 Allegations of transphobia in radical feminism 2.3 Radical transfeminism 3 Issues within transfeminism Toggle Issues within transfeminism subsection 3.1 Inclusion in mainstream feminism 3.2 Gender dysphoria 3.3 Social construction of gender 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Works cited 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Transfeminism 32 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Русский سرائیکی کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська اردو Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of feminism This article is about the social movement and is not to be confused with Transfeminine .

The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A symbol used to represent transfeminism Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series on Transgender topics Outline History Timeline Gender identities Androgyne Bissu, Calabai, Calalai Burrnesha Cisgender Gender bender Hijra Non-binary or genderqueer Gender fluidity Kathoey Koekchuch Third gender Bakla Faʻafafine Femminiello Khanith Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte X-gender Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transgender Youth Akava'ine Trans* Transsexual Health care practices Gender clinic Gender dysphoria in children causes Sex assignment Hormone therapy feminizing masculinizing DIY Puberty-suppressing hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery masculinizing feminizing Facial feminization surgery Facial masculinization surgery Hair removal Pregnancy Assisted reproductive technology Voice therapy WPATH Standards of Care Transgender health care misinformation Rights and legal status Gender self-identification Legal gender Non-binary gender Personal identity Rights movement Organizations Political office-holders United States Asylum Healthcare Military service South Korea United States Prisons Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Anti-gender movement Anti-transgender movement in the United Kingdom Discrimination Non-binary Parental rights movement Transgender men Transmisogyny Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminism Genocide Inequality Violence Murders Trans panic defense Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture Events and awareness Awareness Week Beauty pageants Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility Flag March more Culture Anatomical terminology Fictional characters Film Literature Transgender culture of New York City Media portrayals People non-binary Publications Religion Sports Television Theory and concepts Androphilia and gynephilia Blanchard's typology Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cisnormativity Cross-dressing Deadnaming Gender binary Gender detransitioning Gender expression Gender transitioning Gender identity Gender modality Gender nonconformity Gender-sexuality questioning Postgenderism Rapid-onset dysphoria Studies Transfeminism views Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country Rights Argentina 2012 law 2021 law Australia Austria Brazil Canada 2016 bill China Finland France [ fr ] Germany 1980 law 2018 law 2024 law India 2014 bill 2019 act Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland Pakistan 2017 bill 2018 act New Zealand Norway 2016 act Singapore South Africa 2003 act South Korea Spain 2022 law United Kingdom Anti-trans movement 2004 act 2022 bill United States Disenfranchisement Title IX Transphobia History Argentina [ es ] Australia Re Kevin Brazil China Finland Nazi Germany Singapore United Kingdom United States Legality elected officials Cafeteria riot Stonewall See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Androgyny Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Gender Gender diversity Gender studies Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of intersex people Queer heterosexuality LGBTQ Mental health of LGBTQ people Sex Sex–gender distinction Sexual orientation Social construction of gender Suicide among LGBTQ people LGBTQ portal Category v t e Transfeminism , or trans feminism , is a branch of feminism focused on transgender women and informed by transgender studies .

[ 1 ] Transfeminism focuses on the effects of transmisogyny and patriarchy on trans women. It is related to the broader field of queer theory . The term was popularized by Emi Koyama (involved in the ISNA ) in The Transfeminist Manifesto.

Transfeminism describes the concepts of gender nonconformity , notions of masculinity and femininity and the maintaining of gender binary on trans men and women. Transfeminists view gender conformity as a control mechanism of patriarchy , which is maintained via violence against transgender and gender-nonconforming individuals as a basis of patriarchy and transmisogyny.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Tactics of transfeminism emerged from groups such as The Transexual Menace (name from the Lavender Menace ) in the 1990s, [ 4 ] in response to exclusion of transgender people in Pride marches . The group organized in direct action , focusing on violence against transgender people, such as the murder and rape of Brandon Teena , a trans man. The Transsexual Menace organized protests and sit ins against the medical and mental pathologization of trans people.

[ 5 ] Trans people were generally excluded from first wave feminism, as were lesbians and all other people considered " queer ." Second wave feminism saw greater level of acceptance amongst some feminists, however "transsexuality" was heavily excluded, and described as an "illness," [ 6 ] even amongst feminists who supported gay liberation .

Third and fourth wave feminism have generally been accepting of transgender people, and see trans liberation as an overall part of women's liberation.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 2006, the first book on transfeminism, Trans/Forming Feminisms: Transfeminist Voices Speak Out edited by Krista Scott-Dixon, was published by Sumach Press. Transfeminism has also been defined more generally as "an approach to feminism that is informed by trans politics." [ 9 ] History [ edit ] Early voices in the movement include Kate Bornstein , author of 1994 Gender Outlaw: On Men, Women, and the Rest of Us , [ 10 ] and Sandy Stone , author of the 1987 essay " The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto ", which included a direct response to Janice Raymond 's writings on transsexuality.

[ 11 ] At the beginning of the 21st century, Emi Koyama published the Transfeminist Manifesto and later a website.

[ 12 ] Krista Scott-Dixon [ 9 ] and Julia Serano [ 13 ] [ 14 ] have published transfeminist works, and in 2016, Susan Stryker and Talia M. Bettcher produced a special issue of Transgender Studies Quarterly dedicated to transfeminism.

[ 15 ] Patrick Califia used the word in print in 1997, and this remains the first known use in print outside of a periodical.

[ 16 ] It is possible or even likely that the term was independently coined repeatedly before the year 2000 (or even before Courvant's first claimed use in 1992). The term gained traction only after 1999. Jessica Xavier, an acquaintance of Courvant, may have independently coined the term when she used it to introduce her articles, "Passing As Stigma Management" and "Passing as Privilege" in late 1999.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In the past few decades, the idea that all women share a common experience has come under scrutiny by women of color , lesbians , and working class women, among others. Many transgender people are also questioning what gender means, and are challenging gender as a biological fact. Transfeminists insist that their unique experiences be recognized as part of the feminist sphere.

[ 19 ] Transfeminism incorporates all major themes of third wave feminism , including diversity , body image , self-definition, and women's agency . It also includes critical analysis of second wave feminism from the perspective of the third wave.

[ 20 ] It critiques mainstream notions of masculinity and argues that women deserve equal rights and shares the unifying principle with other feminisms that gender is a patriarchal social construct used to oppress women. The "trans" in transgender has been used to imply transgressiveness.

[ 21 ] Nicholas Birns categorizes transfeminism as "a feminism that defines the term 'trans-' in a maximally heterogeneous way." [ 22 ] The road to legitimacy for transfeminism as a concept has been different and more vexed than for other feminisms. Marginalized women of trans background and affect have had to prove that their needs are different and that mainstream feminism does not necessarily speak for them.

[ 23 ] Contrarily, trans women must show their womanhood is equally valid as that of other women, and that feminism can speak for them without ceasing to be feminism.

Radical feminist Janice Raymond's resistance to considering trans women as women and as participants in feminism is representative of this obstacle. Her career began with The Transsexual Empire (a book-length analysis of transsexual women) and she has often returned to this theme.

[ 24 ] In 2006, the first book on transfeminism, Trans/Forming Feminisms: Transfeminist Voices Speak Out edited by Krista Scott-Dixon, was published by Sumach Press.

[ 9 ] At the 2007 Transgender Leadership Summit, Alexis Marie Rivera , spoke about her personal experiences with transfeminism as a young Latina trans woman. She discussed her journey from early transition, where she believed she had to take on the role of housewife, to where she was in the present moment. She asserted that, for her, transfeminism is about taking on feminine gender roles because she wants to, not because she has to.

[ 25 ] [ independent source needed ] Compared to other feminisms [ edit ] Common foundations [ edit ] Simone de Beauvoir once said that biology does not and must not equal destiny.

[ 26 ] Feminists have traditionally explored the boundaries of what it means to be a woman.

[ 27 ] Transfeminists argue that trans people and cisgender feminists confront society's conventional views of sex and gender in similar ways.

Transgender liberation theory offers feminism a new vantage point from which to view gender as a social construct, even offering a new meaning of gender.

[ 19 ] Transfeminist critics of mainstream feminism say that as an institutionalized movement, feminism has lost sight of the basic idea that biology is not destiny. In fact, they argue, many feminists seem perfectly comfortable equating sex and gender and insisting on a given destiny for trans persons based on nothing more than biology.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Transfeminism aims to resist and challenge the fixedness of gender that, as many of its supporters believe, traditional approaches to women's studies depend upon.

[ 30 ] Transgender people are frequently targets of anti-trans violence.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] While cis women also routinely face violence, transfeminists recognize anti-trans violence as a form of gender policing.

[ 33 ] Differences [ edit ] Transfeminism stands in stark contrast to mainstream second-wave feminism. Transfeminists often criticize the ideas of a universal sisterhood, aligning more with intersectionality and with the mainstream third wave's appreciation for the diversity of women's experience.

[ 34 ] According to Julia Serano femininity in transgender women is noticed and punished much more harshly than the same behaviors in cisgender women.

[ 35 ] This double standard reveals that the behavior itself is not as problematic to many critics as the existence of trans people.

[ 28 ] [ 36 ] Julia Serano refers to the breed of misogyny experienced by trans women as ' transmisogyny '.

[ 13 ] Access to feminist spaces [ edit ] Though little acknowledged, trans people have been part of feminist movements.

[ 37 ] There have been a number of documented occasions when the trans people portrayed as bad actors were in fact the victims of overreactions by others.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Lesbian feminism and transfeminism [ edit ] Further information: Lesbian feminism § Views on transgender people In Living a Feminist Life (2017), Sara Ahmed imagines lesbian feminism as a fundamental and necessary alliance with trans feminism. Ahmed argues an anti-trans stance is an anti-feminist stance and one that works against the feminist project of creating worlds to support those for whom gender fatalism (i.e. boys will be boys, girls will be girls) is deleterious.

[ 40 ] Radical feminism and transfeminism [ edit ] Some radical feminists have expressed anti-trans viewpoints. For example, in Gender Hurts (2014), Sheila Jeffreys argued that trans feminism amounted to men exercising their authority in defining what women are.

[ 41 ] Some radical feminists are supportive of trans rights. The radical feminist writer and activist Andrea Dworkin , in her book Woman Hating , argued against the persecution and hatred of transgender people and demanded that sex reassignment surgery be provided freely to transgender people by the community. Dworkin argued that "every transsexual has the right to survival on his/her own terms. That means every transsexual is entitled to a sex-change operation, and it should be provided by the community as one of its functions." [ 42 ] Allegations of transphobia in radical feminism [ edit ] Further information: Trans-exclusionary radical feminism Radical feminist Janice Raymond 's 1979 book, The Transsexual Empire , was and still is controversial due to its unequivocal condemnation of transgender surgeries.

[ citation needed ] Raymond says, "All transsexuals rape women's bodies by reducing the real female form to an artifact, appropriating this body for themselves .... Transsexuals merely cut off the most obvious means of invading women, so that they seem non-invasive." [ 43 ] In the early 1990s Michigan Womyn's Music Festival ejected a transgender woman, Nancy Burkholder, [ 44 ] After that, the festival maintained that it is intended for " womyn-born-womyn " only.

[ 45 ] The activist group Camp Trans formed to protest the transphobic "womyn-born-womyn" policy and to advocate for greater acceptance of trans people within the feminist community. A number of prominent trans activists and transfeminists were involved in Camp Trans including Riki Wilchins , Jessica Xavier, and Leslie Feinberg .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] The festival considered allowing post-operative trans women to attend; however, this was criticized as classist , as many trans women cannot afford genital surgery.

[ 49 ] Since this incident, the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival has updated their community statements page. This page now includes a list of links to letters and statements such as their August 2014 response to Equality Michigan's Call For Boycott and a list of demands in response to the Equality Michigan call to boycott.

[ 50 ] The initial response to the boycott states that the MWMF believes that "support for womyn-born-female space is not at odds with standing with and for the transgender community".

[ 51 ] Kimberly Nixon is a trans woman who volunteered for training as a rape crisis counselor at Vancouver Rape Relief in Vancouver, British Columbia, in 1995. When Nixon's transgender status was determined, she was expelled. The staff decided that Nixon's status made it impossible for her to understand the experiences of their clients, and also required their clients to be genetically female. Nixon disagreed, disclosing her own history of partner abuse and sued for discrimination. Nixon's attorneys argued that there was no basis for the dismissal, citing Diana Courvant's experiences as the first publicly transgender woman to work in a women-only domestic violence shelter. In 2007 the Canadian Supreme Court refused to hear Nixon's appeal, ending the case.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Transgender women such as Sandy Stone challenged the mainstream second-wave feminist conception of "biological woman". Stone worked as a sound engineer for Olivia Records from about 1974 to 1978, resigning as the controversy over a trans woman working for a lesbian-identified enterprise increased.

[ 55 ] The debate continued in Raymond's book, [ 24 ] which devoted a chapter to criticism of "the transsexually constructed lesbian-feminist." Groups like Lesbian Organization of Toronto instituted "womyn-born womyn only" policies. A formal request to join the L.O.O.T. was made by a male-to-female transgender lesbian in 1978. In response, the organization voted to exclude trans women . During informal discussion, members of L.O.O.T expressed their outrage that in their view a "sex-change he-creature...dared to identify himself as a woman and a lesbian." In their public response, L.O.O.T. wrote: A woman's voice was almost never heard as a woman's voice—it was always filtered through men's voices. So here a guy comes along saying, "I'm going to be a girl now and speak for girls." And we thought, "No you're not." A person cannot just joined the oppressed by fiat.

[ 56 ] Radical transfeminism [ edit ] Some transgender women have been participants in lesbian feminism and radical feminism . A prominent example is Sandy Stone , a trans lesbian feminist who worked as a sound technician for the lesbian-feminist Olivia Records . In June and July 1977, when 22 feminists protested Stone's participation, Olivia Records defended her employment by saying that Stone was a "woman we can related to with comfort and trust" and that she was "perhaps even the Goddess-sent engineering wizard we had so long sought." [ 57 ] Issues within transfeminism [ edit ] Inclusion in mainstream feminism [ edit ] According to Graham Mayeda, women who identify as right-wing feel that issues of equality and female importance becomes less significant when the biology of trans people, specifically, male-to-female trans people, is mentioned.

[ 58 ] He noted that these feminists feel that the biological nature of trans-females confuse "women only" boundaries and could contradict or disrupt feminist goals of establishing a voice in a patriarchal world.

[ 58 ] Groups such as the Lesbian Avengers accept trans women, while others reject them. The Violence Against Women Act now "explicitly protects transgender and lesbian, gay, and bisexual survivors", such that domestic violence centers, rape crisis centers, support groups, and other VAWA-funded services cannot turn away any person due to their sex, gender identity or expression, or sexual orientation.

[ 59 ] Gender dysphoria [ edit ] Gender dysphoria describes the condition of people who experience significant dysphoria with the sex assignment that they were given at birth, or the gender roles associated with that sex [ citation needed ] . The term "gender identity disorder" (GID) is also frequently used especially in the formal diagnosis used amongst psychologists and physicians .

[ 60 ] Gender identity disorder was classified as a medical disorder by the ICD-10 CM [ 61 ] and DSM-4.

[ 62 ] The DSM-5 uses the less pathologizing term gender dysphoria , and the ICD-11 uses the term gender incongruence . Many transgender individuals, transfeminists and medical researchers support the declassification of GID because they say the diagnosis pathologizes gender variance , reinforces the binary model of gender , [ 63 ] and can result in stigmatization of transgender individuals.

[ 62 ] Many transfeminists and traditional feminists also propose that this diagnosis be discarded because of its potentially abusive use by people with power, [ 64 ] [ better source needed ] and may argue that gender variation is the right of all persons.

[ 20 ] When arguing for the previous diagnostic category, pro-GID transfeminists typically concede past misuse of the diagnosis while arguing for greater professional accountability.

[ 65 ] In many situations or legal jurisdictions, transgender people have insurance coverage for surgery only as a consequence of the diagnosis. Removal would therefore increase patient costs. In other situations, anti-discrimination laws which protect legally disabled people apply to transgender people only so long as a manifest diagnosis exists. In other cases, transgender people are protected by sex discrimination rules or as a separate category.

[ 66 ] This economic issue can split advocates along class lines.

[ 39 ] At the 2006 Trans Identity Conference at the University of Vermont , Courvant presented an analysis of this controversy. She noted that "eliminationists" must decide whether their efforts to destigmatize trans people conflict with efforts to destigmatize mental illness and whether removing the GID category would actually help with the former, while disrupting the current, albeit limited, insurance regime. Conversely, "preservationists" must address the problem of faulty diagnoses and improper "treatment".

[ 67 ] She proposed retaining the category and focusing efforts on legitimating mental illness and improving acceptance of trans people, leaving aside the diagnosis question.

[ citation needed ] Social construction of gender [ edit ] Citing their common experience, many transfeminists [ like whom?

] directly challenge the idea that femininity is an entirely social construction. Instead, they view gender as a multifaceted set of diverse intrinsic and social qualities. For example, there are both trans and cis persons who express themselves in ways that differ from society's expectations of feminine and masculine.

[ 34 ] Talia M. Bettcher states in her 2014 essay "Trapped in the Wrong Theory" that "while the actual appeal to native gender must be rejected from a transfeminist perspective, the socially constituted denial of realness must be taken with dead seriousness." [ 68 ] Decolonial trans feminists identify the gender binary as an aspect of Western epistemology and tool of colonial power. Integrating knowledge and experiences from muxe , hijra , faʻafafine , two-spirit , and other indigenous third gender systems into trans feminist thought counters both individualist and universalizing conceptualization of gender.

[ 69 ] See also [ edit ] Feminism portal Feminism movements and ideologies Feminist views on transgender topics Fourth-wave feminism Heteropatriarchy Heterosexism Transmisogyny List of transgender-related topics Queer theory References [ edit ] This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ Erickson-Schroth, Laura, ed. (2014).

Trans bodies, trans selves : a resource for the transgender community . [S.l.]: Oxford University Press. p.

620 .

ISBN 9780199325351 .

^ Draper, Suzanne C.; Chapple, Reshawna (April 25, 2023).

"Resistance as a Foundational Commons: Intersectionality, Transfeminism, and the Future of Critical Feminisms" .

Affilia .

38 (4): 585– 596.

doi : 10.1177/08861099231165788 .

S2CID 258340922 – via CrossRef.

^ Hereth, Blake; Timpe, Kevin (September 4, 2019).

The Lost Sheep in Philosophy of Religion: New Perspectives on Disability, Gender, Race, and Animals . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-429-66355-0 – via Google Books.

^ a b Enke, Finn (February 1, 2018).

"Collective Memory and the Transfeminist 1970s: Toward a Less Plausible History" .

Transgender Studies Quarterly .

5 (1): 9– 29.

doi : 10.1215/23289252-4291502 .

^ Scott, Bonnie Kime; Cayleff, Susan E.; Donadey, Anne; Lara, Irene (May 24, 2016).

Women in Culture: An Intersectional Anthology for Gender and Women's Studies . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-119-12071-1 – via Google Books.

^ Raha, Nat (2017).

"Transfeminine Brokenness, Radical Transfeminism" .

South Atlantic Quarterly .

116 (3): 632– 646.

doi : 10.1215/00382876-3961754 .

^ Ruth Pearce (2012).

"Inadvertent Praxis: What Can "Genderfork" Tell Us about Trans Feminism?" (PDF) .

ISSN 1939-330X .

^ Mann, Susan Archer; Huffman, Douglas J. (January 22, 2005).

"The Decentering of Second Wave Feminism and the Rise of the Third Wave" .

Science & Society .

69 (1): 56– 91.

doi : 10.1521/siso.69.1.56.56799 – via CrossRef.

^ a b c Scott-Dixon, Krista, ed. (2006).

Trans/forming feminisms : trans/feminist voices speak out . Toronto: Sumach Press.

ISBN 9781894549615 . Archived from the original on March 26, 2009.

^ Bornstein, Kate (1994). "Gender Outlaw: On Men, Women, and the Rest of Us." ISBN 0-679-75701-5 ^ Stone, Sandy (1991).

The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto Archived September 28, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . In Body Guards: The Cultural Politics of Gender Ambiguity .

^ Bettcher, Talia Mae (November 2017).

"Trans Feminism: Recent Philosophical Developments" (PDF) .

Philosophy Compass .

12 (11).

doi : 10.1111/phc3.12438 .

ISSN 1747-9991 . Archived from the original on January 24, 2022.

^ a b Serano, Julia (2007).

Whipping Girl, A Transsexual Woman on Sexism and the Scapegoating of Femininity . Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-1580051545 .

^ Serano, Julia (2013).

Excluded: Making Queer and Feminist Movements More Inclusive . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-1580055048 .

^ Stryker, Susan; Bettcher, Talia M. (May 2016).

"Introduction" .

TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly .

3 ( 1– 2): 5– 14.

doi : 10.1215/23289252-3334127 .

ISSN 2328-9252 .

^ Califia, Patrick (July 1997).

Sex Changes: The Politics of Transgenderism . Cleis Pr; First Printing Highlighting edition.

ISBN 978-1573440721 .

^ Xavier, Jessica, Passing as Stigma Management , archived from the original on July 5, 2008 ^ Xavier, Jessica, Passing as Privilege , archived from the original on July 5, 2008 ^ a b Gluckman, R.; Trudeau, M. (2002).

"Trans-itioning feminism: the politics of transgender in the reproductive rights movement" (PDF) . Amherst, MA. Hampshire College. pp.

6– 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 18, 2017.

^ a b Hill, R. J. (2001), Menacing Feminism, Educating Sisters (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on March 8, 2008 ^ See the subtitle of the trans community periodical "Chrysalis," which is "The Journal of Transgressive Gender Identities," transfeminism should not be seen as an anti-feminist movement ^ Birns, Nicholas, "The Earth's Revenge: Nature, Transfeminism and Diaspora in Larissa Lai's Salt Fish Girl " , in Lee, A. Robert (ed.), China Fictions, English Language: Literary Essays in Diaspora, Memory, Story , Rodopi, 2008, p. 161.

^ Johnson Reagon, B. (1981), Coalition Politics: Turning the Century ^ a b Raymond, J. (1994), The Transsexual Empire (2nd ed.), Teachers College Press ; The second edition includes a new forward that describes her transgender-related work after the publication of her thesis project as the first edition in the late 70s.

^ "Transgender Leadership Summit, Sunday, March 25, 2007" . August 9, 2011 – via www.youtube.com.

^ Simone de Beauvoir , The Second Sex ^ Brewer, Mary (September 2002).

Exclusions in Feminist Thought: Challenging the Boundaries of Womanhood . Sussex, England: Sussex Academic Press. p. 71.

ISBN 978-1-902210-63-6 . Retrieved January 19, 2015 .

^ a b Courvant, Diana "Thinking of Privilege" In Anzaldua & Keating 2002 , pp. 458–463 ^ Murphy, Emma; Lantz, Sarah (October 28, 1998).

"Transgender debate: against exclusion" .

Press for Change . Archived from the original on May 11, 2008 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ Salamon, Gayle (2008). "Women's Studies on the Edge", p. 117. Duke University Press, Durham.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4274-8 JSTOR j.ctv11sn3bm .

^ "Homepage" .

Gender.com . Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ "Transgender Death Statistics 1970 to 8/15/02" . Archived from the original on October 11, 2008 . Retrieved March 2, 2017 .

^ Gagné, Patricia; Tewksbury, Richard (February 1998). "Conformity Pressures and Gender Resistance among Transgendered Individuals".

Social Problems .

45 (1). Los Angeles, California: University of California Press: 81– 101.

doi : 10.1525/sp.1998.45.1.03x0158b .

JSTOR 3097144 .

^ a b Serano, Julia (April 18, 2012).

"Trans Feminism: There's No Conundrum About It" .

Ms.

Retrieved January 20, 2015 .

^ Serano, Julia (2007).

"Trans-misogyny primer" (PDF) . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ Valerio, Max Wolf (2002). "Now That You're a White Man".

In Anzaldua & Keating 2002 , pp. 239–254 ^ Deke Law, "Evolution" in This is What Lesbian Looks Like, Kris Kleindienst, Firebrand Books, 1999.

ISBN 978-1563411168 ^ See Courvant at Courvant, Diana.

"Why Serve Trans or Intersex Survivors" . Archived from the original on May 11, 2008 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ a b See Koyama at http://www.confluere.com/store/pdf-zn/mich-handbook.pdf Archived October 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Ahmed, Sara (2017).

Living a Feminist Life (1st ed.). North Carolina, U.S.: Duke University Press Books .

ISBN 978-0822363194 .

^ Jeffreys, Sheila (2014).

Gender Hurts: A Feminist Analysis of the Politics of Transgenderism (1st ed.). Abingdon-on-Thames, UK: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415539401 .

^ Dworkin, Andrea (1974).

Woman Hating . New York City: E. P. Dutton . p.

186 .

ISBN 0-525-47423-4 .

^ Raymond, J. (1994), The Transsexual Empire (2nd ed.), Teachers College Press, p. 104 ^ Van Gelder, Lindsy; and Pamela Robin Brandt. "The Girls Next Door: Into the Heart of Lesbian America", p. 73. Simon and Schuster, ISBN 978-0-684-83957-8 ^ "Michigan Womyn's Music Festival:Performances" . Archived from the original on September 6, 2014.

^ Wilchins, Riki (August 14, 2013).

"Op-ed: Where 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' is Alive and Well" .

The Advocate . Retrieved January 20, 2014 .

^ Denny, Dallas (October 13, 2013).

"Congratulations, Camp Trans (1993)" .

Dallasdenny.com . Retrieved January 20, 2014 .

^ Pratt, Minnie Bruce.

"Leslie Feinberg" .

Mbpratt.com . Archived from the original on February 21, 2015 . Retrieved January 20, 2015 .

^ Sreedhar, Susanne; Hand, Michael (2006). "The Ethics of Exclusion: Gender and Politics at the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival". In Scott-Dixon, Krista (ed.).

Trans/Forming Feminisms: Trans/Feminist Voices Speak Out . Toronto: Sumach Press. pp.

164– 65.

ISBN 1-894-54961-9 .

OCLC 70839321 .

^ "Community Statements | Michfest" .

michfest.com . Retrieved October 9, 2018 .

^ "Michfest Response to Equality Michigan's Call For Boycott – August 1, 2014 | Michfest" .

michfest.com . Retrieved October 9, 2018 .

^ "Background on Nixon v Vancouver Rape Relief" .

Egale Canada . April 4, 2005. Archived from the original on February 7, 2012 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ "Excerpt from Proceedings" (PDF) . January 8, 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 2, 2008 . Retrieved July 3, 2021 .

^ Perelle, Robin (February 14, 2007). Rape Relief wins: Supreme Court refuses to hear trans woman's appeal.

Xtra ^ Sayer, Susan (October 1, 1995).

"From Lesbian Nation to Queer Nation" . Hecate . Retrieved April 7, 2012 .

^ Ross, Becki (1995).

The House that Jill Built: A Lesbian Nation in Formation.

University of Toronto Press, ISBN 978-0-8020-7479-9 ^ Stryker, Susan (2006).

The Transgender Studies Reader . United Kingdom: Routledge . p. 142.

ISBN 0-415-94708-1 . Retrieved October 3, 2012 .

^ a b Mayeda, G (2005). "Re-imagining Feminist Theory: Transgender Identity, Feminism, and the Law".

Canadian Journal of Women & the Law .

17 (2): 423– 472.

SSRN 1427319 .

^ "Know Your Rights! Trans Survivors of Domestic and Sexual Violence" (PDF) .

Forge Forward . 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 29, 2017 . Retrieved October 8, 2018 .

^ Heylens, G; De Cuypere, G; Zucker, K ; Schelfaut, C; Elaut, E; Vanden Bossche, H; De Baere, E; T'Sjoen, G (2012). "Gender Identity Disorder in Twins: A Review of the Case Report Literature".

The Journal of Sexual Medicine .

8 (3): 751– 757.

doi : 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2011.02567.x .

PMID 22146048 .

^ "Gender identity disorder in adolescence and adulthood" . ICD10Data.com . Retrieved July 3, 2011 .

^ a b Fraser, L; Karasic, D; Meyer, W; Wylie, K (2010). "Recommendations for Revision of the DSM Diagnosis of Gender Identity Disorder in Adults".

International Journal of Transgenderism .

12 (2): 80– 85.

doi : 10.1080/15532739.2010.509202 .

S2CID 144409977 .

^ Newman, L (July 1, 2002). "Sex, Gender and Culture: Issues in the Definition, Assessment and Treatment of Gender Identity Disorder".

Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry .

7 (3): 352– 359.

doi : 10.1177/1359104502007003004 .

S2CID 145666729 .

^ Crabtree (2002) ^ "Destigmatization Versus Coverage and Access: The Medical Model of Transsexuality" .

wordpress.com . April 5, 2008.

^ "Transgender Law and Policy Institute: State Cases" . August 26, 2002. Archived from the original on September 16, 2008.

^ Scholinski, Daphne (October 1998).

The Last Time I Wore A Dress . Riverhead Books.

ISBN 9781573226967 .

^ Bettcher, Talia Mae (2014).

"Trapped in the Wrong Theory: Rethinking Trans Oppression and Resistance" .

Signs .

39 (2): 383– 406.

doi : 10.1086/673088 .

ISSN 0097-9740 .

JSTOR 10.1086/673088 .

S2CID 146756702 .

^ Salas-SantaCruz, Omi (January 11, 2025).

"Decolonial Trans* Feminism" .

kohljournal.press . Retrieved April 1, 2025 .

Works cited [ edit ] Anzaldua, Gloria; Keating, AnaLouise (2002).

This Bridge We Call Home: Radical Visions for Transformation . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-93682-8 .

Califia, Patrick (1997).

Sex Changes: The Politics of Transgenderism . San Francisco: Cleis Press.

ISBN 978-1573440721 .

Courvant, Diana (May 25, 2003).

"Thoughts on 'Now That You're a White Man' " .

confluere.com . Archived from the original on August 27, 2008.

Crabtree, Sadie (2002). "Finding common ground between movements for reproductive freedom and transgender/transsexual liberation".

The Fight for Reproductive Freedom: A Newsletter for Student and Community Activists . Vol. 16, no. 3. Hampshire College. Civil Liberties and Public Policy Program. pp.

9– 11.

[ better source needed ] Feinberg, Leslie (1996).

Transgender Warriors: Making History from Joan of Arc to Marsha P. Johnson and Beyond . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0807079416 .

Further reading [ edit ] Salas-SantaCruz, Omi (2024). "What Is Decolonial Trans* Feminism and What Can It Do for Queer/Trans BIPOC Education Research?" Journal of Queer and Trans Studies in Education 1 :1.

doi : 10.60808/f6by-hh48 .

ISSN 2837-9659 .

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Transgender and gender non-conforming topics Gender identities Androgyne Bissu, Calabai, Calalai Burrnesha Cisgender Gender bender Hijra Non-binary or genderqueer Gender fluidity Kathoey Koekchuch Third gender Bakla Faʻafafine Femminiello Khanith Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte X-gender Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transgender Youth Akava'ine Trans* Transsexual Health care and medicine Gender dysphoria causes in children Hormone therapy feminizing masculinizing DIY Legal status Misinformation Surgery feminizing masculinizing Pregnancy Puberty blocker Rights Gender self-identification Legal gender Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status Marriage Rights movement Rights organizations Toilets bathroom bills unisex Yogyakarta Principles Discrimination Against non-binary people Against transgender men Anti-gender movement Anti-trans movement in the UK Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminism Asylum seekers Cisgenderism Inequality Prison Transmisogyny Violence genocide killings trans panic Society and culture Anatomical terminology Blåhaj Christianity LGBTQ-related films Events Awareness Week Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility March Non-binary People's Day LGBTQ Flags History Media portrayals fictional characters film People Pornography Publications Sexuality Sports ice hockey chess Youth Zizians more Theory and concepts Androphilia and gynephilia Blanchard's typology Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cisnormativity Cross-dressing Deadnaming Gender binary Gender detransitioning Gender expression Gender transitioning Gender identity Gender modality Gender nonconformity Gender-sexuality questioning Postgenderism Rapid-onset dysphoria Studies Transfeminism views Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country History Argentina [ es ] Australia Brazil Cambodia Chile [ es ] China Finland India Iran Russia Singapore United Kingdom United States legal People China ancient Egypt France [ fr ] Nazi Germany South Korea Singapore Rights Argentina 2012 law 2021 law Australia Re Kevin Bolivia 2016 law [ es ] Brazil Canada 2016 bill C-16 Chile 2018 law [ es ] Germany India 2014 Bill 2019 Act Kerala Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland New Zealand Pakistan 2017 bill 2018 Act South Africa 2003 Act South Korea Spain 2022 law United Kingdom 2004 act United States legal history title IX Uruguay 2018 law [ es ] Political office-holders United States See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Androgyny Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Gender Gender diversity Gender studies Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of intersex people Queer heterosexuality LGBTQ Mental health of LGBTQ people Sex Sex–gender distinction Sexual orientation Social construction of gender Suicide among LGBTQ people Outline Timeline Category v t e LGBTQ people ( topic outline ) Academic fields Discourse LGBTQ topics in education Gender studies Lesbian feminism Linguistics Literature Gay Lesbian Transgender Psychology Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism Community Culture Anthems Awards Literary Bars Gay Lesbian Bisexual community Businesses Coming out Community centers Cross-dressing Drag king Drag queen Events Awareness periods Film festivals Gay village Gay-friendly Icons Literature Music Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals Portrayal Organizations People Pets Pride Pride Month Pride parade Queerplatonic relationships Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang Slogans Sports Pride Nights Takatāpui Theatre Companies Tourism Symbols Black triangle Gaysper Labrys Lambda Pink triangle Rainbow plaque Pride flags Aromantic Asexual Bear Bisexual Gay flag of South Africa Gay men Intersex Leather Lesbian Non-binary Pansexual Rainbow Rainbow crossing Transgender Gender identities Sexual identities Sexual diversities Gender identity Androgyny Boi Cisgender Gender bender Gender nonconformity Khanith Man Non-binary / genderqueer Queer heterosexuality Theyby Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Transsexual Trans woman Mak nyah Woman Womxn Womyn Xenogender Third sex / Third gender Bakla Balkan sworn virgins Bissu Faʻafafine Fakaleitī Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Köçek Māhū Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Sexual identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Homosexual Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Aegosexuality Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Fictosexuality Gay Gay men Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Sexual minority Tom / Dee Related Acronyms LGBTQ Detransition Effeminacy Erotic target location error Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Female Gender and sexual diversity Gender assignment Gender binary Gender essentialism Gender expression Gender modality Gender neutrality Gender roles Gender transition Health Organizations Hermaphrodite Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Intersex Androgynos Tumtum Legal status of transgender people Male Men who have sex with men / Sexual practices between men Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Straight ally Tomboy Transgender health care Misinformation Women who have sex with women / Sexual practices between women History LGBTQ history History of homosexuality History of gay men in the United States History of lesbianism Transgender history Timeline of transgender history Timeline of asexual history LGBTQ history timeline Migration Social movements Students History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBTQ history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece pre-Columbian Peru Ancient Rome Medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Molly house Section 377 First homosexual movement 20th century Dance of the Forty-One Institut für Sexualwissenschaft Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Cadet scandal Florida Legislative Investigation Committee Sea queens Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Gay Liberation Front Handkerchief code Festival of Light action White Night riots Front homosexuel d'action révolutionnaire Florida orange juice boycott Operation Soap Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS ACT UP Section 28 Tasty nightclub raid Bar Abanicos police raid 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage Lawrence v. Texas Russian anti-LGBTQ law Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 Rainbow wave Rainbow Night 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Rights and legal issues LGBTQ rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBTQ rights articles by region LGBTQ rights topics Capital punishment for homosexuality Censorship of LGBTQ issues Civil unions and partnerships Criminalization of homosexuality decriminalization Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Military service Same-sex parenting Adoption Assisted reproduction Same-sex marriage Timeline Socialism Legal status of transgender people Transgender rights movement United Nations / Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBTQ rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBTQ rights groups LGBTQ rights activists Rainbow capitalism Separatism Gay Lesbian Sexual orientation — Medicine, science and sexology Autism and LGBTQ identities Biology Birth order Demographics Disability and LGBTQ identities Environment Homosexuality and psychology Homosexuality in the DSM Kinsey scale Klein Grid Life expectancy Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Conversion therapy Split attraction model Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine Societal attitudes Prejudice Violence Societal attitudes Amatonormativity Heteronormativity Heteropatriarchy Homonationalism Pinkwashing Gay panic defense Opposition to LGBTQ rights Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric LGBTQ stereotypes Suicide among LGBTQ people list Monuments and memorials Queerbaiting Homosexuality and religion Transgender people and religion Prejudice and discrimination Arophobia Acephobia Anti-gender movement AIDS stigma Biphobia Gayphobia Grooming conspiracy theory Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal homophobia Discrimination against lesbians Discrimination against non-binary people Racism Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Transmisogyny Transphobia Violence against LGBTQ people Corrective rape Capital punishment for homosexuality Gay bashing Violence against LGBTQ people History in the UK in the US Transgender people Unlawful killings Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Stop Murder Music LGBTQ portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transfeminism&oldid=1304816302 " Categories : Transfeminism Feminism and history Feminism and transgender topics Feminist theory Intersectional feminism LGBTQ feminism Third-wave feminism Transgender studies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2018 United States-centric Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Use mdy dates from March 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Articles lacking reliable references from March 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2023 Articles with incomplete citations from March 2023 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 09:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transfeminism 32 languages Add topic

