Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Exploration methods 2 Elements of a petroleum prospect 3 Exploration risk 4 Terms used in petroleum evaluation 5 Licensing 6 Reserves and resources Toggle Reserves and resources subsection 6.1 Oil and gas reserves 6.2 Reserve booking 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Hydrocarbon exploration 16 languages Afrikaans العربية Dansk Eesti Español فارسی हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Română سرائیکی Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Oil exploration ) Attempts to locate oil and gas Part of a series of Geophysics Computational Exploration History Outline Electricity Ionosphere Polar wind Thunderstorms Lightning Fluid dynamics Atmospheric science Magnetohydrodynamics Oceanography Turbulence Geodynamics Climate Earth's mantle Exoplanetology Geochemistry Glaciology Planetary science Plate tectonics Tectonics Volcanism Gravity Geodesy Geoid Physical geodesy Magnetism Earth's magnetic field Geomagnetic reversal Magnetosphere Paleomagnetism Solar wind Waves Seismology Spectroscopy Vibration Geophysicists Aki Alfven Anderson Benioff Bowie Dziewonski Forbes Eotvos Gilbert Gutenberg Heiskanen Hotine von Humboldt Jeffreys Kanamori Love Matthews McKenzie Mercalli Molodenskii Munk Press Richter Turcotte Van Allen Vanicek Vening Meinesz Wegener Wilson v t e Hydrocarbon exploration (or oil and gas exploration ) is the search by petroleum geologists and geophysicists for hydrocarbon deposits, particularly petroleum and natural gas , in the Earth's crust using petroleum geology .

Exploration methods [ edit ] Visible surface features such as oil seeps , natural gas seeps , pockmarks (underwater craters caused by escaping gas) provide basic evidence of hydrocarbon generation (be it shallow or deep in the Earth). However, most exploration depends on highly sophisticated technology to detect and determine the extent of these deposits using exploration geophysics . Areas thought to contain hydrocarbons are initially subjected to a gravity survey , magnetic survey , passive seismic or regional seismic reflection surveys to detect large-scale features of the sub-surface geology. Features of interest (known as leads ) are subjected to more detailed seismic surveys which work on the principle of the time it takes for reflected sound waves to travel through matter (rock) of varying densities and using the process of depth conversion to create a profile of the substructure. Finally, when a prospect has been identified and evaluated and passes the oil company's selection criteria, an exploration well is drilled in an attempt to conclusively determine the presence or absence of oil or gas. In Offshore operations the risk can be reduced by using electromagnetic survey methods (EM) [ 1 ] Oil exploration is an expensive, high-risk operation. Offshore and remote area exploration is generally only undertaken by very large corporations or national governments. Typical shallow shelf oil wells (e.g.

North Sea ) cost US$10 – 30 million, while deep water wells can cost up to US$100 million plus. Hundreds of smaller companies search for onshore hydrocarbon deposits worldwide, with some wells costing as little as US$100,000.

Elements of a petroleum prospect [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A petroleum prospect is a potential trap which geologists believe may contain hydrocarbons. A significant amount of geological, structural and seismic investigation and analysis must first be completed to define the potential hydrocarbon drill location from a lead to a prospect. Four geological factors have to be present for a prospect to work and if any of them fail neither oil nor gas will be present.

Source rock When an organic-rich rock such as oil shale or coal is subjected to high pressure and temperature over an extended period of time, hydrocarbons is formed.

Migration Migration is the movement of petroleum from the source rock to the reservoir. The hydrocarbons are expelled from source rock by three density-related mechanisms: the newly matured hydrocarbons are less dense than their precursors, which causes over-pressure; the hydrocarbons are lighter, and so migrate upwards due to buoyancy, and the fluids expand as further burial causes increased heating. Most hydrocarbons migrate to the surface as oil seeps , but some will get trapped.

Reservoir The hydrocarbons are contained in a reservoir rock. This is commonly a porous sandstone or limestone . The oil collects in the pores within the rock although open fractures within non-porous rocks (e.g. fractured granite ) may also store hydrocarbons. The reservoir must also be permeable so that the hydrocarbons will flow to surface during production.

Trap The hydrocarbons are buoyant and have to be trapped within a structural (e.g.

Anticline , fault block ) or stratigraphic trap . The hydrocarbon trap has to be covered by an impermeable rock known as a seal or cap-rock in order to prevent hydrocarbons escaping to the surface.

Exploration risk [ edit ] Onshore drilling rig Seismic reflection survey being conducted in Saudi Arabia , circa 1960. A controlled explosion generates seismic waves that are detected by geophones .

Mud log in process, a common way to study the rock types when drilling oil wells.

Oil exploration expenditures are greatest when crude oil prices are high Hydrocarbon exploration is a high risk investment and risk assessment is paramount for successful project portfolio management . Exploration risk is a difficult concept and is usually defined by assigning confidence to the presence of the imperative geological factors, as discussed above. This confidence is based on data and/or models and is usually mapped on Common Risk Segment Maps (CRS Maps). High confidence in the presence of imperative geological factors is usually coloured green and low confidence coloured red.

[ 2 ] Therefore, these maps are also called Traffic Light Maps, while the full procedure is often referred to as Play Fairway Analysis (PFA).

[ 3 ] The aim of such procedures is to force the geologist to objectively assess all different geological factors. Furthermore, it results in simple maps that can be understood by non-geologists and managers to base exploration decisions on.

Terms used in petroleum evaluation [ edit ] Bright spot On a seismic section, coda that have high amplitudes due to a formation containing hydrocarbons.

Chance of success An estimate of the chance of all the elements (see above) within a prospect working, described as a probability.

Dry hole A boring that does not contain commercial hydrocarbons. See also Dry-hole clause Flat spot Possibly an oil-water, gas-water or gas-oil contact on a seismic section; flat due to gravity.

Full Waveform Inversion A supercomputer technique recently use in conjunction with seismic sensors to explore for petroleum deposits offshore.

[ 4 ] Hydrocarbon in place Amount of hydrocarbon likely to be contained in the prospect. This is calculated using the volumetric equation - GRV x N/G x Porosity x Sh / FVF Gross rock volume (GRV) Amount of rock in the trap above the hydrocarbon water contact Net sand Part of GRV that has the lithological capacity for being a productive zone; i.e. less shale contaminations.

[ 5 ] Net reserve Part of net sand that has the minimum reservoir qualities; i.e. minimum porosity and permeability values.

[ 5 ] Net/gross ratio (N/G) Proportion of the GRV formed by the reservoir rock (range is 0 to 1) Porosity Percentage of the net reservoir rock occupied by pores (typically 5-35%) Hydrocarbon saturation (Sh) Some of the pore space is filled with water - this must be discounted Formation volume factor (FVF) Oil shrinks and gas expands when brought to the surface. The FVF converts volumes at reservoir conditions (high pressure and high temperature) to storage and sale conditions Lead Potential accumulation is currently poorly defined and requires more data acquisition and/or evaluation in order to be classified as a prospect.

[ 6 ] Play An area in which hydrocarbon accumulations or prospects of a given type occur. For example, the shale gas plays in North America include the Barnett , Eagle Ford , Fayetteville , Haynesville , Marcellus , and Woodford , among many others.

[ 7 ] Prospect A lead which has been more fully evaluated.

Recoverable hydrocarbons Amount of hydrocarbon likely to be recovered during production. This is typically 10-50% in an oil field and 50-80% in a gas field.

Licensing [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Petroleum resources are typically owned by the government of the host country. In the United States, most onshore (land) oil and gas rights (OGM) are owned by private individuals, in which case oil companies must negotiate terms for a lease of these rights with the individual who owns the OGM. Sometimes this is not the same person who owns the land surface. In most nations the government issues licences to explore, develop and produce its oil and gas resources, which are typically administered by the oil ministry. There are several different types of licence. Oil companies often operate in joint ventures to spread the risk; one of the companies in the partnership is designated the operator who actually supervises the work.

Tax and Royalty Companies would pay a royalty on any oil produced, together with a profits tax (which can have expenditure offset against it). In some cases there are also various bonuses and ground rents (license fees) payable to the government - for example a signature bonus payable at the start of the licence. Licences are awarded in competitive bid rounds on the basis of either the size of the work programme (number of wells, seismic etc.) or size of the signature bonus.

Production Sharing contract (PSA) A PSA is more complex than a Tax/Royalty system - The companies bid on the percentage of the production that the host government receives (this may be variable with the oil price), There is often also participation by the Government owned National Oil Company (NOC). There are also various bonuses to be paid. Development expenditure is offset against production revenue.

Service contract This is when an oil company acts as a contractor for the host government, being paid to produce the hydrocarbons.

Reserves and resources [ edit ] Resources are hydrocarbons which may or may not be produced in the future. A resource number may be assigned to an undrilled prospect or an unappraised discovery. Appraisal by drilling additional delineation wells or acquiring extra seismic data will confirm the size of the field and lead to project sanction. At this point the relevant government body gives the oil company a production licence which enables the field to be developed. This is also the point at which oil reserves and gas reserves can be formally booked.

Oil and gas reserves [ edit ] Oil and gas reserves are defined as volumes that will be commercially recovered in the future. Reserves are separated into three categories: proved, probable, and possible. To be included in any reserves category, all commercial aspects must have been addressed, which includes government consent. Technical issues alone separate proved from unproved categories. All reserve estimates involve some degree of uncertainty.

Proved reserves are the highest valued category.

Proved reserves have a "reasonable certainty" of being recovered, which means a high degree of confidence that the volumes will be recovered. Some industry specialists refer to this as P90, i.e., having a 90% certainty of being produced. The SEC provides a more detailed definition: Proved oil and gas reserves are those quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible—from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations—prior to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic methods are used for the estimation. The project to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator must be reasonably certain that it will commence the project within a reasonable time.

[ 8 ] Probable reserves are volumes defined as "less likely to be recovered than proved, but more certain to be recovered than Possible Reserves". Some industry specialists refer to this as P50, i.e., having a 50% certainty of being produced.

Possible reserves are reserves which analysis of geological and engineering data suggests are less likely to be recoverable than probable reserves. Some industry specialists refer to this as P10, i.e., having a 10% certainty of being produced.

The term 1P is frequently used to denote proved reserves; 2P is the sum of proved and probable reserves; and 3P the sum of proved, probable, and possible reserves. The best estimate of recovery from committed projects is generally considered to be the 2P sum of proved and probable reserves. Note that these volumes only refer to currently justified projects or those projects already in development.

[ 9 ] Reserve booking [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Oil and gas reserves are the main asset of an oil company. Booking is the process by which they are added to the balance sheet.

In the United States, booking is done according to a set of rules developed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE). The reserves of any company listed on the New York Stock Exchange have to be stated to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission . Reported reserves may be audited by outside geologists, although this is not a legal requirement.

In Russia, companies report their reserves to the State Commission on Mineral Reserves (GKZ).

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Abiogenic petroleum origin Decline curve analysis Drill baby drill Energy development Future energy development Giant oil and gas fields Hubbert peak NORM Petroleum Petroleum exploration in the Arctic Petroleum licensing Renewable energy Seismic source Site survey Upward continuation Wildcatter Extraction of petroleum References [ edit ] ^ Stéphane Sainson, Electromagnetic seabed logging, A new tool for geoscientists . Ed. Springer, 2017 ^ "Assigning exploration risks : Risk and Play Mapping - Exploration & Production Geology" .

www.epgeology.com .

Archived from the original on 2011-07-10.

^ "Coordinating Committee for Geoscience Programmes in East and Southeast Asia" (PDF) .

www.ccop.or.th .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-03-12.

^ Bousso, Ron (January 18, 2019).

"After billion-barrel bonanza, BP goes global with seismic tech" .

www.reuters.com . Retrieved January 18, 2019 .

^ a b F., Worthington, Paul (2010-10-01).

"Net Pay--What Is It? What Does It Do? How Do We Quantify It? How Do We Use It?" .

SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering .

13 (5): 812– 822.

doi : 10.2118/123561-PA .

ISSN 1094-6470 .

Archived from the original on 2017-03-12.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Guidelines for the Evaluation of Petroleum Reserves and Resources" (PDF) . SOCIETY OF PETROLEUM ENGINEERS.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-01-26.

^ "Oilfield Glossary" . Schlumberger. Archived from the original on 2020-08-15 . Retrieved 2013-05-29 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-08-30 . Retrieved 2017-08-31 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "SPE Petroleum Resources Management System 
Guide for Non-Technical Users"; "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-09-06 . Retrieved 2014-06-15 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) External links [ edit ] Oilfield Glossary Exploration Geology Forums Archived 2012-03-13 at the Wayback Machine v t e Petroleum industry Petroleum Primary energy Benchmarks Argus Sour Bonny Light Brent Dubai Indian Basket Indonesian Isthmus-34 Light Japan Cocktail OPEC Reference Basket Tapis Urals West Texas Intermediate Western Canadian Select Data Natural gas Consumption Production Reserves Imports Exports Price Petroleum Consumption Production Reserves Imports Exports Posted oil price Price of gasoline and diesel Exploration Core sampling Geophysics Integrated asset modelling Petroleum engineering Reservoir simulation Reservoir modeling Petroleum geology Petrophysics Reflection seismology Seismic inversion Seismic source Drilling Blowout Completion Squeeze job Differential sticking Directional drilling Geosteering Drill stem test Drilling engineering Drilling fluid invasion Lost circulation Measurement Shale oil extraction Ljungström method Tracers Underbalanced drilling Well logging Production Petroleum fiscal regime Concessions Production sharing agreements Artificial lift Gas lift Pumpjack Submersible pump (ESP) Downstream Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) Gas reinjection Steam injection Midstream Petroleum product Pipeline Refining Upstream Water injection Well intervention XT History 1967 Oil Embargo 1973 oil crisis 1979 oil crisis 1980s oil glut 1990 oil price shock 2000s energy crisis 2010s oil glut 2020 Russia–Saudi Arabia oil price war Nationalization GECF OPEC Seven Sisters Standard Oil Canada France India Iraq Norway Saudi Arabia United States Venezuela Provinces and fields List of natural gas fields List of oil fields Caspian Sea East Midlands Oil Province East Texas Gulf of Mexico Niger Delta North Sea Permian Basin Persian Gulf Prudhoe Bay Russia Venezuela Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin Other topics Abbreviations Classification sweet oil sour oil Oil shale gas Orphan wells Peak oil fossil fuel phase-out timing Petrocurrency Petrodollar recycling Petrofiction Shale band Shale gas Swing producer Unconventional (oil and gas) reservoir heavy crude oil sands oil shale tight oil Companies and organisations Major petroleum companies Supermajors BP Chevron Eni ExxonMobil Shell TotalEnergies National oil companies Abu Dhabi National Oil Company ANCAP Bharat Petroleum China National Offshore Oil Corporation China National Petroleum Corporation Ecopetrol Equinor Gazprom Hindustan Petroleum Indian Oil Corporation Iraq National Oil Company KazMunayGas Kuwait Petroleum Corporation Lotos Naftogaz National Iranian Oil Company National Iranian South Oil Company NNPC Limited Oil & Gas Development Company Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Orlen PDVSA Pemex Pertamina Petrobangla Petrobras PetroChina Petronas Petrovietnam PTT Public Company Limited QatarEnergy Rosneft Saudi Aramco Sinopec SOCAR Sonangol Sonatrach TPAO YPF Energy trading Enron Glencore Gunvor Mercuria Naftiran Intertrade Trafigura Vitol Others APA Corporation Cenovus Energy Cepsa ConocoPhillips Devon Energy Eneos Holdings Galp Energia Hess Corporation Husky Energy Imperial Oil Lukoil Marathon Oil Marathon Petroleum Occidental Petroleum OMV Phillips 66 Port Harcourt Refining Company Reliance Industries Repsol Suncor Energy Sunoco Surgutneftegas TechnipFMC TNK-BP Tullow Oil Tüpraş Valero Energy Major services companies Amec Foster Wheeler Baker Hughes Cameron International CGG CH2M Chicago Bridge & Iron Company China Oilfield Services Enbridge GE Power Halliburton Nabors Industries Naftiran Intertrade NOV Inc.

Petrofac Saipem Schlumberger Snam Subsea 7 TC Energy Transocean Valaris Limited Weatherford International John Wood Group Others American Petroleum Institute Canadian petroleum companies Intercontinental Exchange Futures International Association of Oil & Gas Producers International Energy Agency Society of Petroleum Engineers World Petroleum Council Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐ql2hm
Cached time: 20250812024742
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.377 seconds
Real time usage: 0.495 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1679/1000000
Revision size: 17970/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 113862/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2515/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53727/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.223/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5891881/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  377.942      1 -total
 30.10%  113.758      1 Template:Reflist
 24.43%   92.349      7 Template:Cite_web
 20.85%   78.806      1 Template:Geophysics
 20.00%   75.596      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.95%   56.502      1 Template:Short_description
 13.52%   51.086      4 Template:Navbox
 12.16%   45.963      3 Template:Unreferenced_section
 11.90%   44.988      1 Template:Petroleum_industry
 10.88%   41.121      3 Template:Unreferenced Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:614302:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024742 and revision id 1293627534. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hydrocarbon_exploration&oldid=1293627534 " Categories : Hydrocarbons Petroleum geology Natural gas Oil exploration Fossil fuels Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 20:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hydrocarbon exploration 16 languages Add topic

