Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 2.1 James Angell 2.2 Mary Calkins 2.3 John Dewey 2.4 Herman Ebbinghaus 2.5 William James 2.6 Joseph Jastrow 2.7 Edward Titchener 2.8 James Ward 2.9 Wilhelm Wundt 3 Contemporary descendants 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Functional psychology 18 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית മലയാളം Polski Русский Shqip 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Psychological school of thought For the use of the term in cognitive science, see Functionalism (philosophy of mind) .

Functional psychology or functionalism refers to a psychological school of thought that was a direct outgrowth of Darwinian thinking which focuses attention on the utility and purpose of behavior that has been modified over years of human existence.

[ 1 ] Edward L. Thorndike , best known for his experiments with trial-and-error learning, came to be known as the leader of the loosely defined movement. This movement arose in the U.S. in the late 19th century in direct contrast to Edward Titchener 's structuralism , which focused on the contents of consciousness rather than the motives and ideals of human behavior. Functionalism denies the principle of introspection, which tends to investigate the inner workings of human thinking rather than understanding the biological processes of the human consciousness.

While functionalism eventually became its own formal school, it built on structuralism's concern for the anatomy of the mind and led to greater concern over the functions of the mind and later to the psychological approach of behaviorism .

History [ edit ] See also: History of psychology § Early American This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Functionalism [ 2 ] opposed the prevailing structuralism of psychology of the late 19th century.

Edward Titchener , the main structuralist, gave psychology its first definition as a science of the study of mental experience, of consciousness , to be studied by trained introspection .

At the start of the nineteenth century, there was a discrepancy between psychologists who were interested in the analysis of the structures of the mind and those who turned their attention to studying the function of mental processes.

[ 3 ] This resulted in a battle of structuralism versus functionalism.

The main goal of Structuralism was to make attempts to study human consciousness within the confines [ 4 ] of an actual living experience, but this could make studying the human mind impossible, functionalism is in stark contrast to that. Structural psychology was concerned with mental contents while functionalism is concerned with mental operations. It is argued that structural psychology emanated from philosophy and remained closely allied to it, while functionalism has a close ally in biology.

[ 4 ] William James is considered to be the founder of functional psychology. But he would not consider himself as a functionalist, nor did he truly like the way science divided itself into schools.

John Dewey , George Herbert Mead , Harvey A. Carr , and especially James Rowland Angell were the main proponents of functionalism at the University of Chicago . Another group at Columbia , including notably James McKeen Cattell , Edward L. Thorndike , and Robert S. Woodworth , were also considered functionalists and shared some of the opinions of Chicago's professors.

Egon Brunswik represents a more recent, but Continental, version. The functionalists retained an emphasis on conscious experience.

Behaviourists also rejected the method of introspection but criticized functionalism because it was not based on controlled experiments and its theories provided little predictive ability.

[ citation needed ] B.F. Skinner was a developer of behaviourism. He did not think that considering how the mind affects behaviour was worthwhile, for he considered behaviour simply as a learned response to an external stimulus. Yet, such behaviourist concepts tend to deny the human capacity for random, unpredictable, sentient decision-making, further blocking the functionalist concept that human behaviour is an active process driven by the individual. Perhaps, a combination of both the functionalist and behaviourist perspectives provides scientists with the most empirical value, [ citation needed ] but, even so, it remains philosophically (and physiologically) difficult to integrate the two concepts without raising further questions about human behaviour.

[ citation needed ] For instance, consider the interrelationship between three elements: the human environment, the human autonomic nervous system (our fight or flight muscle responses), and the human somatic nervous system (our voluntary muscle control). The behaviourist perspective explains a mixture of both types of muscle behaviour, whereas the functionalist perspective resides mostly in the somatic nervous system. It can be argued that all behavioural origins begin within the nervous system, prompting all scientists of human behaviour to possess basic physiological understandings, something very well understood by the functionalist founder William James.

The main problems with structuralism were the elements and their attributes, their modes of composition, structural characteristics, and the role of attention.

[ 3 ] Because of these problems, many psychologists began to shift their attention from mental states to mental processes. This change of thought was preceded by a change in the whole conception of what psychology is.

[ 3 ] Three parts ushered functional psychology into the modern-day psychology. Utilizing the Darwinian ideology, the mind was considered to perform a diverse biological function on its own and can evolve and adapt to varying circumstances. Secondly, the physiological functioning of the organism results in the development of the consciousness. Lastly, the promise of the impact of functional psychology to the improvement of education, mental hygiene and abnormal states.

Notable people [ edit ] James Angell [ edit ] James Angell was a proponent of the struggle for the emergence of functional psychology. He argued that mental elements identified by the structuralist were temporary and only existed at the moment of sensory perception.

[ 4 ] During his American Psychological Association presidential address, Angell laid out three major ideas regarding functionalism. The first of his ideas being that functional psychology is focused on mental operations and their relationship with biology and these mental operations were a way of dealing with the conditions of the environment. Second, mental operations contribute to the relationship between an organism's needs and the environment in which it lives. Its mental functions aid in the survival of the organism in unfamiliar situations. Lastly, functionalism does not abide by the rules of dualism because it is the study of how mental functions relate to behavior.

[ 5 ] Mary Calkins [ edit ] Mary Calkins attempted to make strides in reconciling structural and functional psychology during her APA presidential address. It was a goal of Calkin's for her school of self-psychology to be a place where functionalism and structuralism could unite under common ground.

[ 6 ] John Dewey [ edit ] John Dewey , an American psychologist and philosopher, became the organizing principle [ clarification needed ] behind the Chicago school of functional psychology in 1894.

[ 7 ] His first important contribution to the development of functional psychology was a paper criticizing "the reflex arc " concept in psychology.

Herman Ebbinghaus [ edit ] Herman Ebbinghaus's study on memory was a monumental moment in psychology. He was influenced by the Fechner's work on perception and from the Elements of Psychophysics . He used himself as a subject when he set out to prove that some higher mental processes could be experimentally investigated. His experiment was hailed as an important contribution to psychology by Wundt.

[ 4 ] William James [ edit ] James was the first American psychologist and wrote the first general textbook regarding psychology. In this approach he reasoned that the mental act of consciousness must be an important biological function.

[ 8 ] He also noted that it was a psychologist's job to understand these functions so they can discover how the mental processes operate. This idea was an alternative approach to Structuralism , which was the first paradigm in psychology (Gordon, 1995).

In opposition of Titchener's idea that the mind was simple, William James argued that the mind should be a dynamic concept.

James's main contribution to functionalism was his theory of the subconscious. He said there were three ways of looking at the subconscious in which it may be related to the conscious. First, the subconscious is identical in nature with states of consciousness. Second, it's the same as conscious but impersonal. Lastly, he said that the subconscious is a simple brain state but with no mental counterpart.

[ 3 ] According to An Illustrated History of American Psychology , James was the most influential pioneer. In 1890, he argued that psychology should be a division of biology and adaptation should be an area of focus.

[ 9 ] His main theories that contributed to the development of functional psychology were his ideas about the role of consciousness, the effects of emotions, and the usefulness of instincts and habits [ 9 ] Joseph Jastrow [ edit ] In 1901, Joseph Jastrow declared that functional psychology appeared to welcome the other areas of psychology that were neglected by structuralism.

[ 4 ] In 1905, a wave of acceptance was eminent as there had been a widespread acceptance of functionalism over the structural view of psychology.

Edward Titchener [ edit ] Edward Titchener made arguments that structural psychology preceded functional psychology because mental structures need to be isolated and understood before their function be ascertained. Despite Titchener's enthusiasm towards functional psychology, he was weary and urged other psychologists to avoid the appeal of functional psychology and continue to embrace the rigorous introspective experimental psychology.

[ 4 ] James Ward [ edit ] James Ward was a pioneer of functional psychology in Britain. Once a minister, after experiencing a turmoil in his spiritual life, he turned to psychology but not without an attempt at physiology. He eventually settled for philosophy. He later made attempts at establishing psychological laboratory. Ward believed perception is not passive reception of sensation, but an active grasping of the environment. Ward's presence influenced the adoption of functionalist view in British psychology and later served as the turning point for the development of cognitive psychology.

[ 4 ] Wilhelm Wundt [ edit ] Later in his life, Dewey neglected to mention Wilhelm Wundt , a German philosopher and psychologist, as an influence towards his functional psychology. In fact, Dewey gave all credit to James.

[ 10 ] At the time it didn't seem worthwhile to bring up old theories from a German philosopher who only held a temporary spotlight and whose reputation went into a rather negative decline in America in the early twentieth century.

Wundt's major contribution to functional psychology was when he made will into a structural concept.

[ 9 ] Though controversial, according to Titchener's definition of structuralism, Wundt was actually more of a structuralist than functionalist. Despite this claim, it is possibly one of the greatest ironies in the history of psychology that Wundt be deemed responsible for major contributions to functionalism due to his spark of several functionalist rebellions.

[ 10 ] Contemporary descendants [ edit ] Evolutionary psychology is based on the idea that knowledge concerning the function of the psychological phenomena affecting human evolution is necessary for a complete understanding of the human psyche. Even the project of studying the evolutionary functions of consciousness is now an active topic of study. Like evolutionary psychology, James's functionalism was inspired by Charles Darwin 's theory of natural selection.

[ 11 ] Functionalism was the basis of development for several subtypes of psychology including child and developmental psychology , clinical psychology , psychometrics , and industrial/vocational psychology .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Functionalism eventually dropped out of popular favor and was replaced by the next dominant paradigm, behaviourism .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Functionalism (philosophy of mind) References [ edit ] ^ Fancher (1990).

Pioneers of Psychology . New York.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Functionalism . "Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" ^ a b c d Murphy, Gardner (1932).

An Historical Introduction to Modern Psychology . Harcourt, Brace & Company.

^ a b c d e f g Leahey, Thomas Hardy (2004).

A History of Psychology: Main Currents in psychological thought . Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-111447-6 .

^ Arnold (1907). "Untitled [Review of the article: The Province of Functional Psychology]".

The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods .

4 .

doi : 10.2307/2012076 .

JSTOR 2012076 .

^ Strunk (1972). "The self-psyhchology of Mary Whiton Calkins".

Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences .

8 (2): 196– 203.

doi : 10.1002/1520-6696(197204)8:2<196::AID-JHBS2300080205>3.0.CO;2-L .

PMID 11609713 .

^ Boring, Edwin G. (1929).

A History of Experimental Psychology . The Century.

^ Schacter, Daniel; Gilbert, Daniel; Wegner, Daniel; Hood, Bruce (2016).

Psychology .

doi : 10.1007/978-1-137-40673-6 (inactive 12 July 2025).

ISBN 978-1-137-40674-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b c An Illustrated History of American Psychology . Brown & Benchmark. 1994.

^ a b Shook, John R. "Wilhelm Wundt's Contribution to John Dewey's Functional Psychology".

Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences .

31 .

^ Schacter, Daniel L.; Wegner, Daniel & Gilbert, Daniel. 2007.

Psychology . Worth Publishers. pp. 26–7 ^ a b Green, Christopher D. (2009). "Darwinian theory, functionalism, and the first American psychological revolution".

American Psychologist .

64 (2): 75– 83.

doi : 10.1037/a0013338 .

ISSN 1935-990X .

PMID 19203139 .

^ Hart, Joseph (1981-09-01). "The significance of William James' ideas for modern psychotherapy".

Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy .

12 (2): 88– 102.

doi : 10.1007/BF00946185 .

ISSN 1573-3564 .

S2CID 538768 .

External links [ edit ] Look up functionalism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"functionalism" – Encyclopædia Britannica Online Mary Calkins (1906) "A Reconciliation Between Structural And Functional Psychology" James R. Angell (1907) "The Province of Functional Psychology" James R. Angell (1906), Psychology: An Introductory Study of the Structure and Function of Human Consciousness v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐67mgw
Cached time: 20250812015045
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.523 seconds
Real time usage: 0.658 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1922/1000000
Revision size: 16197/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92528/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2725/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 54494/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.324/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6794627/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  536.387      1 -total
 30.14%  161.660      1 Template:Reflist
 23.35%  125.221      3 Template:Navbox
 22.89%  122.787      1 Template:Evolutionary_psychology
 19.04%  102.112      6 Template:Cite_book
 12.84%   68.876      1 Template:Short_description
  8.70%   46.677      1 Template:Original_research
  7.93%   42.548      1 Template:Ambox
  7.77%   41.655      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.18%   33.157      5 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13512823:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015045 and revision id 1300058327. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Functional_psychology&oldid=1300058327 " Categories : Behaviorism History of psychology William James Psychological theories Consciousness Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from July 2012 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2024 This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 02:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Functional psychology 18 languages Add topic

