Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 Degrees in Europe Toggle Degrees in Europe subsection 3.1 Germany 3.2 Netherlands 3.3 United Kingdom and Ireland 4 Degrees in North America Toggle Degrees in North America subsection 4.1 Canada 4.2 United States 5 Degrees in other countries 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bachelor of Arts 45 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latina मराठी مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of undergraduate qualification "B.A." and "A.B." redirect here. For other uses, see BA (disambiguation) and AB (disambiguation) .

"BAs" redirects here. For chemical compound, see boron arsenide .

For the R. K. Narayan novel, see The Bachelor of Arts . For the film, see Bachelor of Arts (film) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bachelor of Arts" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bachelor of Arts A Bachelor of Arts degree from Northwestern University Acronym BA AB Type Bachelor's degree Duration Three or four years, depending on country A Bachelor of Arts (abbreviated BA or AB ; from the Latin baccalaureus artium , baccalaureus in artibus , or artium baccalaureus ) is the holder of a bachelor's degree awarded for an undergraduate program in the liberal arts , [ 1 ] or, in some cases, other disciplines. A Bachelor of Arts degree course is generally completed in three or four years, depending on the country and institution.

Degree attainment typically takes five or more years in Argentina , Brazil , Chile , and Peru .

Degree attainment typically takes four years in Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brunei, Bulgaria, Canada (except Quebec), China, Egypt, Finland, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Scotland , Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United States, and Zambia.

[ 2 ] Degree attainment typically takes three years in Albania, Algeria, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark, France, Germany, Iceland, Israel, [ 3 ] Italy, Montenegro, Malta, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Canadian province of Quebec , South Africa (certain degrees), Switzerland, the United Kingdom (except Scotland), and most of the European Union . In Bangladesh, China, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Russia, three-year BA (associates) courses are also available.

[ 4 ] A three-year bachelor's degree usually does not qualify the holder for admission to graduate programs in other countries where four-year bachelor's degrees are the standard prerequisite.

[ 5 ] Definition [ edit ] The Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree is an undergraduate postsecondary degree that puts a focus on liberal arts and studies.

[ 6 ] In comparison, a Bachelor of Science (BS) has a greater focus on science, math, and engineering. The Bachelor of Arts degree is a type of baccalaureate degree .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] A Bachelor of Arts degree is usually completed in four years: that is, it requires four years of full-time coursework during term time. However, just as with other degrees, some may require a longer time period. This is due to factors such as the student's ability, motivation, and access to financial assistance to earn the degree. Just like other baccalaureate degrees, a Bachelor of Arts is historically offered only at public and private universities and colleges.

[ 6 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] A Bachelor of Arts, just like other bachelor's degrees, is an admission requirement for graduate and professional school. Beginning in the 1990s, junior colleges started to confer their own baccalaureate degrees. In addition to the standard BA degrees, there are career-specific Bachelor of Arts degrees, including Bachelor of Arts in Functional English , Bachelor of Arts in Administration , Bachelor of Arts in Interdisciplinary Studies , and Regents Bachelor of Arts .

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] The Bachelor of Arts degree has been prominent in academics for centuries. It influenced universities to begin focusing on broad topics such as algebra , psychology , biology , art , history , and philosophy .

This aspect of the BA degree has been consistent in its history. The Bachelor of Arts degree was formed out of the study of liberal arts .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Liberal art is a term that was applied to the study of many branches of learning such as grammar , logic , rhetoric , arithmetic , geometry , astronomy , and music .

[ 7 ] The study of liberal arts started during the Middle Ages . During the Renaissance , the term liberal art was meant to describe general studies more broadly.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] This definition of liberal studies remains to this day.

In Japan and the United States, Bachelor of Arts degrees were historically given only by public or private institutions and colleges.

[ 6 ] [ 10 ] Degrees in Europe [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Germany [ edit ] In Germany, university-level education usually happens in either a Universität (plural: Universitäten ) or a Fachhochschule (plural: Fachhochschulen ); both can be referred to as a Hochschule , which is the generic term in Germany for all institutions awarding academic degrees.

Fachhochschule is often translated as "University of Applied Sciences".

Universitäten place greater emphasis on fundamental science and background in theory, while Fachhochschulen are generally designed with a focus on teaching professional skills. Degrees earned at Universitäten and Fachhochschulen are legally equivalent.

In Germany, the BA course normally lasts between three and three and a half years—six or seven semesters—and the degree is awarded after the student earns between 180 and 210 ECTS .

Netherlands [ edit ] In the Netherlands, the BA and Master of Arts (MA) degrees were introduced in 2002. Until then, a single program led to the doctorandus degree (abbreviated drs.), which comprised the same course load as the bachelor's and master's programs combined. The title doctorandus was used in almost all fields of study; other titles were used for legal studies ( meester , Dutch for master, abbreviated Mr.

) and engineering ( ingenieur , abbreviated Ir. for academic masters level or ING. for higher vocational bachelor's level). Those who had already started the doctorandus program could, on completing it, opt for the doctorandus degree (entitling them to use "drs." in front of their name) or could use the master's degree (post-nominal letters) in accordance with the new standard. When attaining a master level/graduate degree, it is still customary to use either drs. pre-nominally or MA/MSc post-nominally at the discretion of the holder.

United Kingdom and Ireland [ edit ] Main article: British undergraduate degree classification In the United Kingdom (excluding Scotland) and Ireland, the first degree course normally lasts three years, but nomenclature varies: 19th-century and later universities usually distinguish between arts and sciences subjects by awarding either a BA or BSc degree. However, some older or ancient universities , such as Oxford , Cambridge , and Trinity College Dublin traditionally award BAs to undergraduates having completed the final examinations, e.g., Part II Tripos (Cambridge), Final Honour Schools (Oxford), Moderator-ship (Dublin), in most subjects including the sciences. Some new plate glass universities established in the 1960s, such as York and Lancaster , originally followed the practice of Oxford and Cambridge by awarding BAs in all subjects, but have since changed to awarding BSc degrees in science subjects. At Oxford, Cambridge, and Dublin the degree of MA can be claimed, usually twenty-one terms after matriculation , without any further study. For many centuries, the bachelor's degree was an intermediate step and was awarded for much of the work carried out in later times at secondary schools. The names of the final secondary school exams in France and Spain (and of the International Baccalaureate ) come from this: le Baccalauréat and el Bachillerato , respectively.

The ancient universities of Scotland award a Master of Arts degree to humanities or arts graduates, but a BSc to science graduates. This course takes four years for an honours degree and three for an ordinary. In Scotland, one can opt to take an ordinary degree, which ranks below a third class honours degree (for example, BA with distinction, merit or pass).

A Bachelor of Arts is entitled to the post-nominal letters BA for an ordinary or pass degree and BA (Hons) for an honours degree.(However, graduates entitled to use the "Hons" post-nominal very rarely do so in practice.) The academic dress worn by honours and non-honours graduates is identical. An honours degree is always awarded in one of four classes, depending upon the marks gained in the final assessments and examinations. The top students are awarded a first-class degree, followed by an upper second-class degree (usually referred to as a 2:1), a lower second-class degree (usually referred to as a 2:2), and those who pass with the lowest marks gain a third-class degree. An ordinary, pass or unclassified degree (which does not give the graduate the right to add "Hons") may be awarded if a student has completed (i) followed a non-honours program, or (b) attempted an honours course but marginally failed to achieve third-class standard.

Degrees in North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] Education in Canada is controlled by the provinces and can be very different depending on the province. While all Canadian universities offer four-year degrees, it is not uncommon, depending on the province and the university for a three-year general degree to also be offered as an option. In many universities and colleges, Bachelor of Arts degrees are differentiated either as BA or as honours BA degrees. Honours programs require more education than non-honours programs, typically a specialization beyond the requirements of a BA, and can often be used as a gateway to a PhD program, bypassing a master's degree.

[ citation needed ] In Québec , BA degrees generally last three years, because the fourth year is replaced by CEGEP education (which fills the gap between Secondary V, the last year of high school, and the first year of university).

[ 11 ] However, four-year programs exist for students having completed 12 (instead of 13) years of education prior to being admitted to university.

[ 12 ] United States [ edit ] Along with the Bachelor of Science (BS), the Bachelor of Arts (BA) is the most commonly granted degree in the US. A BA [ 6 ] degree is earned after the completion of four years of undergraduate college level study.

Some universities in the United States abbreviate the degree as "AB" or "AB", derived from the Latin title Artium Baccalaureatus . AB degrees are particularly associated with Ivy League institutions and other universities with historical ties to Latin academic traditions—such as Harvard, Princeton, Brown, and Stanford. These schools use the AB designation to distinguish their degree from the more common Bachelor of Arts (BA). The use of Latin terminology underscores their heritage and the prestige of their academic programs.

[ 13 ] Additionally, the study of Greek and Latin has traditionally been a fundamental component of the undergraduate curriculum at these institutions.

[ 14 ] Degrees in other countries [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bachelor of Arts" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In colleges and universities in Australia, Nepal, New Zealand, India and South Africa, the BA degree can be taken over three years of full-time study.

[ 15 ] Students must pursue at least one major area of study and units from that subject are usually studied in each year, though sometimes students may choose to complete upper-level classes in the same year and as a result, can leave space for elective subjects from a different field. At some universities, students may choose to pursue a second major; alternatively, the remainder of the degree is taken up with a minor area of study (in the first two years) and other individual or stream-based subjects.
In Pakistan the Bachelor of Arts (BA) program used to be regular 2-year degree program in which students were offered with a combination of any two of areas from the available electives: Business, Journalism, Psychology, Computer Science and Education. However, now all bachelor's degree courses are 4-year program. 2 years degree is now called associate degree.

See also [ edit ] Portals : Middle Ages Schools Associate of Arts Bachelor of Applied Arts Bachelor of Business Administration Bachelor of Fine Arts Bachelor of Independent Studies Bachelor of Science Educational attainment in the United States Lady Literate in Arts Master of Arts References [ edit ] ^ "Understand the Difference Between a BA and BS Degree" .

US News and World Report . 23 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 19 August 2023 .

^ "FAST-US-5 United States Education Reference File" .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2008 . Retrieved 19 August 2008 .

^ "BA Business Administration – RRIS – IDC Herzliya" .

www.idc.ac.il .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 June 2021 .

^ "Degree (Pass) prospectus" (PDF) .

National University, Bangladesh (in Bengali).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 November 2018.

^ See for example https://grad.ucla.edu/admissions/research-requirements/ ^ a b c d e f "Degree, Academic." Funk & Wagnalls New World Encyclopedia , Jan. 2018.

EBSCOhost Database.

Retrieved 6 April 2022.

^ a b c d "Liberal arts." The Columbia Encyclopedia.

Credo Reference Database. Retrieved 2 April 2022.

^ a b Floyd, Deborah L.; Ramdin, Gianna; Salinas, Cristobal (2020), "Baccalaureate" , The SAGE Encyclopedia of Higher Education , Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc., pp.

153– 156, doi : 10.4135/9781529714395 , ISBN 9781473942912 , S2CID 219813700 , archived from the original on 2 April 2022 , retrieved 2 April 2022 ^ Bachelor of Arts. (2014). In Collins Dictionaries (Ed.), Collins English Dictionary (12th ed.). Collins. Credo Reference Database ^ a b Eby, Gulsun; Danver, Steven L. (2016), "Bachelor's Degree Programs", The SAGE Encyclopedia of Online Education , Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc., pp.

131– 133, doi : 10.4135/9781483318332 , ISBN 9781483318356 ^ "Québec education system" .

quebec.ca . Retrieved 8 May 2025 .

^ "Program length - Concordia University" .

www.concordia.ca .

^ AB vs B.A Degree: What's the difference?

- website collegevine.com ^ Artium Baccalaureatus - website of College of Charleston ^ "Bachelor of Arts degrees" .

Australian National University . Archived from the original on 1 April 2010.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bachelor of Arts .

v t e Levels of academic degree Undergraduate ISCED level 5 Associate degree Foundation degree Higher National Diploma / ​ Diploma of Higher Education / ​ Certificate of Higher Education ISCED level 6 Bachelor's degree Honours degree Postgraduate ISCED level 7 Master's degree Postgraduate diploma /​ certificate Diplom degree Engineer's degree ISCED level 8 Doctorate Candidate of Sciences Other Postdoctoral Higher doctorate Doctor of Sciences Habilitation Docent Tenure Fellow No dominant classification Academic certificate Artist diploma External degree Laurea Licentiate Magister degree Microdegree Professional degree Graduate diploma /​ certificate Higher diploma Specialist degree /​ diploma Terminal degree Unearned Honorary degree Ad eundem degree Master of Arts (Oxford, Cambridge and Dublin) Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐m6dr9
Cached time: 20250817043720
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.484 seconds
Real time usage: 0.609 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2046/1000000
Revision size: 17910/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 79976/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1805/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61742/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.337/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23593041/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  551.288      1 -total
 22.02%  121.416      1 Template:Reflist
 16.62%   91.645      7 Template:Cite_web
 14.82%   81.723     11 Template:Lang
 12.87%   70.978      4 Template:Navbox
 12.62%   69.547      2 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.59%   69.427      3 Template:Ambox
 12.06%   66.475      1 Template:Academic_degrees
  9.16%   50.472      1 Template:Short_description
  5.69%   31.353      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:156992:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043720 and revision id 1301126130. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bachelor_of_Arts&oldid=1301126130 " Categories : Bachelor's degrees Liberal arts education Hidden categories: CS1 Bengali-language sources (bn) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2022 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bachelor of Arts 45 languages Add topic

