Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organisation Toggle Organisation subsection 1.1 Tactical units 1.1.1 Overview 1.1.2 Organization of a Gruppe (group) or Staffel (squadron) 2 Personnel Toggle Personnel subsection 2.1 Volunteer fire fighters 2.2 Paid fire fighters 2.2.1 Overview 2.2.2 Rank insignia in Rheinland-Pfalz 3 Vehicles 4 German airport firefighting vehicles 5 Dispatching and alerting Toggle Dispatching and alerting subsection 5.1 Radios 5.2 Identification 5.3 Alerting the fire stations 6 Sports 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents German Fire Services 2 languages Deutsch Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German public institution A MAN LF 16/12 (Engine) of the Volunteer Fire Station in Brehna , Germany Fire platoon of one of the stations of the fire department of the city of Hofgeismar The Feuerwehr ( German for "fire protection", lit.

' fire defense ' ) is a number of German fire departments. The responsible bodies for operating and equipping fire departments are the German communities ("Gemeinden") and cities ("Städte"). By law, they are required to operate fire-fighting forces. In cities, this is usually performed by the Fire Prevention Bureau, one of the higher-ranking authorities.

There are three kinds of recruiting firefighters in Germany: the predominant number of Germany's 1,383,730 firefighters are members of voluntary fire brigades (Freiwillige Feuerwehr) , a lesser number working in professional fire brigades and at least the drafted members of a Compulsory Fire Service (Pflichtfeuerwehr) , established just in a few places nationwide.

Professional fire brigades are usually operated as Berufsfeuerwehr (professional fire station or brigade ) of a municipal body counting over 100,000 citizens, such as the city of Berlin as a full-time city department Werkfeuerwehr (plant fire station or brigade ) of a larger company, for the needs of the company operating them by law e.g. refineries or chemical industry production facilities Betriebsfeuerwehr (factory fire station or brigade ) of a larger company, that does not need to run a Werkfeuerwehr by law, but if it is required for the insurance coverage Flughafenfeuerwehr (airport fire station or brigade ) as airports have to meet the ICAO requirements, this includes airplane factories like that of Airbus in Hamburg Bundeswehr -Feuerwehr (armed forces fire station or brigade ) with specialized divisions such as Fliegerhorstfeuerwehr Cologne-Wahn located at German air force bases, military bases, naval bases as well as on any ship of the German Navy By law, cities with a population of more than 80,000–100,000 people (depending on the state) are required to have a professional fire-fighting force ("Berufsfeuerwehr"). Others such as smaller cities and towns can set up a full-time force ("Hauptamtliche Wachbereitschaft"), which is basically a group or a squadron occupying one large fire station around the clock.  This force deals with smaller incidents on its own and is supported by voluntary forces for larger incidents. Each community meets the need of fire-fighting personnel by setting up a voluntary force ("Freiwillige Feuerwehr"). If it is not possible to recruit enough personnel for this job, the mayor of a city is required to set up a "Pflichtfeuerwehr" (compulsory fire brigade), where he will draft the number of personnel required.

Organisation [ edit ] Tactical units [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Voluntary and professional fire brigades usually share the same basic layout when deploying. Firefighters are organized in tactical units as follows: [ 1 ] Unit Translation Number of personnel Leader Comments Trupp Troop (squad) 2 or 3 (as unit within other units) squad leader part of the crew of an engine Selbstständiger Trupp independent troop (squad) 3 (as own tactical unit, e.g. vehicle crew) "squad leader" (needs to have the training of a group leader) usually the crew of a ladder or other special vehicles Staffel squadron 2 squads + engine operator + squadron leader squadron leader most common unit of professional fire fighting forces; minimum standard for firefighting Gruppe group 3 squads + engine operator + message runner + group leader group leader most common unit of voluntary fire fighting forces; usually the crew of an engine; the term message runner was created before radio electronics came into use, today the message runner can also act as second engine operator, supports a squad or is in charge for security surveillance (e.g. traffic regulation) Zug platoon; Strike Team (description changes from place to place) 2 groups + platoon squad platoon leader usually consisting of several vehicles, e.g. 1 command car, an engine, a tanker and a ladder depending on the platoon type (e.g. "Löschzug" for fire, "Rüstzug" for technical rescue or "Gefahrgutzug" for hazmats) In contrast to the United States system, there is no division into engine and ladder companies.

Organization of a Gruppe (group) or Staffel (squadron) [ edit ] Most standard procedures in German firefighting are based on the Gruppe (group), since it is the smallest tactical unit to work independently. The also common Staffel (squadron) is basically a group stripped down to the absolutely necessary minimum, which can easily be extended to a Gruppe by joining with a three-firefighter Trupp (squad) from another vehicle. Due to the financial situation of most German cities, the squadron is the most common unit for professional fire-fighting forces, because it provides sufficient manpower but saves three firefighters in comparison to a group.

The standard procedures for fire and technical aid and rescue assign certain tasks to certain crew members. This helps keeping the orders the unit commander has to give short and simple, since those tasks don't need to be specifically assigned to anyone.
However, most of these guidelines date back to a time when Self-contained breathing apparatus was not widespread. Thus, if SCBA is applied, the procedure has to be adapted.

[ 2 ] Role Translation Tasks according to standard fire procedure Tasks according to standard technical aid/rescue procedure Comments Einheitsführer unit leader/ captain commands the unit, is responsible for the crew's safety, determines placement of vehicle and, if necessary, of portable fire pump commands the unit, is responsible for the crew's safety, determines placement of vehicle and, if necessary, of powered appliances like generators etc.

The more specific terms "Gruppenführer" (group leader) and "Staffelführer" (squadron leader) depending on the unit's size were abandoned Maschinist engine operator/ engineer drives the engine, operates the pump and other machinery, assists other crew members unloading equipment from the engine and building up water supply drives the engine, operates powered appliances (e.g. generators, hydraulic pumps), assists other crew members unloading equipment from the engine while driving, the engine operator is responsible for safety of crew and vehicle Melder message runner carries out assigned tasks (e.g. assists the unit commander, provides assistance to a squad deploying a ladder, takes care of casualties, relays information) carries out assigned tasks (e.g. assists the unit commander, assists with deploying appliances, takes care of casualties, relays information) In a staffel (squadron) this position is not occupied Angriffstrupp attack squad/ team rescues (especially from areas only accessible with SCBA ); deploys the Wye (between main water supply line and attack lines); usually deploys the first nozzle rescues, provides first aid until ambulance arrives and EMTs take over, provides technical aid Wassertrupp water squad rescues; builds up water supply for the engine; deploys portable ladders on command; becomes rescue squad, if SCBAs are in use ( Two-in, two-out ) secures the incident site against additional hazards using the necessary equipment, is free for other tasks after that Schlauchtrupp hose squad rescues; lays out attack lines for the other squads (due to SCBA and technical simplifications such as hose carrying baskets nowadays redundant; the squads lay out hoses on their own); if SCBA is applied immediately after arrival, the hose squad instead of the water squad has to build up the water supply; deploys portable ladders on command; takes additional tasks like operating the Wye or deploying additional appliances prepares the equipment for the attack squad, if necessary assists the attack squad and operates needed powered appliances; if the attack squad is busy providing first aid, the hose squad takes over deploying the ordered appliances in a Staffel (squadron) this squad is missing, so the remaining two squads have to take over its tasks.

Personnel [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Members of the professional fire departments and volunteer fire departments serve in a hierarchy corresponding to other German institutions e.g. the police.

Volunteer fire fighters [ edit ] The volunteer firefighters ranks are as follows (with deviations depending on the federal state): Firefighters Feuerwehrmannanwärter (FMA)/trainee fresh to the fire brigade, at least 18 years old (16 years in some German states).

Feuerwehrmann (FM)/Firefighter after the first part of the basic training.

Oberfeuerwehrmann (OFM) after the second part of the basic training and after at least two years as Feuerwehrmann (FM) Hauptfeuerwehrmann (HFM) after being Oberfeuerwehrmann (OFM) for five years.

Leaders Löschmeister (LM) after being Hauptfeuerwehrmann for ten years or/and qualification "group leader" (Gruppenführer).

Oberlöschmeister (OLM) after being Löschmeister for ten years or/and qualification "platoon leader" (Zugführer).

Unterbrandmeister (UBM)(does not exist in Baden-Wuerttemberg, in Bavaria it's called "Hauptlöschmeister", HLM) with completed training to leading a squad or platoon squad and at least one year being Oberfeuerwehrmann (OFM).

Brandmeister (BM) after at least two years as Unterbrandmeister (UBM) and two weeks training at the county's fire school (F3). Allowed to command a squadron or group.

Oberbrandmeister (OBM) at least two years as Brandmeister (BM) Hauptbrandmeister (HBM) at least five years as Oberbrandmeister (OBM) Brandinspektor (BI)  after a training at the county's fire school (F4). Allowed to command a platoon. Must have been Oberbrandmeister (OBM) before.

Brandoberinspektor (BOI) ( after a training at the countys fireschool (F/B5). Allowed to command several platoons. Must have been Brandinspektor (BI) before.

Ranks differ between states because each state is responsible for providing and admitting its own fire services as Thuringia i.e. provides education and administration of all fire brigades in Thuringia and Saxony provides it for all brigades in Saxony and so on.

Paid fire fighters [ edit ] In Germany there are three career groups for fire fighters. They are governed by state laws for civil servants.

Overview [ edit ] Rank insignia of the Professional Fire Department of Hamburg Medium grades Brandmeister i.a.

(in reversionary) in the most states this is the professional starting rank. This grade requires vocational training in a useful job (mostly craft or industrial) Brandmeister (in Baden-Wuerttemberg, this is the first grade) the same conditions as Brandmeister i.a.

The firefighters start with an 18-month training time which ends with test. The use of Brandmeister is dependent of the size of the fire department they are working for. In bigger departments mostly as water squad in smaller departments also as attack squad or engine operator.

Oberbrandmeister used as water squad (leader) and attack squad, engine operator Hauptbrandmeister (in bigger fire departments attack squad leader in smaller also unit leader) ladder operator Executive grades Brandinspektor i.A Condition to start directly in this grade is a college degree, starting with a 24-month training and end a test.

Brandinspektor used mostly as unit leader (engine) Brandoberinspektor Brandamtmann, Brandamtsrat and Brandoberamtsrat , used mostly as platoon leaders.

Senior civil service Brandreferendar z.a/-assessor , a master's degree is required to start directly in this grade.

Brandrat, Oberbrandrat (some states: Brandoberrat ), Branddirektor and Leitender Branddirektor . These grades are use in the functions of division chief/deputy/deputy assistant oder chief/commissioner assistant chief/commissioner, chief/commissioner dependent of the size of the city they are working for.

In cities with more than 400,000 people the top position of Direktor der Feuerwehr (NRW), Landesbranddirektor (Berlin), Oberbranddirektor (Hamburg, München), Direktor der Branddirektion (Hessen) or Stadtdirektor (Baden-Württemberg (Stuttgart)) exists.

Rank insignia in Rheinland-Pfalz [ edit ] Medium grades Brandmeister/-in während der Laufbahnausbildung Brandmeister Oberbrandmeister Hauptbrandmeister fire fighter under training Executive grades Brandinspektorenanwärter Brandinspektor Brandoberinspektor Brandamtmann Brandamtsrat Brandoberamtsrat executive grade under training Senior civil service Brandreferendar Brandrat Oberbrandrat Branddirektor Leitender Branddirektor Ministerialrat Leitender Ministerialrat Landesfeuerwehrinspekteur senior civil service trainee assistant state fire chief deputy state fire chief state fire chief Vehicles [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Technically, there are eleven types of vehicles in service today. However, due to regional needs and availability, there are a vast number of different vehicles in use.

The eleven standardized types are: A Volkswagen T5 used as ELW [ de ] (Incident command vehicle referred to »Battalion chief«) A Mercedes-Benz truck serving as Turntable ladder A Mercedes-Benz 413 "Sprinter" used as an Ambulance Command car/Battalion Chief; the Einsatzleitwagen [ de ] (ELW). This type has 3 subtypes, KdoW, ELW 1 and ELW 2 with the first one usually being a "normal" car and the last one having the size of a coach Small fire trucks; either the Tragkraftspritzenfahrzeug [ de ] (TSF) or (TSF-W, Tragkraftspritzenfahrzeug mit Wasser [ de ] with a water tank normally 500 to 750 litres), or the Kleinlöschfahrzeug [ de ] (KLF). Usually modified panel truck with basic means of firefighting. Those vehicles usually have a portable fire pump with an own engine instead of a fixed one that is powered by the vehicle's engine. The names of the TSF and TSF-W are actually derived from the German term " Tragkraftspritze [ de ] " which roughly translates into "portable self powered pump". Those vehicles are crewed by a German Staffel (0/1/5/ 6 ), but the TSF and the TSF-W types provide enough equipment for a group (0/1/8/ 9 ).

Engines / Pumpers; the Löschgruppenfahrzeug [ de ] (LF). Typically a large truck operated by a group and carrying firefighting and rescue gear, nowadays usually with a small water (ranging from 800 to 2500 litres) and foam supply (60 or 120 litres depending on the type of fire engine). Although the crew of the LF consists of a group, the larger types of this engine carry enough equipment for two groups, which often includes a second, portable fire pump.

Rescue engines / pumpers, the Hilfeleistungs-Löschgruppenfahrzeug [ de ] (HLF). Similar to the engine (LF) but with far more rescue equipment (i.e. Jaws of Life and a winch) on board.

Water tenders , the Tanklöschfahrzeug [ de ] (TLF). Typically a large truck operated by one squad (0/1/2/ 3 ) or a German Staffel (a group consisting of 0/1/5/ 6 (in the case of a TLF 16/25 - a TLF 16/25 [ de ] with a 1600-litre/min pump and a 2500-litre water tank) and a water supply of several thousand litres). Very often they are equipped with water cannons on the roof and foam cannons.

Rescue vehicle , the Rüstwagen [ de ] (RW). Usually either a larger panel truck or a smaller truck, they are equipped with a broad range of rescue gear i.e.

jaws of life , a winch, saws, cutters or work platforms Equipment carriers, the Gerätewagen [ de ] (GW). A vehicle that comes in all sizes, depending on the equipment stowed. Equipment might be specialized gear for water rescue operations or hazmat. Another variation is the Wechselladerfahrzeug [ de ] (WLF) which is a specialized, heavy-duty truck WLFs and their modules used by the Cologne Fire Department with a mounted hydraulic crane arm behind the truck's cabin designed to lift heavy containers or modules (called Abrollbehälter ) which contain specialized equipment (examples include mobile command modules/trailers, rescue gear modules, Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus modules, HazMat or environmental modules) Aerial ladders, like the Drehleiter [ de ] (DL or DLK). A large truck with a telescopic ladder (DL), often with an attached bucket or platform at the end (DLK). The most common type is the DLK 23–12, a ladder truck with a platform that can extend to 23 metres height while positioned 12 metres away. (Referred to »Truck« or »Tiller Truck«) Hose carriers, the Schlauchwagen [ de ] (SW). Typically large trucks with a supply of rolled or folded and pre-coupled hoses (usually 1000 m or 2000 m), in case longer distances have to be bridged.

Crew carrier, the Mannschaftstransportwagen [ de ] (MTW). Usually a minivan or a small bus, used for non-emergency rides, organisational tours or transfer of additional personnel.

Ambulances, the Rettungswagen [ de ] (RTW). Typically based on a delivery-truck chassis with a special body, the RTW provides pre-hospital critical care for one patient. Crew consist of two EMT-I or EMT-P, sometimes augmented by an emergency physician (only when the fire department also operates an EMS).

German airport firefighting vehicles [ edit ] A MAN truck of the airport fire department at Paderborn-Lippstadt Specialized vehicles are used by German airport fire departments. These include airport crash tenders . In German, they are called Flugfeldlöschfahrzeug [ de ] (FLFs). These normally have pumps with a large pumping capacity of 10,000 litres/min and have large supplies of either powder or foam (ranging between 300-800 litres) in addition to a standard water tank ranging from 6,000 to 13,000 litres. German airports tend to use crash engines manufactured by Rosenbauer [ 3 ] (Rosenbauer Simba, Rosenbauer Panther 8x8 MA 5 or the Rosenbauer Panther 6x6 CA 5). Other manufacturers include Ziegler , Saval-Kronenburg, Amdac Carmichael International, Metz, E-One, [ 4 ] Oshkosh, [ 5 ] Sides, and Magirus-Deutz/IVECO Magirus.

[ 6 ] German military bases are protected by the Bundeswehr-Feuerwehr which currently have three generations of Feuerlösch-KFZ (FlKfz) engines in use. These are specialized engines constructed in three different generations since 1958 and they use specialised military truck chassis (normally MAN/ Unimog ). The first generation covers engines constructed between 1958 and 1978 (known as the FlKfz 2400).

The second-generation engines FlKfz 1000 (equipment manufacturer: Metz, now part of Rosenbauer), FlKfz 3000 (equipment manufacturer: cooperation between Bachert and Albert Ziegler), FlKfz 3500/400/750 ((equipment manufacturer: cooperation between Bachert and Albert Ziegler) and FlKfz 8000/800 ((equipment manufacturer: Schoerling-Brock [ 7 ] ), (all constructed by Faun GmbH ) except the FlKfz 1000 [constructed on a Mercedes Benz Unimog U 1300 L chassis] were first put into service in 1979.

The third generation entered active service in 2005. Most of the older FlKfz 8000/800 were replaced by the new Ziegler Z8 ((FLF 80/125-12,5 Z8 "Advancer")). Unlike the second-generation engines, this new series of 16 Z8 engines is no longer a military-specific design. The first generation of FlKfz 2400 was replaced by LF 16/12 (originally based on the Daimler-Benz 1017 chassis) with the design changes being incorporated into the Mercedes-Benz Atego chassis. Furthermore, the 3rd generation has been supplemented by the TLF 20-28 and the RW (Rüstwagen 2) on MAN 18.280 chassis as well as the TLF 20–45 on the Mercedes-Benz Unimog U 5000 chassis. All of these vehicles were equipped by Ziegler.

More information on the military vehicles mentioned above are available below: Standard ELW 1/command vehicle: [5] [6] First generation: 1st Generation FlKfz 3800-400 Second generation: FlKfz 1000 FlKfz 2400 FlKfz 3000 FlKfz 3500 FlKfz 8000 Third generation: U 5000a Z8 LF 16/12 on MB Atego Dispatching and alerting [ edit ] Radios [ edit ] German fire brigades all use two-way FM radio to coordinate their efforts. The German emergency currently use the so-called "BOS-Band" (BOS means Behörden und Organisationen mit Sicherheitsaufgaben , "authorities and organisations with security duties"), channels located in the 4-metre and 2-metre bands with a frequency range from 74.215 to 87.255 MHz (4m/base stations) and from 167.56 to 173.98 MHz (2m/portable radios). There were plans to implement digitally scrambled trunked radio systems (a nationwide TETRA-based [ 8 ] system) located in many German cities by 2010. This process was delayed in many cities due to either financial constraints (expenses due to setting up a whole new infrastructure and replacing numerous 4-meter base stations/mobile radios and 2-meter portable radios) or legislative delays. The city of Aachen began testing a TETRA-based system in 2001 and has implemented it since 2003 after completion of the pilot project.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] An enormous advantage of the German BOS Radio System is that virtually every helping organisation in Germany like police, rescue services, THW, lifeguard and fire brigades are using the same system in different channels so they can easily switch and communicate. Typically, 4-meter-radios [ 11 ] [ 12 ] are used by dispatch centres and on vehicles, whereas 2-metre-radios are handheld Handie-Talkies [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] for tactical communication on scene. Unlike in the US, 2-meter portable radios are normally only used for fireground/tactical communications and not for direct contact with the dispatch centre. If direct communication is required, the engineer of the first-in engine will relay all messages directly to the dispatch center via the 4-meter radio on the engine. However, a dispatch center can monitor and if necessary respond on a (non-)repeatered 2-metre tactical channel. In most cases, German tactical channels are not used with a repeater. In bigger areas, there is usually a number of relay stations/repeaters in place which repeat the signal, giving it more range and quality.

German firefighters during an exercise Identification [ edit ] Radio identification names consist of five parts: Name of the organisation, i.e. "FLORIAN" for the fire services Name of the city or county the brigade is based, e.g. "MAGDEBURG" Two digits referring to the specific area or station, e.g. "01" Two digits referring to the type of vehicle, e.g. "33" for a ladder (Tiller truck) Two digits referring to which one it is, e.g. "01" for the first vehicle of its type.

For example, the radio identification "Florian Magdeburg 01-33-01" would describe the first ladder of station 1, operated by the Fire department of the city of Magdeburg .

A "Swissphone PatronPRO", one of the most favoured pagers for emergency services Although not in accordance with the respective service regulation ("Dienstvorschrift"), these identifications are sometimes shortened for the sake of fast radio contact and when there can be no doubt that the vehicle is unique. For example, the ELW [ de ] currently on scene may simply refer to himself as "1-11" or "Florian 1-11", instead of using the whole sequence when the crew is certain that there are no other companies involved.
Because the German Fire Services are terms of the federal states like Bavaria , Hesse or Berlin this may vary from state to state.  The radio identification name for the same ladder in Bavaria can be "Florian Geretsried 30/1" for example.

Alerting the fire stations [ edit ] All fires or emergencies requiring assistance from the fire service can be reported using the toll-free European emergency telephone number " 112 ". The caller will be connected to the command centre responsible for their area and can report the emergency.
The dispatcher will then decide whom to alert. If professional fire brigades are at the station, they will be alerted by klaxon, announcement or display messages. During the night, the alarm circuits are often wired to turn on the lights in the crew quarters.

Voluntary fire brigades are almost everywhere equipped with pagers , some only informing the firefighters of an emergency (spoken messages on a pager), some even displaying short messages (display pagers such as the Motorola LX2/LX2plus or LX4/LX4plus [ 16 ] ) with the type of call, incident address, map coordinates, time and date of call and other important details.  In some areas sirens are still in use, sometimes even as the primary means of alerting firefighters.

German siren signal "fire alert" ⓘ A few fire brigades are experimenting with a GSM -based alarm circuit. The firefighter will then get either a message on his mobile phone or a machine will call him. This method has proven successful in areas where constant radio contact for pagers can not be guaranteed, e.g. in mountainous areas.

Sports [ edit ] To create an incentive for sports, fitness and health the German firefighting fitness badge can be awarded to any member of the German fire services.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Feuerschutzpolizei Fire department Volunteer fire department References [ edit ] ^ Feuerwehr-Dienstvorschrift 3: "Einheiten im Lösch- und Hilfeleistungseinsatz Archived 2016-03-27 at the Wayback Machine , German Fire Service regulation 3: "units within fire and technical rescue missions" ^ Feuerwehr-Dienstvorschrift 1: Grundtätigkeiten im Lösch- und Hilfeleistungseinsatz Archived 2013-10-05 at the Wayback Machine , German fire service regulation 1: "Standard procedures within fire and technical rescue missions" ^ Rosenbauer ^ E-One ^ Oshkosh ^ Magirus-Deutz/IVECO Magirus [ permanent dead link ] ^ Schoerling-Brock ^ "Motorola TETRA-Endgeräte" .

^ "Motorola Government and Enterprise - Motorola TETRA Referenzprojekte" .

^ http://www.motorola.com/governmentandenterprise/contentdir/en_GB/Files/CaseStudies/aachen.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ "Motorola Government and Enterprise - Motorola BOS Funkgeräte" .

^ [1] Archived 2007-12-24 at the Wayback Machine , [2] ^ [3] , [4] Archived 2007-12-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Niros TRX 1012 Atex" . Archived from the original on 17 August 2009.

^ "NIROS TRX 5116 Intrinsically safe ATEX radio" . Archived from the original on 27 March 2010.

^ Motorola LX2/LX2plus or LX4/LX4plus ^ "Die DFS" . Archived from the original on 2014-10-30 . Retrieved 2014-12-07 .

External links [ edit ] German Armed Forces fire engines (third-generation) as well as a Flash movie of the Stuttgart Airport Fire Department responding to a call v t e Geography of firefighting Albania Algeria Andorra Australia Belgium Brunei China (People's Republic) Cyprus Denmark - Copenhagen Fire Department Estonia Finland France Germany Ghana Greece Hong Kong SAR Indonesia Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Luxembourg Macau SAR Malaysia ( JBPM • MCDF ) Netherlands New Zealand Poland Philippines Romania Russia Singapore Sri Lanka South Korea Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Vatican City/Holy See List of fire departments v t e Fire services in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐67mgw
Cached time: 20250812023727
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.632 seconds
Real time usage: 0.760 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14577/1000000
Revision size: 34040/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 106176/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9717/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55472/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.282/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7151556/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  604.980      1 -total
 21.31%  128.918      1 Template:Europe_topic
 19.40%  117.346      3 Template:Navbox
 17.47%  105.695      6 Template:Cite_web
 17.07%  103.261     49 Template:Iso2country
 14.00%   84.683      1 Template:Fire_services_by_country
 10.47%   63.331      1 Template:Short_description
  9.99%   60.453     19 Template:Ill
  8.73%   52.789      2 Template:Unreferenced_section
  7.99%   48.350      2 Template:Unreferenced Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3551309:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023727 and revision id 1300055655. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=German_Fire_Services&oldid=1300055655 " Categories : Fire departments of Germany Emergency services in Germany Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2024 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 02:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents German Fire Services 2 languages Add topic

