Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Key contributions 3 Awards 4 Publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Noel Castree 1 language Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British geographer Noel Castree Born ( 1968-04-02 ) 2 April 1968 (age 57) Bury, Greater Manchester , UK Education University of Oxford , (BA); University of British Columbia (MA, PhD) Occupation(s) Geographer at University of Manchester (Marxist political economy, political economy of nature) Years active 1989–present Noel Castree FAcSS (born 2 April 1968) is a British geographer whose research has focused on capitalism -environment relationships and, more recently, on the role that various experts play in discourses about global environmental change. He is currently at the University of Manchester . He is also the editor-in-chief of the peer-reviewed journal Progress in Human Geography .

Background [ edit ] Castree was born in Bury, Greater Manchester , UK and has a BA in Geography (first class honours) from the University of Oxford (1989), and an MA (1992) and PhD from the University of British Columbia (1999). He has worked at the universities of Liverpool and Wollongong, as well as Manchester and UTS (Sydney).

Key contributions [ edit ] His "principal interests are in the political economy of environmental change, regulation and contestation". He's sought to develop and apply Marxian approaches to understanding a range of environmental problems, with an emphasis on understanding the meaning and limits of ' commodification '.".

[ 1 ] One of his main intellectual contributions to the discipline of geography is advancing the concept of " social nature ", which mediates between social constructivist and materialist perspectives on the biophysical world that people interact with; another is explaining the 'neoliberalisation of nature' in the context of 21st century carbon-intensive capitalism. His more recent research focuses on who gets to speak for the Earth and humanity in light of growing concerns about a global environmental crisis. He has served twice as a managing editor of peer review journals, once for Antipode and more recently for Progress in Human Geography . He is also the founding editor of Environment & Planning F: Philosophy, Theory, Models, Methods and Practice (Sage publishers, launched in 2021).

Awards [ edit ] Castree received a Governor General of Canada's Gold Medal while a graduate student at UBC. In 2005, he received the Gill Memorial Award from the Royal Geographical Society .

[ 2 ] In 2008 he chaired the RGS-IBG conference held in London. In 2012 he was made a Fellow of the British Academy of Social Science. In 2019 he won a lifetime achievement award from the publisher Taylor and Francis for the impact of his books, articles and chapters. In 2023 he received the Murchison Award from the Royal Geographical Society for 'influential research about the relations between societies and the physical environment'.

Publications [ edit ] Books Authored Castree, N., Charnock, G. & Christophers, B. 2022 David Harvey: A Critical Introduction To His Thought . London and New York: Routledge.

Castree, N. 2014.

Making sense of nature . London and New York: Routledge.

Castree, N., Kitchin, R & Rogers, A. 2013 Oxford Dictionary of Human Geography . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Castree, N. 2005.

Nature . London: Routledge.

Ch.1 Castree, N., Coe N., K. Ward & M. Samers. 2004.

Spaces of Work . London & Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Edited Castree, N., Barnes, T. J. & Salmond, J. (eds.) 2025 Making Geography Matter London: Routledge Castree, N., Hulme, M. & Proctor, J. (eds.) 2018 A Companion to Environmental Studies London: Routledge Richardson, D., Castree, N. et al. (eds.) 2017 International Encyclopedia of Geography (in 15 volumes) Malden: Wiley Blackwell.

Castree N. and D. Gregory (eds.) 2011.

Human Geography . Major Works in Social Science, the Humanities and the Physical Sciences. London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi: Sage.

Castree N., P. Chatterton, N. Heynen, W. Larner & M. Wright (eds.) 2010.

The Point is to change it . Antipode Book Series. Oxford and Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.

Castree N., D. Demeritt, D. Liverman & B. Rhoads (eds.) 2009.

A Companion to Environmental Geography .  Oxford and Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.

R. Kitchin, N. Thrift , N. Castree, M. Crang and M. Domosh (eds.) 2009.

International Encyclopedia of Human Geography . Amsterdam: Elsevier. 2nd edition published 2019.

Castree, N., D. Gregory (eds.) 2006.

David Harvey: a Critical Reader . London and New York: Blackwell.

Castree, N., A. Rogers, D. Sherman (eds.) 2005.

Questioning geography: essays on a contested discipline . Oxford and New York: Blackwell.

Castree, N., B. Braun (eds.) 2001.

Social nature: theory, practice and politics . Oxford and Malden: Blackwell.

Braun, B. and Castree, N. (eds.) 1998.

Remaking reality: nature at the millennium . London & New York: Routledge.

References [ edit ] ^ Info on the webpage of the Society and Environment Research Group, School of Environment and Development, University of Manchester ^ 2005 Medals' and Awards' Recipients External links [ edit ] Curriculum Vitae of Noel Castree Noel Castree publications indexed by Google Scholar Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii ORCID Scopus Google Scholar Other IdRef Yale LUX This biography of an English academic is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Noel_Castree&oldid=1281095036 " Categories : Academics of the University of Manchester Academic staff of the University of Wollongong British geographers Fellows of the Academy of Social Sciences 1968 births Living people People from Bury, Greater Manchester British academic journal editors English academic biography stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles with hCards All stub articles This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 07:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Noel Castree 1 language Add topic

