Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fields Toggle Fields subsection 1.1 Medical 1.2 Veterinary 1.3 Structural 1.4 Quantitative 1.5 Parasite ecology 1.6 Conservation biology of parasites 1.7 Taxonomy and phylogenetics 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Parasitology 75 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots සිංහල سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the scientific journal, see Parasitology (journal) . For the sci-fi/horror book series, see Parasite (Grant novel) .

Study of parasites, their hosts, and the relationship between them Adult black fly ( Simulium yahense ) with Onchocerca volvulus emerging from the insect's antenna. The parasite is responsible for the disease known as river blindness in Africa. Sample was chemically fixed and critical point dried, then observed using conventional scanning electron microscopy. Magnified 100×.

Parasitology is the study of parasites , their hosts , and the relationship between them. As a biological discipline , the scope of parasitology is not determined by the organism or environment in question but by their way of life. This means it forms a synthesis of other disciplines, and draws on techniques from fields such as cell biology , bioinformatics , biochemistry , molecular biology , immunology , genetics , evolution and ecology .

Fields [ edit ] The study of these diverse organisms means that the subject is often broken up into simpler, more focused units, which use common techniques, even if they are not studying the same organisms or diseases. Much research in parasitology falls somewhere between two or more of these definitions. In general, the study of prokaryotes falls under the field of bacteriology rather than parasitology.

[ 1 ] Medical [ edit ] See also: Human parasites The Italian Francesco Redi , considered to be the father of modern parasitology, was the first to recognize and correctly describe details of many important parasites .

[ 2 ] The parasitologist F. E. G. Cox noted that "Humans are hosts to nearly 300 species of parasitic worms and over 70 species of protozoa, some derived from our primate ancestors and some acquired from the animals we have domesticated or come in contact with during our relatively short history on Earth".

[ 3 ] One of the largest fields in parasitology, medical parasitology is the subject that deals with the parasites that infect humans, the diseases caused by them, clinical picture and the response generated by humans against them. It is also concerned with the various methods of their diagnosis, treatment and finally their prevention & control.
A parasite is an organism that live on or within another organism called the host.
These include organisms such as: [ 4 ] Plasmodium spp., the protozoan parasite which causes malaria . The six species infective to humans are P. falciparum , P. malariae , P. vivax , P. ovale wallikeri , P. ovale curtisi , and P. knowlesi .

Leishmania , unicellular organisms which cause leishmaniasis Entamoeba and Giardia , which cause intestinal infections (dysentery and diarrhoea) Multicellular organisms and intestinal worms ( helminths ) such as Schistosoma spp., Wuchereria bancrofti , Necator americanus (hookworm) and Taenia spp. (tapeworm) Ectoparasites such as ticks , scabies and lice Medical parasitology can involve drug development , epidemiological studies and study of zoonoses .

Veterinary [ edit ] Main article: Veterinary parasitology The study of parasites that cause economic losses in agriculture or aquaculture operations, or which infect companion animals . Examples of species studied are: Lucilia sericata , a blowfly , which lays eggs on the skins of farm animals.  The maggots hatch and burrow into the flesh, distressing the animal and causing economic loss to the farmer Otodectes cynotis , the cat ear mite , responsible for Canker.

Gyrodactylus salaris , a monogenean parasite of salmon , which can wipe out populations which are not resistant.

Structural [ edit ] Main article: Structural parasitology This is the study of structures of proteins from parasites.  Determination of parasitic protein structures may help to better understand how these proteins function differently from homologous proteins in humans.  In addition, protein structures may inform the process of drug discovery .

Quantitative [ edit ] Parasites exhibit an aggregated distribution among host individuals, thus the majority of parasites live in the minority of hosts. This feature forces parasitologists to use advanced biostatistical methodologies.

[ 5 ] Parasite ecology [ edit ] Parasites can provide information about host population ecology. In fisheries biology , for example, parasite communities can be used to distinguish distinct populations of the same fish species co-inhabiting a region. Additionally, parasites possess a variety of specialized traits and life-history strategies that enable them to colonize hosts. Understanding these aspects of parasite ecology, of interest in their own right, can illuminate parasite-avoidance strategies employed by hosts.

Conservation biology of parasites [ edit ] Main article: Conservation biology of parasites Conservation biology is concerned with the protection and preservation of vulnerable species, including parasites. A large proportion of parasite species are threatened by extinction, partly due to efforts to eradicate parasites which infect humans or domestic animals, or damage human economy, but also caused by the decline or fragmentation of host populations and the extinction of host species.

Taxonomy and phylogenetics [ edit ] The huge diversity between parasitic organisms creates a challenge for biologists who wish to describe and catalogue them. Recent developments in using DNA to identify separate species and to investigate the relationship between groups at various taxonomic scales has been enormously useful to parasitologists, as many parasites are highly degenerate , disguising relationships between species.

History [ edit ] Cyst and imago of Giardia lamblia , the protozoan parasite that causes giardiasis . The species was first observed by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1681.

Further information: Parasitism § History Antonie van Leeuwenhoek observed and illustrated Giardia lamblia in 1681, and linked it to "his own loose stools". This was the first protozoan parasite of humans that he recorded, and the first to be seen under a microscope.

[ 6 ] A few years later, in 1687, the Italian biologists Giovanni Cosimo Bonomo and Diacinto Cestoni published that scabies is caused by the parasitic mite Sarcoptes scabiei , marking scabies as the first disease of humans with a known microscopic causative agent.

[ 7 ] In the same publication, Esperienze Intorno alla Generazione degl'Insetti ( Experiences of the Generation of Insects ), Francesco Redi also described ecto- and endoparasites, illustrating ticks , the larvae of nasal flies of deer , and sheep liver fluke . His earlier (1684) book Osservazioni intorno agli animali viventi che si trovano negli animali viventi ( Observations on Living Animals found in Living Animals ) described and illustrated over 100 parasites including the human roundworm .

[ 8 ] He noted that parasites develop from eggs, contradicting the theory of spontaneous generation .

[ 9 ] Modern parasitology developed in the 19th century with accurate observations by several researchers and clinicians. In 1828, James Annersley described amoebiasis , protozoal infections of the intestines and the liver, though the pathogen, Entamoeba histolytica , was not discovered until 1873 by Friedrich Lösch.

James Paget discovered the intestinal nematode Trichinella spiralis in humans in 1835.  James McConnell described the human liver fluke in 1875. A physician at the French naval hospital at Toulon, Louis Alexis Normand, in 1876 researching the ailments of French soldiers returning from what is now Vietnam, discovered the only known helminth that, without treatment, is capable of indefinitely reproducing within a host and causes the disease strongyloidiasis .

[ 3 ] Patrick Manson discovered the life cycle of elephantiasis , caused by nematode worms transmitted by mosquitoes, in 1877. Manson further predicted that the malaria parasite, Plasmodium , had a mosquito vector, and persuaded Ronald Ross to investigate. Ross confirmed that the prediction was correct in 1897–1898. At the same time, Giovanni Battista Grassi and others described the malaria parasite's life cycle stages in Anopheles mosquitoes. Ross was controversially awarded the 1902 Nobel prize for his work, while Grassi was not.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Parasitology .

European Federation of Parasitologists Category:Parasitologists References [ edit ] ^ Sonea, Sorin; Mathieu, Léo G. (2018-07-06), "Chapter I. Uneven development of the science of bacteriology" , Prokaryotology : A Coherent Point of View , Thématique Santé, médecine, sciences infirmières et service social, Montréal: Presses de l’Université de Montréal, pp.

13– 28, ISBN 979-10-365-1369-5 , retrieved 2022-07-13 ^ Roncalli Amici R (2001).

"The history of Italian parasitology" (PDF) .

Veterinary Parasitology .

98 ( 1– 3): 3– 10.

doi : 10.1016/S0304-4017(01)00420-4 .

PMID 11516576 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-10-23.

^ a b Cox, F. E (2002).

"History of Human Parasitology" .

Clinical Microbiology Reviews .

15 (4): 595– 612.

doi : 10.1128/CMR.15.4.595-612.2002 .

PMC 126866 .

PMID 12364371 .

^ "Definition of parasite | Dictionary.com" .

www.dictionary.com . Retrieved 2022-07-13 .

^ Rózsa, L.; Reiczigel, J.; Majoros, G. (2000). "Quantifying parasites in samples of hosts".

J. Parasitol .

86 (2): 228– 32.

doi : 10.1645/0022-3395(2000)086[0228:QPISOH]2.0.CO;2 .

PMID 10780537 .

S2CID 16228008 .

^ a b Cox, Francis E. G. (June 2004).

"History of human parasitic diseases" .

Infectious Disease Clinics of North America .

18 (2): 173– 174.

doi : 10.1016/j.idc.2004.01.001 .

PMID 15145374 .

^ "The cause of scabies" ^ Ioli, A; Petithory, J.C.; Theodorides, J. (1997). "Francesco Redi and the birth of experimental parasitology".

Hist Sci Med .

31 (1): 61– 66.

PMID 11625103 .

^ Bush, A. O.; Fernández, J. C.; Esch, G. W.; Seed, J. R. (2001).

Parasitism: The Diversity and Ecology of Animal Parasites . Cambridge University Press. p.

4 .

ISBN 978-0521664479 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Loker, E., & Hofkin, B. (2015).

Parasitology: a conceptual approach . Garland Science.

"Parasitism and Parasitology".

The Journal of Parasitology .

42 : 1– 10. February 1956.

doi : 10.2307/3274606 .

JSTOR 3274606 .

v t e Biology Introduction ( Genetics , Evolution ) Outline History Timeline Index Biology Overview Science Life Properties ( Adaptation , Energy processing , Growth , Order , Regulation , Reproduction ( Self-replication ), Response to environment ) Hierarchy of life ( Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere ) Reductionistic Emergent property Mechanistic Scientific method Taxonomic rank Theory Law Peer review Biology journals Common name Chemical basis Atoms Amino acids Carbohydrates Chemical bond Chemical element Lipids Matter Quantum Molecules Monomer Nucleic acids Organic compounds pH Polymer Proteins Water Cells ATP Cell cycle Cell theory Cell signaling Cellular respiration Energy transformation Enzyme Eukaryote Fermentation Metabolism Meiosis Mitosis Photosynthesis Prokaryote Genetics DNA Epigenetics Evolutionary developmental biology Gene expression Gene regulation Genomes Mendelian inheritance Post-transcriptional modification Evolution Adaptation Earliest known life forms Function Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Macroevolution Microevolution Mutation Natural selection Phylogenetics Speciation Taxonomy Diversity Archaea Bacteria Eukaryote Alga Animal Fungus Plant Protist Virus Plant form and function Epidermis (botany) Flower Ground tissue Leaf Phloem Plant stem Root Shoot Vascular plant Vascular tissue Xylem Animal form and function Breathing Circulatory system Endocrine system Digestive system Homeostasis Immune system Internal environment Muscular system Nervous system Reproductive system Respiratory system Ecology Biogeochemical cycle Biological interaction Biomass Biomes Biosphere Climate Climate change Community Conservation Ecosystem Habitat niche Microbiome Population dynamics Resources Research methods Laboratory techniques Genetic engineering Transformation Gel electrophoresis Chromatography Centrifugation Cell culture DNA sequencing DNA microarray Green fluorescent protein vector Enzyme assay Protein purification Western blot Northern blot Southern blot Restriction enzyme Polymerase chain reaction Two-hybrid screening in vivo in vitro in silico Field techniques Belt transect mark and recapture species discovery curve Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Glossaries Biology Botanical terms Ecological terms Plant morphology terms Biology portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry v t e Zoology Outline Branches Anthrozoology Arthropodology ( Arachnology ( Acarology ) Carcinology Entomology ( Coleopterology Lepidopterology Melittology Myrmecology Orthopterology ) Myriapodology ) Biological anthropology Bryozoology Cnidariology Ethnozoology Ethology Helminthology Herpetology ( Batrachology Ophiology Testudinology ) Ichthyology Malacology ( Conchology Teuthology ) Mammalogy ( Cetology Cynology Felinology Hippology Primatology ) Nematology Neuroethology Ornithology Parasitology Paleozoology Planktology Zooarchaeology Animal groups Porifera Ctenophora Placozoa Cnidaria Xenacoelomorpha Ambulacraria Chordata Aschelminthes Arthropoda Platyhelminthes Mollusca Annelida Animal anatomy Animal morphology Histology Tissues Epithelial tissue Muscular tissue Nervous tissue Connective tissues Mineralized tissues Molecular anatomy Anatomy and morphology Mammalian anatomy and morphology Human Dog Elephant Cat Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Spider anatomy Insect morphology Animal physiology General physiology Respiration Respiratory system Breathing Gas exchange Respiratory pigment Cellular respiration Vascular system Blood Lymph Blood vessels Arteries Veins Capillaries Heart Water vascular system By species Insect physiology Fish physiology Zoologists Karl Ernst von Baer Georges Cuvier Charles Darwin Jean-Henri Fabre William Kirby Carl Linnaeus Konrad Lorenz Thomas Say Jakob von Uexküll Alfred Russel Wallace History Pre-Darwin Post-Darwin Timeline of zoology Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Portals : Biology Animals NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐wv26w
Cached time: 20250812002715
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.474 seconds
Real time usage: 0.610 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2068/1000000
Revision size: 12455/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 114972/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2201/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 70575/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.300/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6336735/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  476.229      1 -total
 28.18%  134.183      5 Template:Navbox
 26.99%  128.535      1 Template:Reflist
 26.24%  124.972      1 Template:Biology_nav
 14.44%   68.776      1 Template:Citation
 10.27%   48.916      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.95%   47.362      1 Template:Sister_project
  9.61%   45.750      1 Template:Side_box
  9.55%   45.465      1 Template:About
  7.75%   36.905      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:383854:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812002715 and revision id 1292265201. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parasitology&oldid=1292265201 " Categories : Parasitology Medical specialties Pathology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 02:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parasitology 75 languages Add topic

