Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Resources 2 Science information resources freely available for public use 3 Related legislation 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Office of Scientific and Technical Information 3 languages Deutsch 한국어 اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Component of the Office of Science within the U.S. Department of Energy "OSTI" redirects here. For other uses, see OSTI (disambiguation) .

This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( May 2021 ) Office of Scientific and Technical Information Agency overview Jurisdiction United States Government The Office of Scientific and Technical Information ( OSTI ) is a component of the Office of Science within the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The Energy Policy Act PL 109–58, Section 982, called out the responsibility of OSTI: "The Secretary, through the Office of Scientific and Technical Information, shall maintain with the Department publicly available collections of scientific and technical information resulting from research, development, demonstration, and commercial applications activities supported by the Department." Resources [ edit ] OSTI provides access to energy, science, and technology information through publicly available web-based systems, with supporting tools and technologies to enable information search, retrieval and re-use.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Science information resources freely available for public use [ edit ] OSTI.GOV - The primary search tool for DOE science, technology, and engineering R&D results and the organizational hub for information about DOE OSTI; DOE PAGES (DOE Public Access Gateway for Energy and Science) - The DOE discovery tool that makes peer-reviewed scholarly scientific publications resulting from DOE research funding publicly accessible to read, download, and analyze; DOE CODE is an open source, submission and search tool for DOE-funded software; DOE ScienceCinema is a collection of multimedia videos highlighting DOE's scientific research; DOE Data Explorer searches collections of DOE scientific research data, such as computer simulations, figures and plots, interactive maps, multimedia, numeric files and scientific images.

DOE Patents provides a searchable database of patent information resulting from DOE-sponsored research and development.

Science.gov OSTI hosts this USA.gov science portal in collaboration with 17 organizations within 13 Federal science agencies. These agencies are also members of CENDI , a cooperative group of scientific and technical information (STI) managers from the 13 federal agencies and programs. Science.gov provides a gateway to over 2,100 websites and offers deep web searching of more than 50 databases containing science information and R&D results.

OSTI's entire line of electronic products may be accessed through its home page, where users may search multiple databases with one query.

Related legislation [ edit ] 1946 – Atomic Energy Act PL 79-585 (created the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission ) 1954 – Atomic Energy Act Amendments PL 83-703 1974 – Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 PL 93-438 (Split the AEC into the Energy Research and Development Administration and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission ) 1977 – Department of Energy Organization Act PL 95-91 (Dismantled ERDA and replaced it with the Department of Energy) 2005 – Energy Policy Act PL 109-58 2007 – America COMPETES Act PL 110-69 See also [ edit ] Federated search Web harvesting Science.gov References [ edit ] ^ "Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI)" .

usa.gov . Retrieved 11 October 2024 .

^ "Scientific and Technical Information" .

Energy.gov . Retrieved 11 October 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the property: OSTI article ID (P3894) (see uses ) Official website Office of Science Archived 2015-02-14 at the Wayback Machine v t e United States Department of Energy Headquarters: James V. Forrestal Building Chris Wright , Secretary of Energy James Danly , Deputy Secretary of Energy Deputy Secretary of Energy Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence Energy Information Administration Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy Under Secretary of Energy for Infrastructure Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, & Energy Response Under Secretary of Energy for Nuclear Security National Nuclear Security Administration Under Secretary of Energy for Science and Innovation Office of Science OSTI Office of Electricity Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management Office of Nuclear Energy Assistant Secretary of Energy for Nuclear Energy Office of Nuclear Energy Power Marketing Administration Bonneville Power Administration Southeastern Power Administration Southwestern Power Administration Western Area Power Administration National Laboratory System Ames Argonne NBL CNM APS ATLAS EMC Berkeley ALS MF NCEM NERSC ESN JGI Brookhaven AGS CFN NSLS NSLS II RHIC Fermilab TeV Idaho RESL JLab Livermore NARAC NIF Los Alamos DARHTF NETL Albany NREL Oak Ridge SNS CNMS HFIR NCCS Pacific Northwest EMSL PPPL NSTX TFTR SRNL Sandia Z SLAC SSRL Energy Department Facilities and Reservations Fernald NLO Hanford K-25 Kansas City Plant Nevada Test Site Area 19 Area 20 NHHOR Pantex Rocky Flats SSFL ETEC SRE SRS SPR WIPP Y-12 Yucca Mountain Related Independent Agency Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Office_of_Scientific_and_Technical_Information&oldid=1301943159 " Categories : Oak Ridge, Tennessee Anderson County, Tennessee United States Department of Energy agencies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from May 2021 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from May 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 14:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Office of Scientific and Technical Information 3 languages Add topic

