Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In character encoding 2 In Unicode 3 History 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Code point 17 languages Alemannisch Boarisch Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Português Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Numerical value representing a character in a coded character set Not to be confused with point code .

A code point , codepoint or code position is a particular position in a table , where the position has been assigned a meaning. The table may be one dimensional (a column), two dimensional (like cells in a spreadsheet), three dimensional (sheets in a workbook), etc... in any number of dimensions.

Technically, a code point is a unique position in a quantized n-dimensional space, where the position has been assigned a semantic meaning. The table has discrete (whole) and positive positions (1, 2, 3, 4, but not fractions).

Code points are used in a multitude of formal information processing and telecommunication standards.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] For example ITU-T Recommendation T.35 [ 3 ] contains a set of country codes for telecommunications equipment (originally fax machines) which allow equipment to indicate its country of manufacture or operation. In T.35, Argentina is represented by the code point 0x07, Canada by 0x20, Gambia by 0x41, etc.

In character encoding [ edit ] Code points are commonly used in character encoding , where a code point is a numerical value that maps to a specific character . In character encoding code points usually represent a single grapheme —usually a letter, digit, punctuation mark, or whitespace—but sometimes represent symbols, control characters , or formatting.

[ 4 ] The set of all possible code points within a given encoding/character set make up that encoding's codespace .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] For example, the character encoding scheme ASCII comprises 128 code points in the range 0 hex to 7F hex , Extended ASCII comprises 256 code points in the range 0 hex to FF hex , and Unicode comprises 1,114,112 code points in the range 0 hex to 10FFFF hex . The Unicode code space is divided into seventeen planes (the basic multilingual plane, and 16 supplementary planes), each with 65,536 (= 2 16 ) code points. Thus the total size of the Unicode code space is 17 × 65,536 = 1,114,112.

In Unicode [ edit ] For Unicode, the particular sequence of bits is called a code unit – for the UCS-4 encoding, any code point is encoded as 4- byte ( octet ) binary numbers , while in the UTF-8 encoding, different code points are encoded as sequences from one to four bytes long, forming a self-synchronizing code . See comparison of Unicode encodings for details.
Code points are normally assigned to abstract characters . An abstract character is not a graphical glyph but a unit of textual data. However, code points may also be left reserved for future assignment (most of the Unicode code space is unassigned), or given other designated functions.

[ citation needed ] The distinction between a code point and the corresponding abstract character is not pronounced in Unicode but is evident for many other encoding schemes, where numerous code pages may exist for a single code space.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The concept of a code point dates to the earliest standards for digital information processing and digital telecommunications.

In Unicode, code points are part of Unicode's solution to a difficult conundrum faced by character encoding developers in the 1980s.

[ 7 ] If they added more bits per character to accommodate larger character sets, that design decision would also constitute an unacceptable waste of then-scarce computing resources for Latin script users (who constituted the vast majority of computer users at the time), since those extra bits would always be zeroed out for such users.

[ 8 ] The code point avoids this problem by breaking the old idea of a direct one-to-one correspondence between characters and particular sequences of bits.

See also [ edit ] Combining character Replacement character Text-based (computing) Unicode collation algorithm References [ edit ] ^ ETSI TS 101 773 (section 4), https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/101700_101799/101773/01.02.01_60/ts_101773v010201p.pdf ^ RFC4190 (section 1), https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4190 ^ "T.35 : Procedure for the allocation of ITU-T defined codes for non-standard facilities" .

^ "The Unicode® Standard Version 11.0 – Core Specification" (PDF) .

Unicode Consortium . 30 June 2018. p. 23. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 September 2018 . Retrieved 25 December 2018 .

Format: Invisible but affects neighboring characters; includes line/paragraph separators ^ Unicode.

"Glossary of Unicode Terms" .

unicode.org . Retrieved 20 March 2023 .

^ "The Unicode® Standard Version 11.0 – Core Specification" (PDF) .

Unicode Consortium . 30 June 2018. p. 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 September 2018 . Retrieved 25 December 2018 .

On a computer, abstract characters are encoded internally as numbers. To create a complete character encoding, it is necessary to define the list of all characters to be encoded and to establish systematic rules for how the numbers represent the characters. The range of integers used to code the abstract characters is called the codespace. A particular integer in this set is called a code  point. When an abstract character is mapped or assigned to a particular code point in the codespace, it is then referred to as an encodedcharacter.

^ Constable, Peter (13 June 2001).

"Understanding Unicode™ - I" .

NRSI: Computers & Writing Systems . Archived from the original (html) on 16 September 2010 . Retrieved 25 December 2018 .

By the early 1980s, the software industry was starting to recognise the need for a solution to the problems involved with using multiple character encoding standards. Some particularly innovative work was begun at Xerox. The Xerox Star workstation used a multi-byte encoding that allowed it to support a single character set with potentially millions of characters.

^ Mark Davis; Ken Whistler (23 March 2001).

"Unicode Technical Standard #10 UNICODE COLLATION ALGORITHM" .

Unicode Consortium . Archived from the original (html) on 25 August 2001 . Retrieved 25 December 2018 .

6.2 Large Weight Values External links [ edit ] Codepoints.net, a site dedicated to all things characters, letters and Unicode v t e Unicode Unicode Unicode Consortium ISO/IEC 10646 (Universal Character Set) Versions Code points Block List Universal Character Set Character charts Character property Plane Private Use Area Characters Special purpose BOM Combining grapheme joiner Left-to-right mark / Right-to-left mark Soft hyphen Variant form Word joiner Zero-width joiner Zero-width non-joiner Zero-width space Lists Characters CJK Unified Ideographs Combining character Duplicate characters Numerals Scripts Spaces Symbols Halfwidth and fullwidth Alias names and abbreviations Whitespace characters Processing Algorithms Bidirectional text Collation ISO/IEC 14651 Equivalence Variation sequences International Ideographs Core Comparison of encodings BOCU-1 CESU-8 Punycode SCSU UTF-1 UTF-7 UTF-8 UTF-16/UCS-2 UTF-32/UCS-4 UTF-EBCDIC On pairs of code points Combining character Compatibility characters Duplicate characters Equivalence Homoglyph Precomposed character list Z-variant Variation sequences Regional indicator symbol Emoji skin color Usage Domain names (IDN) Email Fonts HTML entity references numeric references Input International Ideographs Core Related standards Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR) GB 18030 ISO/IEC 8859 DIN 91379 ISO 15924 Related topics Anomalies ConScript Unicode Registry Ideographic Research Group International Components for Unicode People involved with Unicode Han unification Scripts and symbols in Unicode Common and inherited scripts Combining marks Diacritics Punctuation marks Spaces Numbers Modern scripts Adlam Arabic Armenian Balinese Bamum Batak Bengali Bopomofo Braille Buhid Burmese Canadian Aboriginal Chakma Cham Cherokee CJK Unified Ideographs (Han) Cyrillic Deseret Devanagari Garay Geʽez Georgian Greek Gujarati Gunjala Gondi Gurmukhi Gurung Khema Hangul Hanifi Rohingya Hanja Hanunuoo Hebrew Hiragana Javanese Kanji Kannada Katakana Kayah Li Khmer Kirat Rai Lao Latin Lepcha Limbu Lisu (Fraser) Lontara Malayalam Masaram Gondi Mende Kikakui Medefaidrin Miao (Pollard) Mongolian Mru N'Ko Nag Mundari New Tai Lue Nüshu Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Odia Ol Chiki Ol Onal Osage Osmanya Pahawh Hmong Pau Cin Hau Pracalit (Newa) Ranjana Rejang Samaritan Saurashtra Shavian Sinhala Sorang Sompeng Sundanese Sunuwar Syriac Tagbanwa Tai Le Tai Tham Tai Viet Tamil Tangsa Telugu Thaana Thai Tibetan Tifinagh Tirhuta Toto Vai Wancho Warang Citi Yi Ancient and historic scripts Ahom Anatolian hieroglyphs Ancient North Arabian Avestan Bassa Vah Bhaiksuki Brāhmī Carian Caucasian Albanian Coptic Cuneiform Cypriot Cypro-Minoan Dives Akuru Dogra Egyptian hieroglyphs Elbasan Elymaic Glagolitic Gothic Grantha Hatran Imperial Aramaic Inscriptional Pahlavi Inscriptional Parthian Kaithi Kawi Kharosthi Khitan small script Khojki Khudawadi Khwarezmian (Chorasmian) Linear A Linear B Lycian Lydian Mahajani Makasar Mandaic Manichaean Marchen Meetei Mayek Meroitic Modi Multani Nabataean Nandinagari Ogham Old Hungarian Old Italic Old Permic Old Persian cuneiform Old Sogdian Old Turkic Old Uyghur Palmyrene ʼPhags-pa Phoenician Psalter Pahlavi Runic Sharada Siddham Sogdian South Arabian Soyombo Sylheti Nagri Tagalog (Baybayin) Takri Tangut Todhri Tulu Tigalari Ugaritic Vithkuqi Yezidi Zanabazar Square Notational scripts Duployan SignWriting Symbols, emojis Cultural, political, and religious symbols Currency Control Pictures Mathematical operators and symbols Glossary Phonetic symbols (including IPA) Emoji Category: Unicode Category: Unicode blocks Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Code_point&oldid=1288356896 " Category : Character encoding Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 02:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Code point 17 languages Add topic

