Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Statement 2 Examples 3 In characteristic p 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Riemann–Hilbert correspondence Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in mathematics The Riemann–Hilbert correspondence is a correspondence between abstract algebra (specifically group theory ) and mathematical analysis (specifically differential equations ).  Classically, David Hilbert posed his twenty-first problem , referencing earlier work by Bernhard Riemann . The basic idea of this problem can be illustrated with an example: the complex differential equation z f ′ ( z ) = 1 {\displaystyle zf'(z)=1} has solutions f ( z ) = log ⁡ ⁡ z + C {\displaystyle f(z)=\log z+C} , which is regular everywhere except at 0 and ∞ ∞ {\displaystyle \infty } on the Riemann sphere .  If we continue the function, following a loop around the origin, the value of the function changes by an integer multiple of 2 π π i {\displaystyle 2\pi i} .  This phenomenon is called monodromy of the differential equation z f ′ ( z ) = 1 {\displaystyle zf'(z)=1} .  The monodromy for this example thus corresponds to adding an integer multiple of 2 π π i {\displaystyle 2\pi i} , which is a representation of the fundamental group of the sphere punctured in two points.  Hilbert's 21st problem asks whether every suitable monodromy representation arises from a linear differential equation with regular singularites .

Modern research on the Riemann–Hilbert correspondence generalizes this, from ordinary differential equations (on the Riemann sphere) to systems of partial differential equations on higher-dimensional complex manifolds , or higher genus Riemann surfaces .  The problem is usually formulated as a correspondence between flat connections on algebraic vector bundles and representations of the fundamental group.  The correspondence is between certain systems of partial differential equations (linear and having very special properties for their solutions) and possible monodromies of their solutions, and there are many generalizations and variants.

Such a result was proved for algebraic connections with regular singularities by Pierre Deligne (1970, generalizing existing work in the case of Riemann surfaces) and more generally for regular holonomic D-modules by Masaki Kashiwara (1980, 1984) and Zoghman Mebkhout (1980, 1984) independently.
In the setting of nonabelian Hodge theory , the Riemann-Hilbert correspondence provides a complex analytic isomorphism between two of the three natural algebraic structures on the moduli spaces, and so is naturally viewed as a nonabelian analogue of the comparison isomorphism between De Rham cohomology and singular/Betti cohomology.

Statement [ edit ] Suppose that X is a smooth complex algebraic variety.

Riemann–Hilbert correspondence (for regular singular connections): 
there is a functor Sol called the local solutions functor, that is an equivalence from the category of flat connections on algebraic vector bundles on X with regular singularities to the category of local systems of finite-dimensional complex vector spaces on X . For X connected, the category of local systems is also equivalent to the category of complex representations of the fundamental group of X .
Thus such connections give a purely algebraic way to access the finite dimensional representations of the topological fundamental group.

The condition of regular singularities means that locally constant sections of the bundle (with respect to the flat connection) have moderate growth at points of Y − X , where Y is an algebraic compactification of X . In particular, when X is compact, the condition of regular singularities is vacuous.

More generally there is the Riemann–Hilbert correspondence (for regular holonomic D-modules): there is a functor DR called the de Rham functor, that is an equivalence from the category of holonomic D-modules on X with regular singularities to the category of perverse sheaves on X .

By considering the irreducible elements of each category, this gives a 1:1 correspondence between isomorphism classes of irreducible holonomic D-modules on X with regular singularities, and intersection cohomology complexes of irreducible closed subvarieties of X with coefficients in irreducible local systems .

A D-module is something like a system of differential equations on X , and a local system on a subvariety is something like a description of possible monodromies, so this correspondence can be thought of as describing certain systems of differential equations in terms of the monodromies of their solutions.

In the case X has dimension one (a complex algebraic curve) then there is a more general Riemann–Hilbert correspondence for algebraic connections with no regularity assumption (or for holonomic D-modules with no regularity assumption) described in Malgrange (1991), the Riemann–Hilbert–Birkhoff correspondence .

Examples [ edit ] An example where the theorem applies is the differential equation d f d z = a z f {\displaystyle {\frac {df}{dz}}={\frac {a}{z}}f} on the punctured affine line A 1 − {0} (that is, on the nonzero complex numbers C − {0}). Here a is a fixed complex number. This equation has regular singularities at 0 and ∞ in the projective line P 1 . The local solutions of the equation are of the form cz a for constants c . If a is not an integer, then the function z a cannot be made well-defined on all of C − {0}. That means that the equation has nontrivial monodromy. Explicitly, the monodromy of this equation is the 1-dimensional representation of the fundamental group π 1 ( A 1 − {0}) = Z in which the generator (a loop around the origin) acts by multiplication by e 2 π ia .

To see the need for the hypothesis of regular singularities, consider the differential equation d f d z = f {\displaystyle {\frac {df}{dz}}=f} on the affine line A 1 (that is, on the complex numbers C ). This equation corresponds to a flat connection on the trivial algebraic line bundle over A 1 . The solutions of the equation are of the form ce z for constants c . Since these solutions do not have polynomial growth on some sectors around the point ∞ in the projective line P 1 , the equation does not have regular singularities at ∞. (This can also be seen by rewriting the equation in terms of the variable w := 1/ z , where it becomes d f d w = − − 1 w 2 f .

{\displaystyle {\frac {df}{dw}}=-{\frac {1}{w^{2}}}f.} The pole of order 2 in the coefficients means that the equation does not have regular singularities at w = 0, according to Fuchs's theorem .) Since the functions ce z are defined on the whole affine line A 1 , the monodromy of this flat connection is trivial. But this flat connection is not isomorphic to the obvious flat connection on the trivial line bundle over A 1 (as an algebraic vector bundle with flat connection), because its solutions do not have moderate growth at ∞. This shows the need to restrict to flat connections with regular singularities in the Riemann–Hilbert correspondence. On the other hand, if we work with holomorphic (rather than algebraic) vector bundles with flat connection on a noncompact complex manifold such as A 1 = C , then the notion of regular singularities is not defined. A much more elementary theorem than the Riemann–Hilbert correspondence states that flat connections on holomorphic vector bundles are determined up to isomorphism by their monodromy.

In characteristic p [ edit ] For schemes in characteristic p >0, Emerton & Kisin (2004) (later developed further under less restrictive assumptions in Bhatt & Lurie (2019) ) establish a Riemann-Hilbert correspondence that asserts in particular that étale cohomology of étale sheaves with Z / p -coefficients can be computed in terms of the action of the Frobenius endomorphism on coherent cohomology .

More generally, there are equivalences of categories between constructible (resp. perverse) étale Z / p -sheaves and left (resp. right) modules with a Frobenius (resp. Cartier) action. This can be regarded as the positive characteristic analogue of the classical theory, where one can find a similar interplay of constructive vs. perverse t-structures.

See also [ edit ] Riemann–Hilbert problem References [ edit ] Emerton, Matthew; Kisin, Mark (2004), "The Riemann-Hilbert correspondence for unit F-crystals", Astérisque , 293 : 1– 268 Bhatt, Bhargav; Lurie, Jacob (2019), "A Riemann-Hilbert correspondence in positive characteristic", Cambridge Journal of Mathematics , 7 ( 1– 2): 71– 217, arXiv : 1711.04148 , doi : 10.4310/CJM.2019.v7.n1.a3 , MR 3922360 , S2CID 119147066 Dimca, Alexandru, Sheaves in Topology , pp.

206– 207 (Gives explicit representation of Riemann–Hilbert correspondence for Milnor fiber of isolated hypersurface singularity) Borel, Armand (1987), Algebraic D-Modules , Perspectives in Mathematics, vol. 2, Boston, MA: Academic Press , ISBN 978-0-12-117740-9 , MR 0882000 Deligne, Pierre (1970), Équations différentielles à points singuliers réguliers , Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 163, Springer-Verlag , ISBN 3540051902 , MR 0417174 , OCLC 169357 Kashiwara, Masaki (1980), "Faisceaux constructibles et systèmes holonômes d'équations aux dérivées partielles linéaires à points singuliers réguliers", Séminaire Goulaouic-Schwartz, 1979–80, Exposé 19 , Palaiseau: École Polytechnique, MR 0600704 Kashiwara, Masaki (1984), "The Riemann-Hilbert problem for holonomic systems" , Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences , 20 (2): 319– 365, doi : 10.2977/prims/1195181610 , MR 0743382 Malgrange, Bernard (1991), Équations différentielles à coefficients polynomiaux , Progress in Mathematics, vol. 96, Birkhäuser , ISBN 0-8176-3556-4 , MR 1117227 Mebkhout, Zoghman (1980), "Sur le problėme de Hilbert-Riemann", Complex analysis, microlocal calculus and relativistic quantum theory (Les Houches, 1979) , Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 126, Springer-Verlag , pp.

90– 110, ISBN 3-540-09996-4 , MR 0579742 Mebkhout, Zoghman (1984), "Une autre équivalence de catégories" , Compositio Mathematica , 51 (1): 63– 88, MR 0734785 v t e Bernhard Riemann Cauchy–Riemann equations Generalized Riemann hypothesis Grand Riemann hypothesis Grothendieck–Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem Local zeta function Measurable Riemann mapping theorem Riemann (crater) Riemann Xi function Riemann curvature tensor Riemann hypothesis Riemann integral Riemann invariant Riemann mapping theorem Riemann form Riemann problem Riemann series theorem Riemann solver Riemann sphere Riemann sum Riemann surface Riemann zeta function Riemann's differential equation Riemann's minimal surface Riemannian circle Riemannian connection on a surface Riemannian geometry Riemann–Hilbert correspondence Riemann–Hilbert problems Riemann–Lebesgue lemma Riemann–Liouville integral Riemann–Roch theorem Riemann–Roch theorem for smooth manifolds Riemann–Siegel formula Riemann–Siegel theta function Riemann–Silberstein vector Riemann–Stieltjes integral Riemann–von Mangoldt formula Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Riemann–Hilbert_correspondence&oldid=1305707942 " Categories : Differential equations Representation theory Bernhard Riemann Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Riemann–Hilbert correspondence Add languages Add topic

