Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Role in the collectivisation process 2 Leadership of Romania Toggle Leadership of Romania subsection 2.1 Decree 770 2.2 Speech of 21 August 1968 2.3 July Theses 2.4 President of the Socialist Republic of Romania 2.5 Oil embargo, strike and foreign relations 2.6 Pacepa defection 2.6.1 Systematisation: demolition and reconstruction 2.7 Foreign debt 2.7.1 Yearly evolution (in billions of dollars) 2.8 1984 failed coup d'état attempt 2.9 1987 Brașov rebellion 2.10 Romani minority rights 3 Revolution Toggle Revolution subsection 3.1 Timișoara 3.2 Overthrow 3.2.1 Speech on 21 December 1989 3.2.2 Flight on 22 December 3.3 Death 3.3.1 Exhumation and reburial 4 Policies Toggle Policies subsection 4.1 Non-aligned policy feats 4.1.1 Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic 4.2 Personality cult and totalitarianism 4.2.1 IKEA 5 Legacy 6 Cultural depictions 7 Honours and awards Toggle Honours and awards subsection 7.1 Romanian orders, decorations and medals 7.2 Foreign state orders, decorations and medals 7.3 Foreign non-state decorations 7.4 Academic titles 8 In popular culture 9 Selected published works 10 Citations 11 General sources 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Nicolae Ceaușescu 99 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Armãneashti Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Коми Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Leader of Romania from 1965 to 1989 "Ceaușescu" redirects here. For his family, see Ceaușescu family .

Tovarășul Conducător Nicolae Ceaușescu Official portrait, 1965 General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party In office 19 March 1965 – 22 December 1989 Preceded by Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Succeeded by Position abolished President of the Socialist Republic of Romania In office 28 March 1974 – 22 December 1989 Prime Minister Manea Mănescu Ilie Verdeț Constantin Dăscălescu Preceded by Position established Succeeded by National Salvation Front Council (interim) Ion Iliescu (as President of Romania) President of the State Council In office 9 December 1967 – 22 December 1989 Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe Maurer Manea Mănescu Ilie Verdeț Constantin Dăscălescu Preceded by Chivu Stoica Succeeded by Office abolished Additional positions Member of the Presidium of the Great National Assembly In office 31 May 1950 – 3 October 1955 President Constantin Ion Parhon Petru Groza Deputy Minister of National Defence In office 1950–1954 Prime Minister Petru Groza Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Minister Emil Bodnăraș Deputy Minister of Agriculture In office 1949–1950 Prime Minister Petru Groza Minister Vasile Vaida State Under Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture In office 13 May 1948 – 1949 Prime Minister Petru Groza Minister Vasile Vaida Member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party In office 21 October 1945 – 25 December 1989 First Secretary of the Union of Communist Youth In office 23 August 1944 – June 1945 Succeeded by Constantin Drăgoescu First Secretary of the Olt Regional Committee of the Communist Party In office December 1946 – May 1948 First Secretary Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Member of the Great National Assembly In office 28 March 1948 – 25 December 1989 Constituency Olt County (1948–1952) Pitești Region (1952–1969) Bucharest (1969–1989) Member of the Assembly of Deputies In office 19 November 1946 – 25 February 1948 Constituency Olt County Personal details Born ( 1918-01-26 ) 26 January 1918 Scornicești , Olt County, Romania Died 25 December 1989 (1989-12-25) (aged 71) Târgoviște , Dâmbovița County, Romania Political party Romanian Communist Party (1932–1989) Spouse Elena Petrescu ​ ( m.

1946) ​ Children Valentin Zoia Nicu Relatives Marin (brother) Ilie (brother) Signature Military service Branch/service Romanian Army Years of service 1944–1989 Rank Lieutenant general Battles/wars Romanian Revolution Criminal conviction Cause of death Execution by firing squad Conviction Genocide Trial Trial and execution of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu Criminal penalty Death Details Victims Romanian dissidents Nicolae Ceaușescu ( / tʃ aʊ ˈ ʃ ɛ s k uː / chow- SHESK -oo ; Romanian: [nikoˈla.e tʃe̯a.uˈʃesku] ⓘ ; 26 January [ O.S.

13 January] 1918 – 25 December 1989) was a Romanian politician and dictator who was the second and last communist leader of Romania , serving as the general secretary of the Romanian Communist Party from 1965 until his execution in 1989. He was the country's head of state from 1967 to 1989, serving as President of the State Council from 1967 and as the first president from 1974. Ceaușescu was overthrown and executed in the Romanian Revolution on 25 December 1989 along with his wife Elena Ceaușescu , as part of a series of anti-communist uprisings in Eastern Europe that year.

Born in 1918 in Scornicești , Ceaușescu was a member of the Romanian Communist youth movement. He was arrested in 1939 and sentenced for "conspiracy against social order", spending the time during World War II in prisons and internment camps: Jilava (1940), Caransebeș (1942), Văcărești (1943), and Târgu Jiu (1943). Ceaușescu rose up through the ranks of Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej 's Socialist government and, upon Gheorghiu-Dej's death in 1965, he succeeded to the leadership of the Romanian Communist Party as general secretary.

[ 1 ] Upon achieving power, Ceaușescu eased press censorship and condemned the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in his speech of 21 August 1968 , which resulted in a surge in popularity. However, this period of stability was brief, as his government soon became totalitarian and came to be considered one of the most repressive in the Eastern Bloc . His secret police , the Securitate , was responsible for mass surveillance as well as severe repression and human rights abuses within the country, and controlled the media and press. Ceaușescu's attempts to implement policies that would lead to a significant growth of the population led to a growing number of illegal abortions and increased the number of orphans in state institutions. Economic mismanagement due to failed oil ventures during the 1970s led to very significant foreign debts for Romania. In 1982, Ceaușescu directed the government to export much of the country's agricultural and industrial production in an effort to repay these debts.

His cult of personality experienced unprecedented elevation, followed by the deterioration of foreign relations, even with the Soviet Union .

As anti-government protesters demonstrated in Timișoara in December 1989, Ceaușescu perceived the demonstrations as a political threat and ordered military forces to open fire on 17 December, causing many deaths and injuries. The revelation that Ceaușescu was responsible resulted in a massive spread of rioting and civil unrest across the country. The demonstrations, which reached Bucharest , became known as the Romanian Revolution —the only violent overthrow of a communist government in the course of the Revolutions of 1989 . Ceaușescu and his wife Elena fled the capital in a helicopter, but were soon captured after the armed forces turned on them. After being tried and convicted of economic sabotage and genocide , both were sentenced to death, and they were immediately executed by firing squad on 25 December .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Early life [ edit ] Ceaușescu, at age 15, detained at Doftana prison , 1933 This article is part of a series about Nicolae Ceaușescu Personal Early life Family Trial and execution Leader of Romania De-satellization Decree 770 1968 speech Patriotic Guards Systematization Ceaușima rural Danube Program Austerity policy 1986 military referendum Political ideology National communism Dacianism July Theses Opposition Dissent 1977 miners strike SLOMR Brașov Rebellion Letter of the Six Romanian revolution Elections 1967 1974 1980 1985 Legacy Cult of personality Centrul Civic Palace of the Parliament v t e Ceaușescu was born in the small village of Scornicești , Olt County , being the third of nine children of a poor peasant family (see Ceaușescu family ). Based on his birth certificate, he was born on 23 January [ O.S.

10 January] 1918, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] rather than the official 26 January [ O.S.

13 January] 1918—his birth was registered with a three-day delay, which later led to confusion. According to the information recorded in his autobiography, Nicolae Ceaușescu was born on 26 January 1918.

[ 8 ] His father Andruță (1886–1969) owned 3 hectares (7.4 acres) of agricultural land and a few sheep, and Nicolae supplemented his large family's income through tailoring.

[ 9 ] He studied at the village school until the age of 11, when he left for Bucharest . The Olt County Service of National Archives holds excerpts from the catalogs of Scornicești Primary School, which certifies that Nicolae A. Ceaușescu passed the first grade with an average of 8.26 and the second grade with an average of 8.18, ranking third, in a class in which 25 students were enrolled.

[ 8 ] Journalist Cătălin Gruia claimed in 2007 that he ran away from his supposedly extremely religious, abusive and strict father. He initially lived with his sister, Niculina Rusescu.

He became an apprentice shoemaker , [ 9 ] working in the workshop of Alexandru Săndulescu, a shoemaker who was an active member in the then-illegal Communist Party.

[ 9 ] Ceaușescu was soon involved in the Communist Party activities (becoming a member in early 1932), but as a teenager he was given only small tasks.

[ 9 ] He was first arrested in 1933, at the age of 15, for street fighting during a strike and again, in 1934, first for collecting signatures on a petition protesting against the trial of railway workers and twice more for other similar activities. By the mid-1930s, he had been in missions in Bucharest, Craiova , Câmpulung and Râmnicu Vâlcea , being arrested several times.

[ 10 ] The profile file from the secret police, Siguranța Statului , named him "a dangerous Communist agitator" and "distributor of Communist and antifascist propaganda materials".

[ 10 ] For these charges, he was convicted on 6 June 1936 by the Brașov Tribunal to 2 years in prison, an additional 6 months for contempt of court , and one year of forced residence in Scornicești.

[ 10 ] He spent most of his sentence in Doftana Prison .

[ 10 ] While out of jail in 1939, he met Elena Petrescu , whom he married in 1946 and who would play an increasing role in his political life over the years.

Ceaușescu and other Communists at a public meeting in Colentina , welcoming the Red Army as it entered Bucharest on 30 August 1944 Soon after being freed, he was arrested again and sentenced for "conspiracy against social order", spending the time during the war in prisons and internment camps : Jilava (1940), Caransebeș (1942), Văcărești (1943), and Târgu Jiu (1943).

[ 10 ] In 1943, he was transferred to Târgu Jiu internment camp , where he shared a cell with Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej , becoming his protégé .

Enticed with substantial bribes, the camp authorities gave the Communist prisoners much freedom in running their cell block, provided they did not attempt to break out of prison.

[ 11 ] At Târgu Jiu, Gheorghiu-Dej ran " self-criticism sessions" where various Party members had to confess before the other Party members to misunderstanding the teachings of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , Vladimir Lenin , and Joseph Stalin as interpreted by Gheorghiu-Dej; journalist Edward Behr claimed that Ceaușescu's role in these "self-criticism sessions" was that of the enforcer, the young man allegedly beating those Party members who refused to go with or were insufficiently enthusiastic about the "self-criticism" sessions.

[ 12 ] These "self-criticism sessions" not only helped to cement Gheorghiu-Dej's control over the Party, but also endeared his protégé Ceaușescu to him.

[ 12 ] It was Ceaușescu's time at Târgu Jiu that marked the beginning of his rise to power. After World War II , when Romania was beginning to fall under Soviet influence, Ceaușescu served as secretary of the Union of Communist Youth (1944–1945).

[ 13 ] Ceaușescu giving a speech in 1954 After the Communists seized power in Romania in 1947, and under the patronage of Gheorghiu-Dej, Ceaușescu was elected a member of the Great National Assembly , the new legislative body of communist Romania.

In May 1948, Ceaușescu was appointed Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, and in March 1949 he was promoted to the position of Deputy Minister.

[ 14 ] From the Ministry of Agriculture and with no military experience, he was made Deputy Minister in charge of the armed forces, holding the rank of Major General. Later, promoted to the rank of lieutenant general, he became First Deputy to the defence ministry and head of the Army's Higher Political Directorate.

[ 15 ] Ceaușescu studied at the Soviet Frunze Military Academy in Moscow for two consecutive months in both 1951 and 1952.

[ 15 ] In 1952, Gheorghiu-Dej brought him onto the Central Committee months after the party's "Muscovite faction" led by Ana Pauker had been purged. In the late 1940s-early 1950s, the Party had been divided into the "home communists" headed by Gheorghiu-Dej who remained inside Romania prior to 1944 and the "Muscovites" who had gone into exile in the Soviet Union. With the partial exception of Poland, where the Polish October crisis of 1956 brought to power the previously imprisoned "home communist" Władysław Gomułka , Romania was the only Eastern European nation where the "home communists" triumphed over the "Muscovites". In the rest of the Soviet bloc, there were a series of purges in this period that led to the "home communists" being executed or imprisoned. Like his patron Gheorghiu-Dej, Ceaușescu was a "home communist" who benefited from the fall of the "Muscovites" in 1952. In 1954, Ceaușescu became a full member of the Politburo, effectively granting him one of the highest positions of power in the country.

Role in the collectivisation process [ edit ] A high-ranking official in the agricultural and defence ministries, Ceaușescu had an important role in the forced collectivisation; according to Romanian Workers' Party's own data, between 1949 and 1952 there were over 80,000 arrests of peasants, with 30,000 receiving prison sentences.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] One example of these arrests is the uprising of Vadu Roșca (Vrancea county), which opposed the state programme of expropriation of private holdings, where military units opened fire on the rebelling peasants, killing 9 and wounding 48. Ceaușescu personally led the investigation which resulted in 18 peasants being imprisoned for "rebellion" and "conspiring against social order".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 17 ] Leadership of Romania [ edit ] See also: De-satellization of the Socialist Republic of Romania Ceaușescu with Deng Xiaoping and Leonid Brezhnev in 1965 When Gheorghiu-Dej died on 19 March 1965, Ceaușescu was not the obvious successor, despite his closeness to the longtime leader. But widespread infighting by older and more connected officials led the Politburo to choose Ceaușescu as a compromise candidate.

[ 20 ] He was elected general secretary on 22 March 1965, three days after Gheorghiu-Dej's death.

One of Ceaușescu's first acts was to change the name of the party from the Romanian Workers' Party back to the Communist Party of Romania and to declare the country a socialist republic , rather than a people's republic . In 1967, he consolidated his power by becoming president of the State Council , making him head of state. His political apparatus sent many thousands of political opponents to prison or psychiatric hospitals.

[ citation needed ] Initially, Ceaușescu became a popular figure, both in Romania and in the West, because of his independent foreign policy, which challenged the authority of the Soviet Union . In the 1960s, he eased press censorship and ended Romania's active participation in the Warsaw Pact , but Romania formally remained a member. He refused to take part in the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia by Warsaw Pact forces and even actively and openly condemned it in his 21 August 1968 speech . He travelled to Prague a week before the invasion to offer moral support to his Czechoslovak counterpart, Alexander Dubček . Although the Soviet Union largely tolerated Ceaușescu's recalcitrance, his seeming independence from Moscow earned Romania maverick status within the Eastern Bloc .

[ 20 ] All of Ceaușescu's economic, foreign, and demographic policies were meant to achieve his ultimate goal: turning Romania into one of the world's great powers.

[ 21 ] During the following years, Ceaușescu pursued an open policy towards the United States and Western Europe . Romania was the first Warsaw Pact country to recognise West Germany , the first to join the International Monetary Fund , and the first to receive a US president, Richard Nixon .

[ 22 ] In 1971, Romania became a member of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . Romania and Yugoslavia were also the only Eastern European countries that entered into trade agreements with the European Economic Community before the fall of the Eastern Bloc.

[ 23 ] A series of official visits to Western countries (including the US, France, the United Kingdom , Spain and Australia) helped Ceaușescu to present himself as a reforming Communist, pursuing an independent foreign policy within the Soviet Bloc. He also became eager to be seen as an enlightened international statesman, able to mediate in international conflicts, and to gain international respect for Romania.

[ 24 ] Ceaușescu negotiated in international affairs, such as the opening of US relations with China in 1969 and the visit of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat to Israel in 1977. In addition, Romania was the only country in the world to maintain normal diplomatic relations with both Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation . In 1980, Romania participated in the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow with its other Soviet bloc allies, but in 1984 was one of the few Communist countries to participate in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles (going on to win 53 medals, trailing only the US and West Germany in the overall count) [ 25 ] [ 26 ] while most of the Eastern Bloc's nations boycotted this event.

[ 27 ] Ceaușescu with Indira Gandhi during his visit to India in 1969 Ceaușescu refused to implement measures of economic liberalism . The evolution of his regime followed the path begun by Gheorghiu-Dej. He continued with the programme of intensive industrialisation aimed at the economic self-sufficiency of the country which since 1959 had already doubled industrial production and had reduced the peasant population from 78% at the end of the 1940s to 61% in 1966 and 49% by 1971. However, for Romania, like other Eastern People's Republics, industrialisation did not mean a total social break with the countryside. The peasants returned periodically to the villages or resided in them, commuting daily to the city in a practice called naveta. This allowed Romanians to act as peasants and workers at the same time.

[ 28 ] Universities were also founded in smaller Romanian towns, which served to train qualified professionals such as engineers, economists, planners or jurists necessary for the development projects of the country. Romanian healthcare also achieved improvements and recognition by the World Health Organization (WHO), whose director general Marcolino Candau in May 1969 visited Romania and declared that the visits of WHO staff to various Romanian hospital establishments had left an extraordinarily good impression.

[ 28 ] The social and economic transformations resulted in improved living conditions for Romanians. Economic growth allowed for higher salaries which, combined with the benefits offered by the state (free medical care, pensions, free universal education at all levels, etc.) were a leap compared to the pre-WWII situation of the Romanian population. Certain extra retributions were allowed for the peasants, who started to produce more.

[ 28 ] Decree 770 [ edit ] In October 1966, in an attempt to reverse the Romania's low birth and fertility rates, Ceaușescu issued Decree 770 to restrict abortion and contraception .

[ 29 ] The government targeted rising divorce rates and made divorce more difficult – marriages could only be dissolved in exceptional cases. By the late 1960s, the population began to swell. In turn, a new problem was created, child abandonment, which swelled the orphanage population (see 1980s–1990s Romanian orphans phenomenon ). Many of the children in these orphanages suffered mental and physical deficiencies (see Cighid ).

[ 30 ] Measures to encourage reproduction included financial motivations for families who bore children, guaranteed maternity leave, and childcare support for mothers who returned to work, work protection for women, and extensive access to medical control in all stages of pregnancy, as well as after it. Medical control was seen as one of the most productive effects of the law, since all women who became pregnant were under the care of a qualified medical practitioner, even in rural areas. In some cases, if a woman was unable to visit a medical office, a doctor would visit her home.

[ 31 ] Mothers of at least five children were entitled to receive significant benefits, while mothers of at least ten children were declared "heroine mothers" by the Romanian state.

Speech of 21 August 1968 [ edit ] Main article: Ceaușescu's speech of 21 August 1968 Nicolae Ceaușescu condemning the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 Ceaușescu's speech of 21 August 1968 represented the apogee of Ceaușescu's rule.

[ 32 ] It marked the highest point in Ceaușescu's popularity, when he openly condemned the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia .

July Theses [ edit ] Main article: July Theses Ceaușescu with Kim Il Sung of North Korea in 1978. In reforming the state , Ceaușescu sought to emulate Juche and Maoist ideas [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Ceaușescu visited China, North Korea, Mongolia and North Vietnam in 1971. He took great interest in the idea of total national transformation as embodied in the programmes of North Korea's Juche and China's Cultural Revolution . He was also inspired by the personality cults of North Korea 's Kim Il Sung and China 's Mao Zedong . Journalist Edward Behr claimed that Ceaușescu admired both Mao and Kim as leaders who not only totally dominated their nations but had also used totalitarian methods coupled with significant ultra-nationalism mixed in with communism in order to transform both China and North Korea into major world powers.

[ 36 ] Furthermore, that Kim and even more so Mao had broken free of Soviet control were additional sources of admiration for Ceaușescu. According to British journalist Edward Behr, Elena Ceaușescu allegedly bonded with Mao's wife, Jiang Qing .

[ 36 ] Behr wrote that the possibility that what Ceaușescu had seen in both China and North Korea were "vast Potemkin villages for the hoodwinking of gullible foreign guests" was something that never seemed to have crossed his mind.

[ 36 ] Shortly after returning home, he began to emulate North Korea's system. North Korean books on Juche were translated into Romanian and widely distributed inside the country.

[ 37 ] On 6 July 1971, he delivered a speech before the executive committee of the Romanian Communist Party. This quasi- Maoist speech, which came to be known as the July Theses , contained seventeen proposals. Among these were: continuous growth in the "leading role" of the Party; improvement of Party education and of mass political action; youth participation on large construction projects as part of their "patriotic work"; an intensification of political-ideological education in schools and universities, as well as in children's, youth and student associations; and an expansion of political propaganda, orienting radio and television shows to this end, as well as publishing houses, theatres and cinemas, opera, ballet, artists' unions, promoting a "militant, revolutionary" character in artistic productions. Gheorghiu-Dej's process of removing Stalinist policies and Stalin's cult of personality between 1956 and 1965 was condemned and an index of banned books and authors was re-established.

Propaganda poster in Bucharest, 1986. By the 1970s, the Ceaușescus had developed a personality cult The Theses heralded the beginning of a "mini cultural revolution" in Romania, launching a Neo-Stalinist offensive against cultural autonomy, reaffirming an ideological basis for literature that, in theory, the Party had hardly abandoned. Although presented in terms of "Socialist Humanism", the Theses in fact marked a return to the strict guidelines of Socialist Realism and attacks on non-compliant intellectuals. Strict ideological conformity in the humanities and social sciences was demanded.

In a 1972 speech, Ceaușescu stated he wanted "a certain blending of party and state activities ... in the long run we shall witness an ever closer blending of the activities of the party, state and other social bodies". In practice, a number of joint party-state organisations were founded such as the Council for Socialist Education and Culture, which had no precise counterpart in any of the other communist states of Eastern Europe, and the Romanian Communist Party was embedded into the daily life of the nation in a way that it never had been before. In 1974, the party programme of the Romanian Communist Party announced that structural changes in society were insufficient to create a full socialist consciousness in the people, and that a full socialist consciousness could only come about if the entire population was made aware of socialist values that guided society. The Communist Party was to be the agency that would so "enlighten" the population, and in the words of the British historian Richard Crampton, "the party would merge state and society, the individual and the collective, and would promote 'the ever more organic participation of party members in the entire social life ' ".

[ 38 ] President of the Socialist Republic of Romania [ edit ] Ceaușescu with US president Richard Nixon and vice president Gerald Ford in 1973 Ceaușescu with Jimmy Carter during a visit in Washington, D.C.

in 1978 Ceaușescu had been head of state since 1967, though nominally only as first among equals, deriving his real power from his status as party leader. However, in 1974 Ceaușescu introduced a full-fledged executive presidency as the nation's top decision-maker. He was first elected to this post in 1974 and would be reelected every five years until 1989.

As President, he was empowered to carry out those functions of the State Council that did not require plenums . He also appointed and dismissed the president of the Supreme Court and the prosecutor general whenever the legislature was not in session. In practice, from 1974 onwards Ceaușescu frequently ruled by decree.

[ 39 ] Over time, he usurped many powers and functions that nominally were vested in the State Council as a whole.

[ 40 ] Effectively, Ceaușescu now held all governing power in the nation; virtually all party and state institutions were subordinated to his will. The principles of democratic centralism, combined with the legislature's infrequent sessions (it sat in full session only twice a year) meant that for all intents and purposes, his decisions had the force of law.

Oil embargo, strike and foreign relations [ edit ] Ceaușescu with Hafez al-Assad during a 1974 state visit to Syria , which was ruled by the Assad family from 1970 to 2024 Starting with the 1973–1974 Arab oil embargo against the West, a period of prolonged high oil prices set in that characterised the rest of the 1970s. Romania as a major oil equipment producer greatly benefited from the high oil prices of the 1970s, which led Ceaușescu to embark on an ambitious plan to invest heavily in oil-refining plants.

[ citation needed ] Ceaușescu's plan was to make Romania into Europe's number one oil refiner not only of its own oil, but also of oil from Middle Eastern states such as Iraq and Iran, and then to sell all of the refined oil at a profit on the Rotterdam spot market.

[ 41 ] As Romania lacked the money to build the necessary oil refining plants and Ceaușescu chose to spend the windfall from the high oil prices on aid to the Third World in an attempt to buy Romania international influence, Ceaușescu borrowed heavily from Western banks on the assumption that when the loans came due, the profits from the sales of the refined oil would be more than enough to pay off the loans.

[ 41 ] The 1977 earthquake which destroyed much of Bucharest led to delays in the oil plan.

[ 41 ] By the time the oil refining plants were finished in the early 1980s, a slump in oil prices had set in, leading to major financial problems for Romania.

[ 41 ] Ceaușescu in a meeting with Robert Mugabe in 1976 In August 1977 over 30,000 miners went on strike in the Jiu River valley complaining of low pay and poor working conditions.

[ 21 ] The Jiu valley miners' strike was the most significant expression of opposition to Ceaușescu's rule prior to the late 1980s. The striking miners were inspired by similar strikes along Poland's Baltic coast in December 1970, and just as in Poland in 1970, the striking Romanian miners demanded face-to-face negotiations with their nation's leader.

[ 21 ] When Ceaușescu appeared before the miners on the third day of the strike, he was greeted (in the words of the British historian Richard Crampton) "once again à la polonaise , with cries of 'Down with the Red Bourgeoisie!

' ".

[ 21 ] Ceaușescu ultimately negotiated a compromise solution to the strike.

[ 21 ] In the years after the strike, a number of its leaders died of accidents and "premature disease". Rumors emerged that Securitate had doctors give the strike leaders 5-minute chest X-rays to ensure the development of cancer.

[ 21 ] Ceaușescu preparing to deliver a speech in Moscow on the 60th anniversary of the Soviet Union Ceaușescu with Jimmy Carter during a visit in Washington, D.C. in 1978 He continued to follow an independent policy in foreign relations—for example, in 1984, Romania was one of few communist states (notably including the People's Republic of China and Yugoslavia ) to take part in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, despite a Soviet-led boycott. The Socialist Republic of Romania was also the first of the Eastern Bloc nations to have official relations with the Western bloc and the European Community : an agreement including Romania in the Community's Generalised System of Preferences was signed in 1974 and an Agreement on Industrial Products was signed in 1980. On 4 April 1975, Ceaușescu visited Japan and met with Emperor Hirohito . In June 1978, Ceaușescu made a state visit to the UK where a £200m licensing agreement was signed between the Romanian government and British Aerospace for the production of more than eighty BAC One-Eleven aircraft. The deal was said at the time to be the biggest between two countries involving civil aircraft.

[ 42 ] This was the first state visit by a Communist head of state to the UK, and Ceaușescu was given an honorary knighthood by the Queen, which was revoked on the day before his death in 1989.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Similarly, in 1983, US vice president George H. W. Bush and in 1985 US Secretary of State George Shultz also praised the Romanian dictator.

[ 45 ] Pacepa defection [ edit ] In 1978, Ion Mihai Pacepa , a senior member of the Romanian political police ( Securitate , State Security), defected to the US. A two-star general, he was the highest-ranking defector from the Eastern Bloc during the Cold War . His defection was a powerful blow against the administration, forcing Ceaușescu to overhaul Romania's state security architecture. Pacepa's 1986 book, Red Horizons: Chronicles of a Communist Spy Chief ( ISBN 0-89526-570-2 ), claimed to expose details of Ceaușescu's government activities, such as massive spying on American industry and elaborate efforts to rally Western political support.

Systematisation: demolition and reconstruction [ edit ] Main article: Systematization (Romania) Bulevardul Unirii , Bucharest Systematisation ( Romanian : Sistematizarea ) was the programme of urban planning carried out under Ceaușescu's regime. After a visit to North Korea in 1971, Ceaușescu was impressed by the Juche ideology of that country, and began a major campaign shortly afterwards.

Beginning in 1974, the programme consisted largely of the demolition and reconstruction of existing hamlets, villages, towns, and cities, in whole or in part, with the stated goal of turning Romania into a "multilaterally developed socialist society ". The policy largely consisted in the mass construction of high-density blocks of flats ( blocuri ).

During the 1980s, Ceaușescu became obsessed with building himself a palace of unprecedented proportions, along with an equally grandiose neighborhood, Centrul Civic , to accompany it. The mass demolitions that occurred in the 1980s under which an overall area of eight square kilometres of the historic centre of Bucharest were leveled, including monasteries, churches, synagogues, a hospital, and a noted Art Deco sports stadium, in order to make way for the grandiose Centrul Civic and the House of the Republic, now officially renamed the Palace of Parliament , were the most extreme manifestation of this policy.

In 1988, a massive rural resettlement effort began .

Foreign debt [ edit ] Main article: 1980s austerity policy in Romania Ceaușescu in 1988 Ceaușescu's political independence from the Soviet Union and his protest against the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 drew the interest of Western powers, whose governments briefly believed that he was an anti-Soviet maverick and hoped to create a schism in the Warsaw Pact by funding him. Ceaușescu did not realise that the funding was not always favourable, borrowing heavily (more than $13 billion) from the West to finance economic development, with these loans ultimately devastating the country's finances. He also secured a deal for cheap oil from Iran , but the deal fell through after the Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi was overthrown in 1979 during the Iranian Revolution .

In an attempt to correct this, Ceaușescu decided to repay Romania's foreign debts . He organised the 1986 military referendum and managed to change the constitution, adding a clause that barred Romania from taking foreign loans in the future. According to official results, the referendum yielded a nearly unanimous "yes" vote.

[ 46 ] Romania's record—having all of its debts to commercial banks paid off in full—has not been matched by any other heavily indebted country in the world.

[ 47 ] The policy to repay—and, in multiple cases, prepay—Romania's external debt became the dominant policy in the late 1980s. The result was economic stagnation throughout the 1980s and, towards the end of the decade, an economic crisis. The country's industrial capacity was eroded as equipment grew obsolete and energy intensity increased, and the standard of living deteriorated significantly. Draconian restrictions were imposed on household energy use to ensure adequate supplies for industry. Convertible currency exports were promoted at all costs and imports severely reduced. In 1988, real GDP contracted by 0.5%, mostly due to a decline in industrial output caused by significantly increased material costs. Despite the 1988 decline, the net foreign balance reached its decade-long peak (9.5% of GDP). In 1989, GDP slumped by a further 5.8% due to growing shortages and the increasingly obsolete capital stock. By March 1989, virtually all external debt had been repaid, including all medium- and long-term external debt. The remaining amount, totalling less than 1 million, consisted of short-term credits (mainly short-term export credits granted by Romania). A 1989 decree legally prohibited Romanian entities from contracting external debt.

[ 48 ] The CIA World Factbook edition of 1990 listed Romania's external debt as "none" as of mid-1989.

[ 49 ] Yearly evolution (in billions of dollars) [ edit ] 1995 was the last year in which Romania's economy was dominated by the state. From 1996 onwards, the private sector would account for most of Romania's GDP.

[ 50 ] Data for 1975, 1980 and 1982–1988 taken from the Statistical Abstract of the United States .

[ 51 ] Data for 1989–1995 provided by the OECD .

[ 52 ] Data for 1981 and 1985 provided by the World Book Year Book .

[ 53 ] By April 1989, with its debt virtually zero, Romania was a net external creditor. Foreign borrowing was resumed after December 1989 .

[ 54 ] In order to maintain net creditor status, Romania had to keep its external debt under $2.5 billion, the low estimate of the amount it was owed by oil producers and other LDCs . This was first achieved in 1988 [ 55 ] and continued through the early 1990s.

[ 56 ] 1975 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 Gross external debt 2.9 9.4 10.2 9.8 8.8 7.1 6.6 6.4 5.1 2.2 0.0 0.2 2.2 3.5 4.5 5.5 6.7 Net status debtor debtor debtor debtor debtor debtor debtor debtor debtor creditor creditor creditor creditor debtor debtor debtor debtor 1984 failed coup d'état attempt [ edit ] A tentative coup d'état planned in October 1984 failed when the military unit assigned to carry out the plan was sent to harvest maize instead.

[ 57 ] 1987 Brașov rebellion [ edit ] Main article: Brașov rebellion Ceaușescu with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in 1985 Romanian workers began to mobilise against the economic policies of Ceaușescu. Spontaneous labour conflicts, limited in scale, took place in major industrial strongholds such as Cluj-Napoca (November 1986) and the Nicolina platform in Iași (February 1987), culminating in a massive strike in Brașov . The draconian measures taken by Ceaușescu involved reducing energy and food consumption, as well as lowering workers' incomes, leading to what political scientist Vladimir Tismăneanu called "generalised dissatisfaction".

[ 58 ] Over 20,000 workers and a number of townspeople marched against economic policies in Socialist Romania and Nicolae Ceaușescu's policies of rationing of basic foodstuffs , rationing electricity and central heating .

The first protests began practically on 14 November 1987, at the 440 "Molds" Section of the Red Flag truck company. Initially, the protests were for basic needs: "We want food and heating!", "We want our money!", "We want food for the children!", "We want light and heat!" and "We want bread without a card!" Next to the County Hospital, they sang the anthem of the revolution of 1848, " Deșteaptă-te, române!

" . Upon arriving in the city centre, thousands of workers from the Tractorul Brașov and Hidromecanica factories, pupils, students, and others joined the demonstration. From this moment on, the protest became political. Participants later claimed to have chanted slogans such as "Down with Ceaușescu!", "Down with communism!", "Down with the dictatorship!" or "Down with the tyrant!". During the march, members of the Securitate disguised as workers infiltrated the demonstrators, or remained on the sidelines as spectators, photographing or even filming.

[ 59 ] By dusk, Securitate forces and the military surrounded the city centre and disbanded the revolt by force. Some 300 protesters were arrested, and, in order to hide the political nature of the Brașov uprising, tried for disturbing the peace and "outrage against morals".

Those under investigation were beaten and tortured, 61 receiving sentences ranging from 6 months to 3 years in prison, including sentences to be carried out working at various state enterprises across in the country. Although many previous party meetings had called for the death penalty to set an example, the regime was eager to downplay the uprising as "isolated cases of hooliganism ". Protesters were sentenced to deportation, with compulsory residence arranged in other cities, despite such measures having been repealed as far back as the late 1950s. The entire trial lasted only an hour and a half.

[ 59 ] A few days after the workers' revolt, Cătălin Bia, a student at the Faculty of Forestry, sat in front of the canteen with a placard that read: "The arrested workers must not die". He was joined by colleagues Lucian Silaghi and Horia Șerban. The three were arrested immediately. Subsequently, graffiti in solidarity with the workers' revolt appeared on the campus, and some students distributed manifestos. Security teams conducted a total of seven arrests. Those arrested were investigated, expelled from the faculty, returned to their home localities and placed under strict supervision, along with their families.

[ 59 ] Romani minority rights [ edit ] Under the Ceaușescu regime, Romani people in Romania were largely neglected. This can be seen, perhaps most blatantly, in a motion from the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Romanian Workers Party , which largely laid the foundation for the Ceaușescu regime's policies regarding the rights of ethnic minorities. The motion entirely ignored the Romani.

[ 60 ] The regime excluded the Romani from its list of "co-inhabiting nationalities", preventing them from gaining any government representation as an ethnic group. Their exclusion continued even after increased representation of minorities such as Hungarians and Germans . Ceaușescu largely wished to ignore the living conditions of the Romani, who had suffered similar institutional neglect at the hands of his predecessors as far back as Ion Antonescu .

[ 60 ] Revolution [ edit ] Main article: Romanian Revolution Tanks and Miliția on the Magheru Boulevard in Bucharest during the 1989 Revolution In November 1989, the XIVth Congress of the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) saw Ceaușescu, then aged 71, re-elected for another five years as leader of the PCR. During the Congress, Ceaușescu made a speech denouncing the anti-Communist revolutions happening throughout the rest of Eastern Europe. The following month, Ceaușescu's government itself collapsed after a series of violent events in Timișoara and Bucharest .

Czechoslovak President Gustáv Husák 's resignation on 10 December 1989 amounted to the fall of the Communist regime in Czechoslovakia, leaving Ceaușescu's Romania as the only remaining hard-line Communist regime in the Warsaw Pact.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Timișoara [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Demonstrations in the city of Timișoara were triggered by the government-sponsored attempt to evict László Tőkés , an ethnic Hungarian pastor, accused by the government of inciting ethnic hatred . Members of his ethnic Hungarian congregation surrounded his apartment in a show of support.

Romanian students spontaneously joined the demonstration, which soon lost nearly all connection to its initial cause and became a more general anti-government demonstration. Regular military forces, police, and the Securitate fired on demonstrators on 17 December 1989, killing and injuring men, women, and children.

On 18 December 1989, Ceaușescu departed for a state visit to Iran , leaving the duty of crushing the Timișoara revolt to his subordinates and his wife. Upon his return to Romania on the evening of 20 December, the situation became even more tense, and he gave a televised speech from the TV studio inside the Central Committee Building (CC Building), in which he spoke about the events at Timișoara in terms of an "interference of foreign forces in Romania's internal affairs" and an "external aggression on Romania's sovereignty".

The country, which had little to no information of the events transpiring in Timișoara from the national media, learned about the revolt from anti-communist radio stations that broadcast news in the Eastern Bloc throughout the Cold War (such as Voice of America and Radio Free Europe ) and by word of mouth. On the next day, 21 December, Ceaușescu staged a mass meeting in Bucharest . Official media presented it as a "spontaneous movement of support for Ceaușescu", emulating the 1968 meeting in which he had spoken against the invasion of Czechoslovakia by Warsaw Pact forces.

Overthrow [ edit ] Speech on 21 December 1989 [ edit ] Main article: Ceaușescu's final speech The mass meeting of 21 December, held in what is now Revolution Square , began like many of Ceaușescu's speeches over the years. He spoke of the achievements of the "Socialist revolution" and Romania's "multi-laterally developed Socialist society". He also blamed the Timișoara riots on "fascist agitators who want to destroy socialism".

[ 64 ] However, Ceaușescu had misjudged the crowd's mood. Roughly eight minutes into his speech, several people began jeering and booing, and others began chanting " Timișoara !" [ 65 ] He tried to silence them by raising his right hand and calling for the crowd's attention before order was temporarily restored, then proceeded to announce social benefit reforms that included raising the national minimum wage by 200 lei per month to a total of 2,200 per month by 1 January. Images of Ceaușescu's facial expression as the crowd began to boo and heckle him were among the most widely broadcast of the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe.

[ 20 ] Failing to control the crowd, the Ceaușescus took cover inside the building that housed the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party. The rest of the day saw an open revolt of Bucharest's population, which had assembled in University Square and confronted the police and army at barricades. The rioters, however, were no match for the military apparatus concentrated in Bucharest, which cleared the streets by midnight and arrested hundreds of people in the process.

Flight on 22 December [ edit ] By the morning of 22 December, the rebellion had already spread to all major cities across the country. The suspicious death of Vasile Milea , Ceaușescu's defence minister , later confirmed as a suicide (he had tried to incapacitate himself with a flesh wound but a bullet severed his artery), [ 66 ] was announced by the media. Immediately thereafter, Ceaușescu presided over the CPEx (Political Executive Committee) meeting and assumed the leadership of the army. Believing that Milea had been murdered, rank-and-file soldiers switched sides to the revolution almost en masse . The commanders wrote off Ceaușescu as a lost cause and made no effort to keep their men loyal to the government. Ceaușescu made a last desperate attempt to address the crowd gathered in front of the Central Committee building, but the people in the square began throwing stones and other projectiles at him, forcing him to take refuge in the building once more.

[ citation needed ] He, Elena and four others managed to get to the roof and escape by helicopter, only seconds ahead of a group of demonstrators who had followed them there.

[ 20 ] The Romanian Communist Party disappeared soon afterwards; unlike its kindred parties in the former Soviet bloc, it has never been revived.

The Western press [ who?

] published estimates of the number of people killed by Securitate forces. The count increased rapidly until an estimated 64,000 fatalities were reported across front pages.

[ 67 ] The Hungarian military attaché expressed doubt regarding these figures, pointing out the unfeasible logistics of killing such a large number of people in such a short period. After Ceaușescu's death, hospitals across the country reported a death toll of fewer than 1,000, and probably much lower than that.

[ 68 ] Death [ edit ] Main article: Trial and execution of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu Ceaușescu's original grave, Ghencea Cemetery , Bucharest The current resting place of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu at Ghencea Cemetery. The tombstone erroneously states Elena's year of birth as 1919; she was born on 7 January 1916 Ceaușescu and his wife Elena fled the capital with Emil Bobu and Manea Mănescu and flew by helicopter to Ceaușescu's Snagov residence, from which they fled again, this time to Târgoviște . They abandoned the helicopter near Târgoviște, having been ordered to land by the army, which by that time had restricted flying in Romania's airspace. The Ceaușescus were held by the police while the policemen listened to the radio. They were eventually handed over to the army.

On Christmas Day, 25 December 1989, the Ceaușescus were tried before a court convened in a small room on orders of the National Salvation Front , Romania's provisional government. They faced charges including illegal gathering of wealth and genocide . Ceaușescu repeatedly denied the court's authority to try him, and asserted he was still legally the President of Romania. At the end of the trial, the Ceaușescus were found guilty and sentenced to death . A soldier standing guard in the proceedings was ordered to take the Ceaușescus outside one by one and shoot them, but the Ceaușescus demanded to die together. The soldiers agreed to this and began to tie their hands behind their backs, which the Ceaușescus protested against, but were powerless to prevent.

The Ceaușescus were executed by a group of soldiers: Captain Ionel Boeru, Sergeant-Major Georghin Octavian and Dorin-Marian Cîrlan, [ 69 ] and five other non-commissioned officers who were recruited from twenty volunteers. Before his sentence was carried out, Nicolae Ceaușescu sang " The Internationale " whilst being led towards the wall. The firing squad began shooting as soon as the two were in their positions up against the wall.

[ 70 ] Later that day, the execution was also shown on Romanian television.

[ 71 ] The hasty show trial and the images of the executed Ceaușescus were videotaped and the footage released in numerous Western countries two days after the execution.

The manner in which the trial was conducted has been criticised. However, Ion Iliescu , Romania's provisional president, said in 2009 that the trial was "quite shameful, but necessary" in order to end the state of near-anarchy that had gripped the country in the three days since the Ceaușescus fled Bucharest.

[ 72 ] Similarly, Victor Stănculescu , who had been defence minister before going over to the revolution, said, in 2009, that the alternative would have been seeing the Ceaușescus lynched on the streets of Bucharest.

[ 73 ] The Ceaușescus were the last people to be executed in Romania before the abolition of capital punishment on 7 January 1990.

[ 74 ] Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu were originally buried in simple graves at Ghencea Cemetery , in Bucharest, on opposite sides of a path; their graves were often decorated with flowers and symbols of communist rule. In April 2007, their son Valentin Ceaușescu lost an appeal for an investigation into whether the graves were genuine. Upon his death in 1996, the younger son, Nicu , was buried nearby in the same cemetery.

[ 75 ] According to the Jurnalul Național , [ 76 ] requests were made by the Ceaușescus' daughter, Zoia , and by supporters of their political views, to move their remains to mausoleums or to purpose-built churches. These demands were denied by the government.

Exhumation and reburial [ edit ] On 21 July 2010, forensic scientists exhumed the bodies to perform DNA tests to prove conclusively that they were indeed the remains of the Ceaușescus.

[ 75 ] The body believed to be Elena's had decayed too much to allow for a positive identification, but Nicolae was easily identifiable, wearing the bullet-riddled black winter coat he had been wearing during the execution. DNA tests were able to conclusively prove his identity.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] His family organised a funeral service for the couple, [ 75 ] and they were reburied together at Ghencea under a tombstone.

[ 79 ] Policies [ edit ] Part of a series on Stalinism Concepts Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-revisionism Collectivization Cult of personality Five-year plans Great Break Korenizatsiia Marxism–Leninism New Soviet man Popular front Self-criticism Socialism in one country Socialist realism Soviet patriotism Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Vanguardism People Stalin Andreyeva Andreyev Berman Bierut Beria Ceaușescu Chervenkov Choibalsan Dimitrov Dugin Firin Foster Frinovsky Frenkel Kaganovich Kalinin Kim Kirov Khrulyov Khrushchev Kolmogorov Kotkin Kosygin Kryuchkov Kuybyshev Malenkov Merkulov Molotov Ochab Ordzhonikidze Petrovsky Pollitt Raikhman Rákosi Rosengolts Serov Sholokhov Thälmann Ulbricht Vyshinsky Voznesensky Yagoda Yenukidze Yezhov Yaroslavsky Zyuganov Theoretical works About the anti-Soviet elements Dialectical and Historical Materialism Dizzy with Success Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR Falsifiers of History Foundations of Leninism History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Marxism and the National Question History Stalinist Era First five-year plan Great Break Collectivisation Industrialisation Great Purge Moscow trials Azerbaijan repressions Mongolia repressions Spanish Civil War World War II Soviet atomic bomb project Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Cominform Chinese Communist Revolution First Indochina War Korean War Doctors' plot Death and funeral of Stalin De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Khrushchev Thaw Parties Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) All-Union Communist Party Bolsheviks Albanian Party of Labour Communist Party of Germany Communist Party of Greece Italian Marxist–Leninist Party CARC Party Communist Party of New Zealand Romanian Communist Party Workers' Party of Korea Communist Party of the Russian Federation National Bolshevik Party The Other Russia Stalin Bloc – For the USSR American Communist Party (2024) Related topics Anti-Stalinist left Joseph Stalin's rise to power Stalin and antisemitism Stalin Society Stalinist architecture Neo-Stalinism Anti-Soviet agitation Authoritarian socialism Comparison to Nazism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Juche Maoism National communism Red fascism Sino–Albanian split Sino–Soviet split Soviet–Albanian split Soviet–Yugoslav split Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Soviet Union portal v t e See also: National communism in Romania and Neo-Stalinism A Romanian Encyclopedic Dictionary entry in 1978 underlines the concept [ clarification needed ] as "a new, superior, stage in the Socialist development of Romania ... begun by the 1971–1975 Five-Year Plan, prolonged over several [succeeding and projected] Five-Year Plans".

[ 80 ] Ceaușism's main trait was a form of Romanian nationalism , [ 81 ] one which arguably propelled Ceaușescu to power in 1965, and probably led the Party leadership under Ion Gheorghe Maurer to select him over the more orthodox Gheorghe Apostol . Although he had previously been a careful supporter of the official lines, Ceaușescu came to embody Romanian society's wish for independence after what many considered years of Soviet directives and purges, during and after the SovRom fiasco. He carried this nationalist option inside the Party, manipulating it against the nominated successor, Apostol. This nationalist policy had more timid precedents: [ 82 ] for example, Gheorghiu-Dej had overseen the withdrawal of the Red Army in 1958.

Moldavian workers during Ceaușescu's visit to Soviet Moldavia in 1972 This nationalist policy had also engineered the publishing of several works that subverted the Soviet image, no longer glossing over traditional points of tension with the Soviet Union.

Ceaușescu was prepared to take a more decisive step in questioning Soviet policies. In the early years of his rule, he generally relaxed political pressures inside Romanian society, [ 83 ] which led to the late 1960s and early 1970s being the most liberal decade in Socialist Romania. Gaining the public's confidence, Ceaușescu took a clear stand against the 1968 crushing of the Prague Spring by Leonid Brezhnev . After a visit from Charles de Gaulle earlier in the same year, during which the French President gave recognition to the incipient maverick, Ceaușescu's public speech in August deeply impressed the population, not only through its themes, but also because, uniquely, it was unscripted. He immediately attracted Western sympathies and backing, which lasted well beyond the 'liberal' phase of his rule; at the same time, the period brought forward the threat of armed Soviet invasion: significantly, many young men inside Romania joined the Patriotic Guards created on the spur of the moment, in order to meet the perceived threat.

[ 84 ] President Richard Nixon was invited to Bucharest in 1969, which was the first visit of a US president to a communist country after the start of the Cold War.

Alexander Dubček 's version of Socialism with a human face was never suited to Romanian Communist goals.

[ citation needed ] Ceaușescu found himself briefly aligned with Dubček's Czechoslovakia and Josip Broz Tito 's Yugoslavia . The latter friendship was to last until Tito's death in 1980, with Ceaușescu adapting the Titoist doctrine of "independent Socialist development" to suit his own objectives.

[ citation needed ] Romania proclaimed itself a "Socialist" (in place of "People's") Republic to show that it was fulfilling Marxist goals without Moscow's oversight, a move mirroring Communist Yugoslavia which renamed itself from a "Federal People's Republic" to a "Socialist Federal Republic" a few years earlier.

The system's nationalist traits grew and progressively blended with North Korean Juche and Chinese Maoist ideals.

[ citation needed ] In 1971, the Party, which had already been completely purged of internal opposition (with the possible exception of Gheorghe Gaston Marin ), [ 82 ] approved the July Theses , expressing Ceaușescu's disdain of Western models as a whole, and the reevaluation of the recent liberalisation as bourgeois . The 1974 XIth Party Congress tightened the Party's grip on Romanian culture, guiding it towards Ceaușescu's nationalist principles.

[ 85 ] Notably, it demanded that Romanian historians refer to Dacians as having "an unorganised State", part of a political continuum that culminated in the Socialist Republic.

[ 85 ] The government continued its cultural dialogue with ancient forms, with Ceaușescu connecting his cult of personality to figures such as Mircea cel Bătrân (lit. "Mircea the Elder", whom he styled "Mircea the Great") and Mihai Viteazul (Michael the Brave). It also started adding Dacian or Roman versions to the names of cities and towns ( Drobeta to Turnu Severin , Napoca to Cluj ).

[ 86 ] Although Ceaușescu maintained an independent, "national Communist" course, his absolute control over the country, as well as the intensity of the personality cult surrounding him, led many non-Romanian observers to describe his rule as one of the closest things to an old-style Stalinist regime. The last edition of the Country Study on Romania, for instance, referred to the PCR's "Stalinist repression of individual liberties".

[ 87 ] A new generation of committed supporters on the outside confirmed the administration's character. Ceaușescu likely never himself appreciated that his policies constituted a paradigm for theorists of National Bolshevism such as Jean-François Thiriart , but there was a publicised connection between him and Iosif Constantin Drăgan , an Iron Guardist Romanian-Italian émigré millionaire (Drăgan was already committed to a Dacianist and protochronist attitude that largely echoed the official cultural policy).

Nicolae Ceaușescu had a major influence on modern-day Romanian populist rhetoric. In his final years, he had begun to rehabilitate the image of pro- Nazi dictator Ion Antonescu .

[ citation needed ] Although Antonescu's image was never a fully official myth in Ceaușescu's time, after his overthrow politicians such as Corneliu Vadim Tudor have coupled the images of the two leaders into their versions of a national Pantheon.

[ citation needed ] The conflict with Hungary over the treatment of the Magyar minority in Romania had several unusual aspects: not only was it a vitriolic argument between two officially Socialist states , it also marked the moment when Hungary, a state behind the Iron Curtain , appealed to the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe for sanctions to be taken against Romania. This meant that the later 1980s were marked by a pronounced anti-Hungarian discourse, which owed more to nationalist tradition than to Marxism, [ 88 ] and the ultimate isolation of Romania on the world stage.

The strong opposition to Ceaușescu on all forms of perestroika and glasnost placed him at odds with Mikhail Gorbachev . He was very displeased when other Warsaw Pact countries decided to try their own versions of Gorbachev's reforms. In particular, he was incensed when Poland 's leaders opted for a power-sharing arrangement with the Solidarity trade union. He even went as far as to call for a Warsaw Pact invasion of Poland—a significant reversal, considering how violently he had opposed the invasion of Czechoslovakia 20 years earlier.

[ 89 ] For his part, Gorbachev made no secret of his distaste for Ceaușescu, whom he called "the Romanian führer ". At a meeting between the two, Gorbachev upbraided Ceaușescu for his inflexible attitude. "You are running a dictatorship here", the Soviet leader warned.

[ 20 ] In November 1989, at the XIVth and last congress of the PCR, Ceaușescu condemned the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact and asked for the annulment of its consequences.

[ citation needed ] In effect, this amounted to a demand for the return of Bessarabia (most of which was then a Soviet republic and since 1991 has been independent Moldova ) and northern Bukovina , both of which had been occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940 and again at the end of World War II.

[ citation needed ] Non-aligned policy feats [ edit ] Warsaw Pact leaders in 1987 from left to right: Husák of Czechoslovakia , Zhivkov of Bulgaria , Honecker of East Germany , Gorbachev of the Soviet Union , Ceaușescu, Jaruzelski of Poland , and Kádár of Hungary Ceaușescu was among the most ardent supporters of dimming lingering tensions between different Balkan states, [ 90 ] and went as far as to establish friendly relations with the vituperatively anti-communist Regime of the Colonels in Greece to pursue his objectives of cooperation between Balkan countries.

[ 91 ] Ceaușescu with Ștefan Andrei and George Macovescu at CSCE Meeting in Helsinki, Finland in 1975 Ceaușescu's Romania was the only Eastern Bloc country that retained diplomatic relations with Israel and did not sever diplomatic relations after Israel's strike on Egypt at the start of the Six-Day War in 1967, to the consternation of the Soviet Union.

[ 92 ] Ceaușescu made efforts to act as a mediator between the PLO and Israel.

[ citation needed ] Similarly, Romania was the only Eastern Bloc country to attend the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , which had been boycotted by the Soviet Union and its allies in response to the US-led boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Ceaușescu's Romania was the only Warsaw Pact country that did not sever diplomatic relations with Chile after Augusto Pinochet seized power in the 1973 coup d'état .

[ 95 ] Nicolae Ceaușescu was a close ally and personal friend of dictator Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo ). Relations were in fact not just state-to-state, but party-to-party between their respective political machineries , the MPR and the PCR . Many believe that Ceaușescu's death played a role in influencing Mobutu to "democratise" Zaire in 1990.

[ 96 ] Ceaușescu reduced the size of the Romanian People's Army by 5%, for which he called the 1986 mock referendum in which 100% voted in favour.

[ 97 ] In line with his policy of keeping a façade of "popular democracy", he also ordered large rallies for peace to be held.

Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic [ edit ] In August 1976, Nicolae Ceaușescu was the first high-level Romanian visitor to Moldavian SSR since World War II. In December 1976, at one of his meetings in Bucharest, Ivan Bodiul said that "the good relationship was initiated by Ceaușescu's visit to Soviet Moldova".

[ 98 ] Personality cult and totalitarianism [ edit ] Main article: Nicolae Ceaușescu's cult of personality Stamp commemorating Ceaușescu's 70th birthday and 55 years of political activity, 1988 Ceaușescu receiving the presidential sceptre, 1974 [ 99 ] Ceaușescu created a pervasive personality cult , giving himself titles such as " Conducător " ("Leader") and "Geniul din Carpați" ("The Genius of the Carpathians"), with inspiration from Proletarian Culture ( Proletkult ). After his election as President of Romania, he even had a "presidential sceptre" created for himself, thus appropriating a royal insignia . This excess prompted painter Salvador Dalí to send a congratulatory telegram to the Romanian president, in which he sarcastically congratulated Ceaușescu on his "introducing the presidential sceptre". The Communist Party daily Scînteia published the message, unaware that it was a work of satire.

[ citation needed ] The most important day of the year during Ceaușescu's rule was his official birthday, 26 January—a day which saw Romanian media saturated with praise for him. According to historian Victor Sebestyen , it was one of the few days of the year when the average Romanian put on a happy face, since appearing miserable on this day was too risky to contemplate.

[ 20 ] To lessen the chance of further treason after Pacepa's defection, Ceaușescu also invested his wife Elena and other members of his family with important positions in the government. This led Romanians to joke that Ceaușescu was creating "socialism in one family", a pun on " socialism in one country ".

[ citation needed ] Ceaușescu was greatly concerned about his public image. For years, nearly all official photographs of him showed him in his late 40s. Romanian state television was under strict orders to portray him in the best possible light.

[ 20 ] Additionally, great care was taken by producers to ensure that Ceaușescu’s height—1.68 metres (5 ft 6 in)—was never conspicuously highlighted on screen.

[ 100 ] Consequences for breaking these rules were severe; one producer showed footage of Ceaușescu blinking and stuttering, and was banned for three months.

[ 20 ] As part of a propaganda ploy arranged by the Ceaușescus through the consular cultural attachés of Romanian embassies, [ citation needed ] they managed to receive orders and titles from numerous states and institutions. France granted Nicolae Ceaușescu the Legion of Honour . In 1978 he became a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB) in the UK, [ 101 ] [ circular reference ] a title of which he was stripped in 1989. Elena Ceaușescu was arranged to be "elected" to membership of a science academy in the US.

To execute a massive redevelopment project, the Ceaușescu government conducted extensive demolition of churches and many other historic structures in Romania. According to Alexandru Budistenu, former chief architect of Bucharest: "The sight of a church bothered Ceaușescu. It didn't matter if they demolished or moved it, as long as it was no longer in sight" — Alexandru Budistenu, 9 January 2019 Nevertheless, a project by Romanian engineer Eugeniu Iordachescu was able to move many historic structures to less prominent sites, thus saving them.

[ 102 ] IKEA [ edit ] In the 1980s under Ceaușescu, the Securitate received six-figure payments from Swedish furniture company IKEA .

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] According to declassified files at the National Council for the Study of the Securitate Archive , IKEA agreed to overcharge for products made in Romania and some of the overpayment funds were deposited into an account controlled by the Securitate.

[ citation needed ] [ relevant?

] Legacy [ edit ] Ceaușescu had a mixed reputation among international leaders of his time. In his memoir The Artful Albanian , Albanian communist leader Enver Hoxha remarked "As if Ceaușescu and company are to bring down imperialism! If the world waits for the Ceaușescus to do such a thing, imperialism will live for tens of thousands of years..." [ 105 ] According to Pacepa, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi had an opposite interpretation, allegedly saying, "My brother! You are my brother for the rest of my life!".

[ 106 ] Ceaușescu even received praise from anti-communists with the Iran's shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi acclaiming Ceaușescu leadership: "I would like to salute [Ceaușescu's] intransigent patriotism and ferocious will for independence. A veritable amity links me to him".

[ 107 ] He directed the construction of the Palace of the Parliament in Bucharest, which broke ground in June 1984. It was previously called The House of the People and The People's House. The building of the Palace of the Parliament was the most extreme expression of the Systematisation programme imposed by Ceaușescu upon Romania, being an urban planning programme used to convert villages into miniature cities . The main architect of the building was Anca Petrescu (1949–2013), who began her work on the building when she was 28 years old. The building was completed in 1997, after Ceaușescu's death in 1989. The Romanian Senate , which was originally housed in the former building of the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party , has been headquartered in the Parliamentary Palace since 2004.

The Parliamentary Palace building has 1,100 rooms and is the largest civilian government building in the world as measured by volume in one continuous structure. (There are larger private sector buildings , mainly for the construction of aircraft, that have more continuous volume in one building, such as the Boeing Everett Factory .) Much of the building remains empty, being larger than the Parliament needs, though Parliament shares it with three museums and an international conference centre.

[ 108 ] It is also the heaviest building in the world, being constructed of 700,000 tonnes of steel and bronze , a million square feet of marble , and large amounts of crystal and wood.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Ceaușescu and his future successor, Ion Iliescu , in 1976 The Ceaușescus had three children: Valentin (born 1948), a nuclear physicist; Zoia (1949–2006), a mathematician; and Nicu Ceaușescu (1951–1996), a physicist. After the death of his parents, Nicolae Ceaușescu ordered [ how?

] the construction of an Orthodox church, the walls of which are decorated with portraits of his parents.

[ 76 ] Praising the crimes of totalitarian governments and denigrating their victims is forbidden by law in Romania; this includes the Ceaușescu era. Dinel Staicu was fined 25,000 lei (approx. 9,000 US dollars) for praising Ceaușescu and displaying his pictures on his private television channel ( 3TV Oltenia ).

[ 111 ] Opinion polls held in 2010 indicated that 41% of Romanians would have voted for Ceaușescu if given the opportunity [ 112 ] [ 113 ] and 63% felt their lives were better before 1989.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] In 2014, the percentage of those who would vote for Ceaușescu reached 46%.

[ 115 ] On 27 December 2018, a poll found 64% of people had a good opinion of him.

[ 116 ] Cultural depictions [ edit ] Ceaușescu is played by Constantin Cojocaru in the 2011 Swiss docudrama Die letzten Tage der Ceaușescus .

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] The final song on the 2012 album Bish Bosch by Scott Walker titled “The Day The ‘Conducator’ Died (An Xmas Song)” is in reference to Ceaușescu (and his death on Christmas Day.) A comedy musical enjoyed a world premiere at Seven Arts in Leeds on Sunday 21 May 2017. It was written by Tom Bailey and Greg Jameson, with songs by Allan Stelmach, and depicted Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu and their son Valentin in a piece of meta musical theatre that was also a comment upon celebrity culture and the role social media and political correctness play in creating social pariahs .

[ 119 ] Honours and awards [ edit ] Ceaușescu was made a knight of the Danish Order of the Elephant , but this appointment was revoked on 23 December 1989 by the then queen of Denmark, Margrethe II .

Ceaușescu was likewise stripped of his honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (GCB) status by Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom on the day before his execution. Queen Elizabeth II also returned the insignia of the Order of the Star of the Socialist Republic of Romania that Ceaușescu had bestowed upon her in 1978.

[ 120 ] On his 70th birthday in 1988, Ceaușescu was decorated with the Karl-Marx-Order by then Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) chief Erich Honecker ; through this he was honoured for his rejection of Mikhail Gorbachev 's reforms.

Romanian orders, decorations and medals [ edit ] All titles and decorations were revoked by the provisional government on 26 December 1989.

Commemorative Medal of the 5th Anniversary of the Republic of Romania Commemorative Medal of the 35th Anniversary of the Liberation of Romania Hero of Romania , three times (1971, 1978 and 1988) Hero of Socialist Labour (Romania) (1964) Military Merit Medal (Romania) Order of the Victory of Socialism (accompanied each Hero of Romania) Order of Labour Order of Homeland Defence Order of the Star of the Republic of Romania Foreign state orders, decorations and medals [ edit ] Several foreign decorations were revoked at the time of the collapse of Ceaușescu's rule.

Argentina Collar of the Order of the Liberator General San Martín (1974) Austria Great Star of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria (1969) [ 121 ] Brazil Order of the Southern Cross (1975) Bulgaria Order of Stara Planina (1983) Cuba Order of José Martí (1973) Twentieth Anniversary Commemorative Medal of the Assault on the Moncada Barracks (1976) Czechoslovakia Grand Collar of the Order of the White Lion (1987; subsequently expelled 1989) [ 122 ] Denmark Knight of the Order of the Elephant (1980; subsequently expelled 1989) France Legion of Honour [ 123 ] East Germany Order of Karl Marx ( German Democratic Republic , 1988) – for his defence of Marxism by rejecting Gorbachev's reforms West Germany Special class of the Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany ( West Germany , 1971) Greece Athens Gold Medal (1976) Iran Commemorative Medal of the 2500th Anniversary of the founding of the Persian Empire (Empire of Iran, 1971).

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Italy Knight Grand Cross decorated with Grand Cordon of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (1973) Malaysia Honorary Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm (1984) [ 126 ] Norway Grand Cross of the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olaf (expelled 1989) Peru Grand Cross with Diamonds of the Order of the Sun of Peru (1973) [ 127 ] Philippines Grand Collar of the Ancient Order of Sikatuna (1975) [ 128 ] Portugal Collar of the Order of Saint James of the Sword (1975) Soviet Union (All Soviet decorations and medals were revoked in 1990) Jubilee Medal "Thirty Years of Victory in the Great Patriotic War 1941–1945" (1975) Order of Lenin , twice (Soviet Union, 1973 and 25 January 1988) [ 129 ] Order of the October Revolution (1983) Sweden Knight of the Royal Order of the Seraphim (1980) United Kingdom Knight Grand Cross of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (1978; expelled 1989) Foreign non-state decorations [ edit ] Gold Collar of the Olympic Order ( International Olympic Committee , 1984), for decision not to participate in the boycott of the Los Angeles Olympics Gold Medal Plate of the International Relations Institute of Rome , an Italian non-profit organisation (1979) Academic titles [ edit ] Honorary degrees from the University of Bucharest (1973), Lebanese University (1974), University of Buenos Aires (1974), Autonomous University of Yucatán (1975), University of Nice Sophia Antipolis (1975), University of the Philippines (1975), University of Liberia (1988) and Kim Il Sung University North Korea (1988).

[ citation needed ] In popular culture [ edit ] Two documentaries have been made about Ceaușescu in the 21st century. The first film was written and directed by Ben Lewis for the BBC , titled The King of Communism: The Pomp & Pageantry of Nicolae Ceaușescu (2002).

The second, Autobiografia lui Nicolae Ceaușescu (2011), was created by Romanian writer/director Andrei Ujica , and an English language version of the film was released simultaneously, titled The Autobiography of Nicolae Ceaușescu .

[ 130 ] The Left Behind novels of Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins prominently feature a fictional Romanian President named Nicolae Carpathia , whose cult of personality, strong-arm tactics, and name are similar to those of Nicolae Ceaușescu.

[ citation needed ] Selected published works [ edit ] Report during the joint solemn session of the CC of the Romanian Communist Party, the National Council of the Socialist Unity Front and the Grand National Assembly: Marking the 60th anniversary of the creation of a Unitary Romanian National State , 1978 Major problems of our time: Eliminating underdevelopment, bridging gaps between states, building a new international economic order , 1980 The solving of the national question in Romania (Socio-political thought of Romania's President) , 1980 Ceaușescu: Builder of Modern Romania and International Statesman , 1983 The nation and co-habiting nationalities in the contemporary epoch (Philosophical thought of Romania's president) , 1983 The history of the Romanian people in the view of the President ( Istoria poporului român în concepția președintelui ), 1988 Citations [ edit ] ^ Behr, E. (1991).

Kiss the hand you cannot bite: the rise and fall of the Ceaușescus . London: Hamish Hamilton.

^ "Nicolae Ceaușescu" .

Biography.com . December 2021.

^ "Nicolae Ceaușescu – president of Romania" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 10 May 2023.

^ Boyes, Roger (24 December 2009).

"Ceaușescu looked in my eyes and he knew that he was going to die" .

The Times . London.

^ Ratesh, N. (1991). Romania: The Entangled Revolution. Praeger Publishers.

^ "Unul dintre cele mai bine păzite secrete înainte de 1989: data reală a nașterii lui Nicolae Ceaușescu. Foto" . 27 January 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2020 .

^ "Ceaușescu, între legendă și adevăr: data nașterii și alegerea numelui de botez" .

Jurnalul Național . Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 8 September 2016 .

^ a b "Cataloagele școlare și autobiografia lui Nicolae Ceaușescu, făcute publice de Arhivele Naționale" [Nicolae Ceaușescu's school catalogs and autobiography, made public by the National Archives] (in Romanian). Info Cultural. 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 March 2022 .

^ a b c d Gruia, Cătălin (2013).

The Man They Killed on Christmas Day . United Kingdom: Createspace Independent Pub. p. 42.

ISBN 978-1-4922-8259-4 .

^ a b c d e Gruia, p. 43 ^ Behr, Edward Kiss the Hand You Cannot Bite , New York: Villard Books, 1991 pp. 180–181.

^ a b Behr, Edward Kiss the Hand You Cannot Bite , New York: Villard Books, 1991 pp. 181–186.

^ "Pagina de istorie: Ascensiunea şi decăderea unui dictator" .

RFI România: Actualitate, informaţii, ştiri în direct (in Romanian). 19 July 2017. Archived from the original on 4 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ "10 lucruri de ştiut despre... Nicolae Ceauşescu" .

historia.ro (in Romanian) . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ a b Catalan, Alexandru (25 October 2020).

"Cum a devenit Nicolae Ceaușescu general-maior al Armatei Române" .

IMPACT.ro (in Romanian) . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ admin (29 May 2009).

"Muzeul Sighet: Sala 18 - Colectivizarea. Rezistenţă şi represiune" .

Memorialul Victimelor Comunismului şi al Rezistenţei . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ a b "ZIUA" . 15 December 2007. Archived from the original on 15 December 2007 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ "Eroi printre noi / Niţu Stan, căpetenia anticomuniştilor din Vadu Roşca" .

adevarul.ro (in Romanian). 25 September 2010 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ "Martirii din Vadu Rosca" .

www.hotnews.ro (in Romanian). 4 August 2005 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h Sebetsyen, Victor (2009).

Revolution 1989: The Fall of the Soviet Empire . New York City: Pantheon Books .

ISBN 978-0-375-42532-5 .

^ a b c d e f Crampton, Richard Eastern Europe In the Twentieth Century – And After , London: Routledge, 1997 p. 355.

^ "Rumania: Enfant Terrible" .

Time . 2 April 1973. Archived from the original on 3 November 2011 . Retrieved 20 May 2010 .

^ Sajdik, Martin; Schwarzinger, Michaël (2008).

European Union enlargement: background, developments, facts . New Jersey: Transaction. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1-4128-0667-1 .

^ Phinnemore, David (2006).

The EU and Romania: accession and beyond . London: Federal Trust for Education and Research. p. 13.

ISBN 1-903403-79-0 .

^ Mitchell, Houston (9 April 2013).

"L.A.'s greatest sports moments No. 3: 1984 Olympics opening" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ "1984 Los Angeles Summer Games" . Sports Reference. Archived from the original on 7 July 2008 . Retrieved 9 April 2013 .

^ Kirk, Roger; Răceanu, Mircea (1994).

Romania versus the United States: diplomacy of the absurd, 1985–1989 . Institute for the Study of Diplomacy, Georgetown University. p.

81 .

ISBN 0-312-12059-1 .

^ a b c Ferrero Blanco, M. D. (Winter 2006).

"The contradictions between domestic and foreign policies in the Cold War Romania (1956–1975)" .

Historia Actual Online (9): 153– 178.

doi : 10.36132/hao.v0i9.143 .

^ Crampton, Richard Eastern Europe in the Twentieth Century – And After , London: Routledge, 1997 p. 355.

^ Weir, Kirsten (June 2014).

"The Lasting Impact of Neglect" .

Monitor on Psychology .

45 (6). American Psychological Association.

^ Bohlen, Celestine (8 February 1990).

"Upheaval in the East: Romania's AIDS Babies: A Legacy of Neglect" .

The New York Times .

^ (in Romanian) "Regimul Ceaușescu – de la mitingul din 1968 la cel din 1989" [Ceaușescu Regime: From the 1968 to the 1989 Mass Meeting], "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 1 November 2013 . Retrieved 22 May 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) , Jurnalul Național , 21 December 2005 ^ Cioroianu, p. 489.

^ Liiceanu, p. xviii.

^ Tismăneanu, p. 241 ^ a b c Behr, Edward (1991), Kiss the Hand You Cannot Bite , New York: Villard Books, p. 195.

^ Post, Jerrold M. (2014).

Narcissism and Politics: Dreams of Glory . Cambridge University Press. pp.

103 .

ISBN 978-1-107-00872-4 .

^ Crampton, Richard (1997), Eastern Europe In the Twentieth Century – And After , London: Routledge, pp. 354–355.

^ Grosescu, R. (2004). "The Political Regrouping of Romanian Nomenklatura during the 1989 Revolution".

Romanian Journal of Society and Politics , 4(1), 97–123.

^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Verona, Sergiu (July 1989). "Government and Politics". In Bachman, Ronald D (ed.).

Romania: a country study .

Federal Research Division , Library of Congress .

LCCN 90006449 .

^ a b c d Crampton, Richard (1997), Eastern Europe in the Twentieth Century – And After , London: Routledge, p. 356.

^ Spainer, David (16 June 1978). "Britain and Romania sign £200m plane deal".

The Times . London. p. 1.

^ "Nine controversial state visits to the UK" .

Sky News . 4 June 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 .

^ "Goodwin joins Mugabe, Mussolini and Ceausescu in gang of disgraced figures" .

The Guardian . 31 January 2012 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 .

^ Funderburk, David B. (28 January 2015) [originally published 13 January 1990].

"U.S. Shares Blame Government Ignored Romania's Abused" .

Greensboro News and Record .

^ Mungiu‐Pippidi, A. (2001). "The Return of Populism‐The 2000 Romanian Elections".

Government and Opposition , 36(2), 230–252.

^ Elliott-Gowerd, Steven (27 July 2016).

The Impact of Governments on East-West Economic Relations . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-349-12419-0 – via Google Books.

^ Demekas, Dimitri G.; Khan, Mohsin S. (15 June 1991).

The Romanian Economic Reform Program . International Monetary Fund.

ISBN 978-1-55775-190-4 – via Google Books.

^ "The World Factbook" . Central Intelligence Agency. 3 September 1989 – via Google Books.

^ OECD Economic Surveys: Romania 2002 . OECD Publishing. 29 October 2002.

ISBN 978-92-64-19412-0 – via Google Books.

^ "Statistical Abstract of the United States" . U.S. Government Printing Office. 3 September 1990 – via Google Books.

^ OECD Review of Agricultural Policies: Romania 2000 . OECD Publishing. 29 September 2000.

ISBN 978-92-64-18782-5 – via Google Books.

^ The World Book Year Book, 1987 . World Book – Childcraft International. 3 September 1987.

ISBN 978-0-7166-0487-7 – via Google Books.

^ Country Reports on Economic Policy and Trade Practices: Report Submitted to the Committee on Foreign Relations, Committee on Finance of the U.S. Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Committee on Ways and Means of the U.S. House of Representatives by the Department of State in Accordance with Section 2202 of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 . U.S. Government Printing Office. 3 February 1995.

ISBN 978-0-16-046793-6 – via Google Books.

^ "Romania" . U.S. Department of Commerce, International Trade Administration. 3 September 1990 – via Google Books.

^ "Country Reports on Economic Policy and Trade Practices: Report Submitted to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Committee on Ways and Means of the U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Foreign Relations, Committee on Finance of the U.S. Senate by the Department of State, in Accordance with Section 2202 of the Omnibus Trade Competitiveness Act of 1988" . U.S. Government Printing Office. 3 September 1991 – via Google Books.

^ Deletant, Dennis (1995).

Ceaușescu and the Securitate: Coercion and Dissent in Romania, 1965–1989 . M. E. Sharpe. p. 351.

ISBN 978-1-56324-633-3 .

^ Tismaneanu, Vladimir (30 December 1987).

"Opinion | Tremors in Rumania" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ a b c Ruxandra Cesereanu, Decembrie '89. Deconstrucția unei revoluții , 2nd ed. (Polirom, Iași, 2009), pp. 25, 26, 31, 32, 34, 38, 39, 40 ^ a b Achim, Viorel (2013). "Chapter VI. The gypsies during the communist regime. A few points of reference".

The Roma in Romanian History . CEUP collection. Central European University Press. pp.

189– 202.

ISBN 978-615-5053-93-1 . Retrieved 29 August 2019 – via OpenEdition Books.

^ East, Roger; Pontin, Jolyon (6 October 2016).

Revolution and Change in Central and Eastern Europe . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1-4742-8748-7 – via books.google.ro.

^ Abraham, Florin (17 November 2016).

Romania since the Second World War . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1-4725-2992-3 – via books.google.ro.

^ Tagliabue, John; Times, Special To the New York (10 December 1989).

"Upheaval in the East; Hard-Line Czech President to Quit And Dissident Is Seen as Successor" .

The New York Times .

^ Text of Speech in Revolution Square, 21 December 1989 ^ McGrath, Stephen (25 December 2019).

"Executing a dictator: Open wounds of Romania's Christmas revolution" .

BBC . Retrieved 21 August 2023 .

^ Marcau, Flavius Cristian, "Revolution of 1989: Milea's Suicide" , University of Târgu Jiu, Letter and Social Science Series, Issue 4, 2013, Retrieved 27 February 2016.

^ Post, Jerrold M. (2014).

Narcissism and politics: dreams of glory . New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 106.

ISBN 978-1-107-00872-4 .

OCLC 878953196 .

^ Aubin, Stephen P (1998).

Distorting defense: Network news and national security . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 158.

ISBN 978-0-275-96303-3 . Retrieved 28 June 2008 .

^ Boyes, Roger (24 December 2009).

"Ceausescu looked in my eyes and he knew that he was going to die" .

The Times . London . Retrieved 20 May 2010 .

^ TVR .

"Trial and Execution" .

Google Arts & Culture . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ "Der Diktator und sein Henker" .

stern.de (in German). 20 October 2005 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 .

^ Demian, Sinziana (25 December 2009).

"In Romania, Ceausescu's death haunts Christmas" .

Global Post . Cluj Napoca . Retrieved 30 March 2013 .

^ "Ceausescu execution 'avoided mob lynching' " .

BBC . 25 December 2009 . Retrieved 30 March 2013 .

^ "DECRET-LEGE nr.6 din 7 ianuarie 1990 pentru abolirea pedepsei cu moartea, pentru modificarea și abrogarea unor prevederi din Codul penal și alte acte normative" (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 25 July 2018 . Retrieved 12 April 2016 .

^ a b c Osborn, Andrew (21 July 2010).

"Nicolae Ceausescu exhumed 'wearing his black winter coat' " .

The Telegraph . Moscow.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2013 .

^ a b Jurnalul Național , 25 January 2005 ^ "Reports: DNA Tests Confirm Ceausescu's Remains" .

RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . Retrieved 12 April 2016 .

^ "Exhumed body in Romania is Nicolae Ceausescu" .

The Telegraph . 4 November 2010.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ John Malathronas (5 December 2014).

"Palace of the damned dictator: The Ceausescu trail" .

CNN . Retrieved 12 April 2016 .

^ Mic Dicționar Enciclopedic ^ Geran Pilon, Chapter III, Communism with a Nationalist Face , pp. 60–66; Tănase, p. 24 ^ a b Geran Pilon, p. 60 ^ Tănase, p. 23 ^ Geran Pilon, p. 62 ^ a b Geran Pilon, p. 61 ^ Geran Pilon, pp. 61–63 ^ "Romania: Introduction" . Archived from the original on 9 January 2009 . Retrieved 4 September 2021 .

^ Geran Pilon, p. 63 ^ Deletant, Dennis (8 October 2007).

" 'Taunting the Bear': Romania and the Warsaw Pact, 1963–89" .

Cold War History .

7 (4): 495– 507.

doi : 10.1080/14682740701621796 .

S2CID 153941556 . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ Karamouzi, Eirini (26 November 2013).

"Managing the "Helsinki Spirit" in the Balkans: The Greek Initiative for Balkan Co-operation, 1975–1976" .

Diplomacy & Statecraft .

24 (4): 597– 618.

doi : 10.1080/09592296.2013.848697 .

S2CID 153905441 . Retrieved 15 March 2023 .

^ Pechlivanis, Paschalis (14 May 2020).

"An Uneasy Triangle: Nicolae Ceaușescu, the Greek Colonels and the Greek Communists (1967–1974)" .

The International History Review .

43 (3): 598– 613.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.2020.1764609 .

S2CID 219486083 .

^ Stanciu, Cezar (13 November 2018).

"A lost chance for Balkan cooperation? The Romanian view on 'regional micro-détente', 1969—75" .

Cold War History .

19 (3): 421– 439.

doi : 10.1080/14682745.2018.1524878 .

S2CID 158433175 . Retrieved 13 February 2023 .

^ Litsky, Frank (29 July 1984).

"President and Pomp Begin Games" .

The New York Times . pp. 1, 8, § 5 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 .

Of the first 139 nations in the parade, the biggest cheers went to Rumania, the only Warsaw Pact nation competing here.

^ Yake, D. Byron (29 July 1984).

" '84 Olympics: Gala trumpets in Games" .

Beaver County Times .

AP . p. A1, A10 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 .

The Romanians, the only Eastern bloc nation to defy the Soviet boycott, were greeted with a standing ovation.

^ Valenzuela, J. Samuel and Arturo Valenzuela (eds.), Military Rule in Chile: Dictatorship and Oppositions , p. 321 ^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain : Turner, Thomas (1994). "Relations with the Communist World". In Meditz, Sandra W.; Merrill, Tim (eds.).

Zaire: a country study (4th ed.). Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division , Library of Congress . p. 263.

ISBN 0-8444-0795-X .

OCLC 30666705 .

^ ch, Beat Müller, beat (at-sign) sudd (dot) (23 November 1986).

"Rumänien, 23. November 1986 : Verkleinerung des Heeres, Senkung der Rüstungsausgaben um 5% -- [in German]" .

www.sudd.ch . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Romanian-Moldavian SSR relations, by Patrick Moore and the Romanian Section" . Archived from the original on 3 February 2012 . Retrieved 21 April 2010 .

^ Sceptrul lui Ceaușescu, scos la vânzare ("Ceaușescu's sceptre put up for sale"), "România Liberă" online, 23 June 2010 ^ "Un Ceaușescu pe care nu îl știați: creț, cu ochii "blonzi" și nasul borcănat" (in Romanian). Realitatea.net. 3 August 2011. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2014 .

^ List of honorary British Knights ^ Smith, Harrison (8 January 2019).

"Eugeniu Iordachescu, Romanian engineer who saved condemned churches under communist rule, dies at 89" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ Rosca, Matei (4 July 2014).

"Ikea funds went to Romanian secret police in communist era" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 25 March 2024 .

^ "Ikea paid millions to Romania's communist secret police in 1980s" .

South China Morning Post . 7 July 2014 . Retrieved 25 March 2024 .

^ Hoxha, Enver (1986).

The Artful Albanian: Memoirs of Enver Hoxha . Chatto & Windus. p. 285.

ISBN 978-0-7011-2891-3 .

^ Muammar Gaddafi, as quoted in Pacepa, Ion Mihai (1987).

Red Horizons: Chronicles of a Communist Spy Chief . Regnery Gateway. p. 101.

ISBN 978-0-89526-570-8 .

^ Muhammad Reza Pahlavi (1979).

Answer to History . Albin Michel. p. 190.

^ Malathronas, John (5 December 2014).

"Palace of the damned dictator: On the trail of Ceausescu in Bucharest" .

CNN . Retrieved 12 August 2020 .

^ "Heaviest building" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 12 August 2020 .

^ "The heaviest building in the world" .

Via Capitale . 1 November 2018 . Retrieved 12 August 2020 .

^ "Official communique of the National Board of the Audio-Visual" .

cna.org (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 20 December 2007.

^ Horvath, John (8 August 2010).

"Ceausescu – Back from the Dead" .

Heise.de . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ a b Dragomir, Elena (27 December 2011).

"In Romania, Opinion Polls Show Nostalgia for Communism" .

Balkanalysis . Archived from the original on 11 January 2012 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ Crăciun, Iulian Andrei; Delcea, Cristian (7 November 2010).

"Noul Partid Comunist Român, condus de un șofer de taxi" [The new Romanian Communist Party, led by a taxi driver].

Adevărul (in Romanian) . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ "SONDAJ. 46% dintre românii intervievați l-ar vota acum pe Nicolae Ceaușescu la prezidențiale" [POLL. 46% of Romanians surveyed would now vote for Nicolae Ceausescu in the presidential election].

DIGI24.ro . 10 April 2014.

Archived from the original on 21 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 June 2016 .

^ Albert, Dénes (27 December 2018).

"Ceaușescu still most beloved President of Romania" . Retrieved 16 September 2022 .

^ "Die letzten Tage der Ceausescus" .

swissfilms (in German) . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ "International Institute of Political Murder » Die letzten Tage der Ceausescus" . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ "Ceausescu the Musical | the culture vulture" .

theculturevulture.co.uk . 23 May 2017 . Retrieved 24 May 2017 .

^ The Official Website of the British Monarchy: "Queen and Honours" Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved on 13 October 2010.

^ "Reply to a parliamentary question" (PDF) (in German). p. 277 . Retrieved 13 October 2012 .

^ "Československý řád Bílého lva 1923–1990" (PDF) .

ARCHIV KANCELÁŘE PREZIDENTA REPUBLIKY .

^ Dikötter, Frank (2020).

Dictators: The Cult of Personality in the Twentieth Century . London: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 177.

ISBN 978-1-5266-2698-1 .

^ "Grand State Banquet" . Archived from the original on 2 March 2004 . Retrieved 12 April 2016 .

^ "badraie.com" .

badraie.com . Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 March 2014 .

^ "Senarai Penuh Penerima Darjah Kebesaran, Bintang dan Pingat Persekutuan Tahun 1984" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2019 .

^ "Condecorados: Orden El Sol del Perú" (PDF) (in Spanish). Lima, Peru: Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ "President's Week in Review: April 7 – April 13, 1975" .

Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines . Archived from the original on 6 June 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2020 .

^ "Указ Президиума Верховного Совета О награждении Генерального секретаря Румынской коммунистической партии, Президента Социалистической Республики Румынии товарища Николае Чаушеску орденом Ленина" (PDF) .

Vedomosti Verkhovnogo Soveta SSSR (in Russian). No. 5. 3 February 1988.

^ Dargis, Manohla (8 September 2011).

"Popular Ascendance to Grim Downfall" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

General sources [ edit ] Mic Dicționar Enciclopedic ("Small encyclopedic dictionary"), 1978 Edward Behr, Kiss the Hand you Cannot Bite , ISBN 0-679-40128-8 Dumitru Burlan , Dupa 14 ani – Sosia lui Ceaușescu se destăinuie ("After 14 Years: The Double of Ceaușescu confesses"). Editura Ergorom. 31 July 2003 (in Romanian ).

Juliana Geran Pilon , The Bloody Flag. Post-Communist Nationalism in Eastern Europe. Spotlight on Romania , ISBN 1-56000-062-7 ; ISBN 1-56000-620-X Gheorghe E. (2015) Nicolae Ceaușescu. In: Casey S., Wright J. (eds) Mental Maps in the Era of Détente and the End of the Cold War 1968–91. Palgrave Macmillan, London Marian Oprea, "Au trecut 15 ani – Conspirația Securității" ("15 Years Later: The Securitate Conspiracy"), in Lumea Magazin Nr 10, 2004 : (in Romanian; link leads to table of contents, verifying that the article exists, but the article itself is not online).

Viorel Patrichi, " Eu am fost sosia lui Nicolae Ceaușescu " ("I was Ceaușescu's double"), Lumea Magazin Nr 12, 2001 (in Romanian) Stevens W. Sowards, Twenty-Five Lectures on Modern Balkan History (The Balkans in the Age of Nationalism) , 1996, in particular Lecture 24: The failure of Balkan Communism and the causes of the Revolutions of 1989 Thomas Kunze , Nicolae Ceauşescu: Eine Biographie. Links, Berlin 2000, ISBN 3-86153-211-5; 4., 2017, ISBN 978-3-86153-562-1., in romanian language: Rumänische Lizenzausgabe: Nicolae Ceauşescu. O biografie, editura Vremea, București, 2002, ISBN 973-645-025-2, in polish language: Ceauşescu. Piekło na Ziemi, Prószy´nski i S-ka, Warszawa, 2016, ISBN 978-83-8069-430-9.

Victor Stănculescu, "Nu vă fie milă, au 2 miliarde de lei în cont" Archived 13 October 2004 at the Wayback Machine ("Do not have mercy, they hold 2 billion lei [33 million dollars] in their account[s]"), in Jurnalul Național , 22 November 2004 John Sweeney, The Life and Evil Times of Nicolae Ceaușescu , ISBN 0-09-174672-8 Stelian Tănase , "Societatea civilă românească și violența" ("Romanian Civil Society and Violence"), in Agora , issue 3/IV, July–September 1991 Filip Teodorescu, et al., Extracts from the minutes of a Romanian senate hearing, 14 December 1994 , featuring the remarks of Filip Teodorescu.

Cătălin Gruia, " Viata lui Nicolae Ceausescu ", in National Geographic Romania , November 2007, pp. 41–65 Dennis Deletant (1995), Ceaușescu and the Securitate: Coercion and Dissent in Romania, 1965–1989 , ISBN 978-1563246333 pub. M. E. Sharpe. p. 351 Pinstripes and Reds: An American Ambassador Caught Between the State Department & the Romanian Communists, 1981–1985 Washington, D.C.: Selous Foundation Press, 1987.

ISBN 0-944273-01-7 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nicolae Ceaușescu .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Nicolae Ceaușescu .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Transcript of the closed trial of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu Nicolae Ceaușescu's last speech in public Procesul și execuția soților Ceaușescu Full video of the trial and execution of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu (in Romanian) Romania's Demographic Policy Gheorghe Brătescu, Clipa 638: Un complot ratat ("A failed scheme") (In Romanian) Death of the Father: Nicolae Ceaușescu Focuses on his death, but also discusses other matters. Many photos.

Political offices Preceded by Position established President of Romania 28 March 1974 – 22 December 1989 Succeeded by Ion Iliescu Preceded by Chivu Stoica President of the State Council 9 December 1967 – 22 December 1989 Succeeded by Position abolished Party political offices Preceded by Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party 22 March 1965 – 22 December 1989 Succeeded by Position abolished v t e General Secretaries of the Romanian Communist Party Cristescu Köblös Holostenco Stefanski Stefanov Breiner Foriș Bodnăraș / Pîrvulescu / Rangheț Gheorghiu-Dej Apostol Gheorghiu-Dej Ceaușescu Italics indicate interim officeholders.

v t e Heads of state of Romania Heads of state of Romania Presidents of Romania Romanian monarchs United Principalities of Romania Domnitor of Romania (1862–1881) 1862–1866 Alexandru Ioan Cuza Princely Lieutenancy [ ro ] Lascăr Catargiu Nicolae Golescu Nicolae Haralambie 1866–1881 Carol I Kingdom of Romania King of Romania (1881–1947) 1881–1914 Carol I 1914–1927 Ferdinand I 1927–1930 Michael I under regents Prince Nicholas Miron Cristea Gheorghe Buzdugan / Constantin Sărăţeanu [ ro ] 1930–1940 Carol II 1940–1947 Michael I with Ion Antonescu as Conducător between 1940 and 1944 Romanian People's Republic (1947–65) Socialist Republic of Romania (1965–89) Provisional Presidium of the Republic (1947–1948) Constantin Ion Parhon Ion Niculi Mihail Sadoveanu Gheorghe Stere [ ro ] Ștefan Voitec Presidium of the Great National Assembly (1948–1961) Constantin Ion Parhon Petru Groza Mihail Sadoveanu & Anton Moisescu Ion Gheorghe Maurer State Council (1961–1974) Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Chivu Stoica Ion Gheorghe Maurer , Ștefan Voitec & Avram Bunaciu Nicolae Ceaușescu President of SR Romania (1974–1989) Nicolae Ceaușescu Post–1989 Romania President of Romania (1989–present) Ion Iliescu Emil Constantinescu Ion Iliescu Traian Băsescu Nicolae Văcăroiu Traian Băsescu Crin Antonescu Traian Băsescu Klaus Iohannis Ilie Bolojan Nicușor Dan Italics indicate interim officeholders.

Bold indicates incumbent/current officeholder.

v t e Leaders of the ruling Communist parties of the Eastern Bloc Party of Labour of Albania Enver Hoxha Ramiz Alia Bulgarian Communist Party Georgi Dimitrov Valko Chervenkov Todor Zhivkov Petar Mladenov Communist Party of Czechoslovakia Klement Gottwald Antonín Novotný Alexander Dubček Gustáv Husák Miloš Jakeš Karel Urbánek Socialist Unity Party of Germany Wilhelm Pieck Otto Grotewohl Walter Ulbricht Erich Honecker Egon Krenz Gregor Gysi Hungarian Working People's Party Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party Mátyás Rákosi Ernő Gerő Imre Nagy János Kádár Károly Grósz Rezső Nyers Polish Workers' Party Polish United Workers' Party Bolesław Bierut Edward Ochab Władysław Gomułka Edward Gierek Stanisław Kania Wojciech Jaruzelski Romanian Communist Party Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Gheorghe Apostol Nicolae Ceaușescu Communist Party of the Soviet Union Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Georgy Malenkov Nikita Khrushchev Leonid Brezhnev Yuri Andropov Konstantin Chernenko Mikhail Gorbachev League of Communists of Yugoslavia Josip Broz Tito Stevan Doronjski Lazar Mojsov Dušan Dragosavac Mitja Ribičič Dragoslav Marković Ali Šukrija Vidoje Žarković Milanko Renovica Boško Krunić Stipe Šuvar Milan Pančevski v t e Refusenik movement and 1990s post-Soviet aliyah ( c.

1970 – 2000) Background Causes The Holocaust Antisemitism in the Soviet Union Joseph Stalin Zionism Six-Day War Emigration from the Eastern Bloc Slánský trial Anti-cosmopolitan campaign Jewish groups Ashkenazim Mountain Jews Karaim Krymchaks Bukharan Jews Georgian Jews Events Dymshits–Kuznetsov hijacking affair 1970s aliyah Jackson–Vanik amendment Helsinki Accords Freedom Sunday for Soviet Jews Operation Solomon Dissolution of the Soviet Union People Soviet Union Commonwealth of Independent States Pro-government / antisemitic Leonid Brezhnev Yuri Andropov Mikhail Gorbachev Mikhail Suslov David Dragunsky Yakov Fishman Adolf Shayevich Emomali Rahmon Jewish Ida Nudel Natan Sharansky Yuli Edelstein Eduard Kuznetsov Iosif Begun United States Jimmy Carter Ronald Reagan George H. W. Bush George Shultz Henry M. Jackson Charles Vanik Menachem Mendel Schneerson Meir Kahane Israel Golda Meir Yitzhak Rabin Shimon Peres Menachem Begin Yitzhak Shamir Benjamin Netanyahu Simcha Dinitz Avraham Burg Nehemiah Levanon Yehuda Lapidot Other Pro-Soviet Władysław Gomułka Pro-Jewish Nicolae Ceaușescu Organisations Soviet Union Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of the Russian Federation Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public Moscow Helsinki Group Pamyat United States Jewish Defense League American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee Union of Councils for Soviet Jews National Coalition Supporting Soviet Jewry Israel Nativ Jewish Agency Aftermath Russian Jews in Israel Yisrael BaAliyah Channel 9 Portals : Biography Communism Romania Politics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia 2 Czech Republic Russia Spain 2 Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nicolae_Ceaușescu&oldid=1304863499 " Categories : 1918 births 1989 deaths Nicolae Ceaușescu 20th-century executions by Romania Romanian anti-fascists Anti-intellectualism Annulled Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Atheism activists Ceaușescu family Collars of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Burials at Ghencea Cemetery Executed communists Executed mass murderers Executed presidents Executed Romanian people Filmed executions General secretaries of the Romanian Communist Party Grand Collars of the Order of Saint James of the Sword Grand Crosses Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Heads of government who were later imprisoned Inmates of Doftana prison Inmates of Jilava Prison Inmates of Târgu Jiu camp Knights Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Leaders ousted by a coup Members of the Chamber of Deputies (Romania) Members of the Great National Assembly Natalist politicians Neo-Stalinists People convicted of genocide People executed by Romania by firing squad People from Scornicești People of the Cold War People of the Romanian revolution People who were court-martialed Politicide perpetrators Presidents of Romania State Council of Romania Recipients of the Grand Star of the Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria Recipients of the Legion of Honour Recipients of the Order of Lenin Recipients of the Order of the Hero of Socialist Labour Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Romanian atheists Romanian Communist Party politicians Romanian Land Forces generals Romanian Marxists Romanian nationalists Romanian politicians convicted of crimes Romanian prisoners and detainees Romanian revolutionaries Stalinism Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) Articles with Romanian-language sources (ro) Articles containing Romanian-language text CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Source attribution CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2023 Use British English from March 2025 Articles with hCards Pages with Romanian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles containing French-language text Articles needing additional references from October 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from March 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id S-aft: 'after' parameter includes the word 'abolished' This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 16:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nicolae Ceaușescu 99 languages Add topic

