Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Benefits 3 Implementation Toggle Implementation subsection 3.1 Implementation of human sensory elements 3.1.1 Vision and sound 3.1.2 Manipulation 3.1.3 Freedom of movement 3.2 Effectiveness 3.3 Transparency of implementation 4 Related technologies Toggle Related technologies subsection 4.1 Virtual presence (virtual reality) 5 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 5.1 Connecting communities 5.2 Hazardous environments 5.3 Pipeline inspection 5.4 Remote surgery 5.5 Education 5.6 Telepresence art 6 Vendors Toggle Vendors subsection 6.1 Software Clients 6.2 With Video, VoIP, and Instant Messaging 7 Popular culture Toggle Popular culture subsection 7.1 Literature 7.2 Television 7.3 Film 7.4 Video games 7.5 Comics 7.6 Virtual reality communities 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Telepresence 16 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Polski Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Technologies allowing a person to feel they are present in another place A modular telepresence video conferencing system Telepresence is the appearance or sensation of a person being present at a place other than their true location, via telerobotics or video.

Telepresence requires that the users' senses interact with specific stimuli in order to provide the feeling of being in that other location. Additionally, users may be given the ability to affect the remote location. In this case, the user's position, movements, actions, voice, etc. may be sensed to transmit and duplicate in the remote location to bring about this effect. Therefore information may be traveling in both directions between the user and the remote location.

A popular application is found in telepresence videoconferencing , the highest possible level of videotelephony . Telepresence via video deploys greater technical sophistication and improved fidelity of both sight and sound than in traditional videoconferencing . Technical advancements in mobile collaboration have also extended the capabilities of videoconferencing beyond the boardroom for use with hand-held mobile devices , enabling collaboration independent of location.

A similar or identical concept is telexistence , which was first proposed by Susumu Tachi in Japan in 1980 [ 1 ] and 1981 [ 2 ] as patents and the first report was published in Japanese in 1982 [ 3 ] and in English in 1984.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] See also: History of videotelephony In a pioneering paper, the U.S. cognitive scientist Marvin Minsky attributed the development of the idea of telepresence to science fiction author Robert A. Heinlein : "My first vision of a remote-controlled economy came from Robert A. Heinlein's prophetic 1948 novel, Waldo," wrote Minsky.

[ 5 ] In his science fiction short story " Waldo " (1942), Heinlein first proposed a primitive telepresence master-slave manipulator system.

The Brother Assassin , written by Fred Saberhagen in 1969, introduced the complete concept for a telepresence master-slave humanoid system. In the novel, the concept is described as follows: "And a moment later it seemed to all his senses that he had been transported from the master down into the body of the slave-unit standing beneath it on the floor. As the control of its movements passed over to him, the slave started gradually to lean to one side, and he moved its foot to maintain balance as naturally as he moved his own. Tilting back his head, he could look up through the slave's eyes to see the master-unit, with himself inside, maintaining the same attitude on its complex suspension." [ This quote needs a citation ] Early system for immersive telepresence (USAF, 1992 - Virtual Fixtures ) The term telepresence , a neologism due to the futurist Patrick Gunkel , was introduced to the public in a 1980 article by Minsky, who outlined his vision for an adapted version of the older concept of teleoperation that focused on giving a remote participant a feeling of actually being present at a different location.

[ 5 ] One of the first systems to create a fully immersive illusion of presence in a remote location was the Virtual Fixtures platform developed in 1992 at the U.S. Air Force's Armstrong Labs by inventor Louis Rosenberg.  The system included stereoscopic image display from the remote environment as well as immersive touch feedback using a full upper-body exoskeleton.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The first commercially successful telepresence company, Teleport (which was later renamed TeleSuite ), was founded in 1993 by David Allen and Herold Williams.

[ 9 ] Before TeleSuite, they ran a resort business from which the original concept emerged because they often found businesspeople would have to cut their stays short to participate in important meetings. Their idea was to develop a technology that would allow businesspeople to attend their meetings without leaving the resorts so that they could lengthen their hotel stays.

A Tandberg E20 high resolution videoconferencing phone meant to replace conventional desktop phones Hilton Hotels had originally licensed to install them in their hotels throughout the United States and other countries, but use was low.  The idea lost momentum, with Hilton eventually backing out. TeleSuite later began to focus less on the hospitality industry and more on business-oriented telepresence systems. Shareholders eventually held enough stock to replace the company's original leadership, which ultimately led to its collapse.

[ citation needed ] David Allen purchased all of the assets of TeleSuite and appointed Scott Allen as president [ 10 ] of the new company called Destiny Conferencing .

Destiny Conferencing licensed its patent portfolio to HP which became the first large company to join the telepresence industry, soon followed by others such as Cisco and Polycom (now called Poly).

[ 11 ] After forming a distribution agreement with Pleasanton-based Polycom (now Poly), Destiny Conferencing sold on January 5, 2007, to Polycom (now Poly) for $60 million.

First Telepresence Systems in 1993 (TeleSuite): Englewood, Ohio to New York City A telepresence research project started in 1990.  Located at the University of Toronto , the Ontario Telepresence Project (OTP) was an interdisciplinary effort involving social sciences and engineering. Its final report stated that it "...was a three year, $4.8 million pre-competitive research project whose mandate was to design and field trial advanced media space systems in a variety of workplaces in order to gain insights into key sociological and engineering issues. The OTP, which has ended in December 1994, was part of the International Telepresence Project which linked Ontario researchers to their counterparts in four European nations. The Project's major sponsor was the Government of Ontario , through two of its Centres of Excellence—the Information Technology Research Centre (ITRC) and the Telecommunications Research Institute of Ontario (TRIO)." [ 12 ] Benefits [ edit ] An industry expert described some benefits of telepresence: "There were four drivers for our decision to do more business over video and telepresence. We wanted to reduce our travel spend, reduce our carbon footprint and environmental impact, improve our employees' work/life balance, and improve employee productivity.".

[ 13 ] American exile Edward Snowden participates in a TED talk in Texas from Russia via telepresence robot, March 2014 Rather than traveling great distances in order to have a face-face meeting, it is now commonplace to use a telepresence system instead, which uses a multiple codec video system (which is what the word "telepresence" most currently represents). Each member/party of the meeting uses a telepresence room to "dial in" and can see/talk to every other member on a screen /screens as if they were in the same room. This brings enormous time and cost benefits. It is also superior to phone conferencing (except in cost), as the visual aspect greatly enhances communications, allowing for perceptions of facial expressions and other body languages.

Mobile collaboration systems combine the use of video, audio and on-screen drawing capabilities using newest generation hand-held mobile devices to enable multi-party conferencing in real-time, independent of location. Benefits include cost-efficiencies resulting from accelerated problem resolution, reductions in downtimes and travel, improvements in customer service and increased productivity.

[ 14 ] Implementation [ edit ] Telepresence has been described as the human experience of being fully present at a live real-world location remote from one's own physical location. Someone experiencing video telepresence would therefore be able to behave and receive stimuli as if part of a meeting at the remote site. The aforementioned would result in interactive participation of group activities that would bring benefits to a wide range of users.

[ 15 ] Implementation of human sensory elements [ edit ] To provide a telepresence experience,  technologies are required that implement the human sensory elements of vision, sound, and manipulation.

Vision and sound [ edit ] A minimum system usually includes visual feedback . Ideally, the entire field of view of the user is filled with a view of the remote location, and the viewpoint corresponds to the movement and orientation of the user's head. In this way, it differs from television or cinema , where the viewpoint is out of the control of the viewer.

In order to achieve this, the user may be provided with either a very large (or wraparound) screen, or small displays mounted directly in front of the eyes. The latter provides a particularly convincing 3D sensation. The movements of the user's head must be sensed, and the camera must mimic those movements accurately and in real time. This is important to prevent unintended motion sickness.

Another source of future improvement to telepresence displays, compared by some to holograms , is a projected display technology featuring life-sized imagery.

[ 16 ] Sound is generally the easiest sensation to implement with high fidelity ,  based on the foundational telephone technology dating back more than 130 years. Very high-fidelity sound equipment has also been available for a considerable period of time, with stereophonic sound being more convincing than monaural sound.

Manipulation [ edit ] Monty, a telemanipulation prototype from Anybots The ability to manipulate a remote object or environment is an important aspect for some telepresence users and can be implemented in a large number of ways depending on the needs of the user. Typically, the movements of the user's hands (position in space and posture of the fingers) are sensed by wired gloves , inertial sensors , or absolute spatial position sensors. A robot in the remote location then copies those movements as closely as possible. This ability is also known as teleoperation .

The more closely the robot re-creates the form factor of the human hand, the greater the sense of telepresence. The complexity of robotic effectors varies greatly, from simple one axis grippers, to fully anthropomorphic robot hands .

Haptic teleoperation refers to a system that provides some sort of tactile force feedback to the user, so the user feels some approximation of the weight, firmness, size, and/or texture of the remote objects manipulated by the robot. A new form of technology, called collaborative telepresence, is currently being developed which will eventually be used to collaborate with others while seeming like you are in the same room as the other person, keeping a normal social distance. Collaborative telepresence uses haptic sensors like these to allow a sense of touch.

Freedom of movement [ edit ] iRobot Ava 500, an autonomous roaming telepresence robot The prevalence of high quality video conferencing using mobile devices, tablets and portable computers has enabled considerable growth in telepresence robots to help give a better sense of remote physical presence for communication and collaboration in the office, home or school when one cannot be there in person.  The robot avatar can move or look around at the command of the remote person. Drivable telepresence robots – typically contain a display (integrated or separate phone or tablet) mounted on a roaming base. Some examples of roaming telepresence robots include Beam by Suitable Technologies, Double by Double Robotics, Ava Telepresence by Ava Robotics , Anybots, Vgo, TeleMe by Mantarobot, and Romo by Romotive.

[ 17 ] More modern roaming telepresence robots may include an ability to operate autonomously . The robots can map out the space and be able to avoid obstacles while driving themselves between rooms and their docking stations.

[ 18 ] Effectiveness [ edit ] Telepresence's effectiveness varies by degree of fidelity. Research has noted that telepresence solutions differ in degree of implementation, from "immersive" through "adaptive" to "lite" solutions.

[ 19 ] At the top are immersive solutions where the environments at both ends are highly controlled (and often the same) with respect to lighting, acoustics, decor and furniture, thereby giving all the participants the impression they are together at the same table in the same room, thus engendering the "immersive" label.

Adaptive telepresence solutions may use the same technology, but the environments at both ends are not highly controlled and hence often differ. Adaptive solutions differ from telepresence lite solutions not in terms of control of environments, but in terms of integration of technology.  Adaptive solutions use a managed service, whereas telepresence lite solutions use components that someone must integrate.

Transparency of implementation [ edit ] A telepresence conference between participants in Ghana and Newark, New Jersey in 2012 A good telepresence strategy puts the human factors first, focusing on visual collaboration configurations that closely replicate the brain's innate preferences for interpersonal communications, separating from the unnatural "talking heads" experience of traditional videoconferencing. These cues include life–size participants, fluid motion, accurate flesh tones and the appearance of true eye contact.

[ 20 ] This is already a well-established technology, used by many businesses today. The chief executive officer of Cisco Systems , John Chambers in June 2006 at the Networkers Conference compared telepresence to teleporting from Star Trek , and said that he saw the technology as a potential billion dollar market for Cisco.

[ 21 ] Rarely will a telepresence system provide such a transparent implementation with such comprehensive and convincing stimuli that the user perceives no differences from actual presence. But the user may set aside such differences, depending on the application.

The fairly simple telephone achieves a limited form of telepresence using just the human sensory element of hearing, in that users consider themselves to be talking to each other rather than talking to the telephone itself.

Watching television , for example, although it stimulates our primary senses of vision and hearing , rarely gives the impression that the watcher is no longer at home. However, television sometimes engages the senses sufficiently to trigger emotional responses from viewers somewhat like those experienced by people who directly witness or experience events. Televised depictions of sports events as an example can elicit strong emotions from viewers.

As the screen size increases, so does the sense of immersion, as well as the range of subjective mental experiences available to viewers. Some viewers have reported a sensation of genuine vertigo or motion sickness while watching IMAX movies of flying or outdoor sequences.

Because most currently feasible telepresence gear leaves something to be desired; the user must suspend disbelief to some degree, and choose to act in a natural way, appropriate to the remote location, perhaps using some skill to operate the equipment. In contrast, a telephone user does not see herself as  "operating" the telephone but merely talking to another person with it.

Related technologies [ edit ] Virtual presence (virtual reality) [ edit ] An online video web conference in an office, December 2010 Telepresence refers to a user interacting with another live, real place, and is distinct from virtual presence , where the user is given the impression of being in a simulated environment. Telepresence and virtual presence rely on similar user-interface equipment, and they share the common feature that the relevant portions of the user's experience at some point in the process will be transmitted in an abstract (usually digital ) representation. The main functional difference is the entity on the other end: a real environment in the case of telepresence, vs. a computer in the case of immersive virtual reality .

Presence is very similar to distal attribution or externalization which is like projecting one's presence and mind beyond the limits of our sensory organs and perceiving the environment in such a way. A distinction is made between two separate perceptions. The first being the unmediated perceptions in which we are unable to feel anything beyond our physical surroundings. The second being the mediated presence through technology which forces us to suddenly perceive two different environments at the same time: The one immediately around us and the one projected for us through technology. Mediated experiences are not limited to virtual technology and can also be experienced with spatially distant places such as space with a telescope or a camera.

[ 22 ] Applications [ edit ] Application examples could be cited within emergency management and security services, B&I, and the entertainment and education industries.

[ 15 ] Connecting communities [ edit ] Telepresence can be used to establish a sense of shared presence or shared space among geographically separated members of a group.

[ citation needed ] Hazardous environments [ edit ] Robonaut 2 aboard the International Space Station Many other applications in situations where humans are exposed to hazardous situations are readily recognised as suitable candidates for telepresence. Mining, bomb disposal, military operations, rescue of victims from fire, toxic atmospheres, deep sea exploration, or even hostage situations, are some examples.  Telepresence also plays a critical role in the exploration of other worlds, such as with the Mars Exploration Rovers , which are teleoperated from Earth.

Pipeline inspection [ edit ] Small diameter pipes otherwise inaccessible for the examination can now be viewed using pipeline video inspection .

Remote surgery [ edit ] The possibility of being able to project the knowledge and the physical skill of a surgeon over long distances has many attractions. Thus, again there is considerable research underway in the subject. (Locally controlled robots are currently being used for joint replacement surgery as they are more precise in milling bone to receive the joints.) The armed forces have an obvious interest since the combination of telepresence, teleoperation , and telerobotics can potentially save the lives of battle casualties by allowing them prompt attention in mobile operating theatres by remote surgeons.

Recently, teleconferencing has been used in medicine (telemedicine or telematics), mainly employing audio-visual exchange, for the performance of real time remote surgical operations – as demonstrated in Regensburg, Germany in 2002.

[ 23 ] In addition to audio-visual data, the transfer of haptic (tactile) information has also been demonstrated in telemedicine.

[ 24 ] Education [ edit ] A professional development expert in Denver uses telepresence to coach a teacher in Utah during the initial research of Project ThereNow.

Research has been conducted on the use of telepresence to provide professional development to teachers. Research has shown that one of the most effective forms of teacher professional development is coaching, or cognitive apprenticeship . The application of telepresence shows promise for making this approach to teacher professional development practical.

[ 25 ] The benefits of enabling schoolchildren to take an active part in exploration have also been shown by the JASON and the NASA Ames Research Center programs. The ability of a pupil, student, or researcher to explore an otherwise inaccessible location is a very attractive proposition; For example, locations where the passage of too many people is harming the immediate environment or the artifacts themselves, e.g. undersea exploration of coral reefs, ancient Egyptian tombs, and more recent works of art.

Another application is for the remote classroom which allows a professor to teach students in different campuses at the same time. An example of this application is in classrooms of the law schools of Rutgers University . Two identical rooms are located in two metropolitan areas . Each classroom is equipped with studio lighting , audio, and video conference equipment connected to a 200-inch monitor on the wall that students face to give an impression that they are all in the same classroom. This allows professors to be on either campus and facilitates the interaction among students in both campuses during the classes.

[ 26 ] Telepresence art [ edit ] True telepresence is a multidisciplinary art and science that foundationally integrates engineering , psychology , and the art of television broadcast.

In 1998, Diller and Scofidio created the "Refresh", an Internet-based art installation that juxtaposed a live web camera with recorded videos staged by professional actors. Each image was accompanied with a fictional narrative which made it difficult to distinguish which was the live web camera.

A soap opera for iMacs In 1993, Eduardo Kac and Ed Bennett created a telepresence installation "Ornitorrinco on the Moon", for the international telecommunication arts festival "Blurred Boundaries" (Entgrenzte Grenzen II).  It was coordinated by Kulturdata, in Graz, Austria, and was connected around the world.

From 1997 to the present Ghislaine Boddington of shinkansen and body>data>space has explored, in a collaboration process she has called The Weave [ 27 ] using performing arts techniques, the extended use of telepresence into festivals, arts centres and clubs and has directed numerous workshops leading to exploration of telepresence by many artists worldwide. This methodology has been used extensively to develop skills in tele-intuition for young people in preparation for the future world of work through the body>data>space / NESTA project "Robots and Avatars" an innovative project explores how young people will work and play with new representational forms of themselves and others in virtual and physical life in the next 10–15 years.

An overview of telepresence in dance and theatre through the last 20 years is given in «Excited Atoms» [ 28 ] research document by Judith Staines (2009) which one can download from the On The Move website.

Vendors [ edit ] Further information: List of video telecommunication services and product brands Software Clients [ edit ] With Video and VoIP BlackBerry: BBM Meetings Blue Jeans Network: cloud video conferencing service Cisco: WebEx [ 29 ] Cisco: Jabber XCP Conference XP FaceTime [ 30 ] GoToMeeting: HD faces Give me five Librestream: Onsight expert collaboration software [ 31 ] LifeSize: Desktop LoopUp Microsoft: NetMeeting Microsoft: Office Live Meeting Microsoft Teams Mirial surl: Mirial Softphone Nefsis: Nefsis Professional Polycom: RealPresence Desktop (for Windows and Mac), RealPresence Mobile (for smartphones and tablets), and CloudAXIS Suite (web browser plugin) Pristine: mobile video collaboration and support Radvision: MTF, VTA, and IMS applications SightSpeed Scopia Starleaf Stickam TeamTalk TeamViewer [ 32 ] Thinking about telephone networks Tokbox Vidio VSee vzRoom Zarafa (software) WebApp (via WebRTC) With Video, VoIP, and Instant Messaging [ edit ] Adobe Connect Alfaview Camfrog CU-SeeMe [ 33 ] Discord Ekiga Google Hangouts [ 34 ] iChat Jami Jitsi Pidgin MeBeam Microsoft: Windows Live Messenger Microsoft: Windows Live Video Messages Microsoft Teams Movim Nextiva ooVoo Paltalk (now PaltalkScene) SightSpeed Signal Skype Starleaf Stickam Tinychat Tox (protocol implemented in various clients) Wire Yahoo! Messenger Zoom: Zoom cloud conferences Popular culture [ edit ] Telepresence is represented in media and entertainment.

Literature [ edit ] The Naked Sun (1957) – a novel mostly occurring on Solaria , a planet with an extremely low population where all personal contact is considered obscene, and all communication occurs through holographic telepresence.

Neuromancer (1984) – a novel that not only uses telepresence extensively but introduces cyberspace and the Internet (aka the Matrix) as the underlying vehicle to make telepresence possible.

Television [ edit ] Space: Above and Beyond (Episode 20, "Star Dust" - April 19, 1996) 24 (2001–2010) The Big Bang Theory (Episode 65, " The Cruciferous Vegetable Amplification " - September 2010) Modern Family (Episode 144, " American Skyper " – May 2015) Bob's Burgers (Episode 115, " Ex Mach Tina " – January 2017) Community (Episode 102, "Laws of Robotics and Party Rights" – April 2015) Film [ edit ] Main category: Films about telepresence Iron Man 3 (2013) – Tony Stark uses the Mark 42 suit using telepresence technology.

Ra.One (2011) Darkdrive (1996) Avatar (2009) G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra (2009) Gamer (2009) Surrogates (2009) Sleep Dealer (2008) Avalon (2001) The Matrix (1999) The Star Wars films (1977–present) with holographic technology used for communication A Hologram for the King (2016)  uses telepresence as a main theme Video games [ edit ] Splinter Cell: Conviction (2010) Half-Life 2: Episode Two (2007) Mass Effect 2 - Commander Shepard communicates with the Illusive Man using a quantum entanglement based telepresence system.

Elite: Dangerous (2014) - players and non-player characters can utilize telepresence to perform as crew members without risk of death.

Death Stranding (2019) - telepresence plays a prominent and important role in communication for the denizens of the game's envisioned future.

Comics [ edit ] Lamar Waldron 's M.I.C.R.A.: Mind Controlled Remote Automaton (1986-88), related the story of a college female paralyzed by a neck injury, who volunteered to be the remote pilot of an android body created by one of her professors.

The Surrogates , a 2005–2006 comic book series, inspired the film Surrogates (2009) and explains about a future where humans have a widespread use of mind-controlled androids .

Virtual reality communities [ edit ] Active Worlds and Second Life allow voice chat with 3D avatars .

See also [ edit ] Telecommunication portal Avatar (computing) Brain–computer interface First-person perspective Telecollaboration Telerobotics Unotchit Virtual fixture Virtual reality References [ edit ] ^ S.Tachi, K.Tanie and K.Komoriya: Evaluation device of mobility aids for the blind,
 Japanese Patent 1462696 filed on December 26, 1980.

^ S.Tachi, K.Tanie and K.Komoriya: Operation method of manipulators with sensoryinformation display functions, Japanese Patent 1458263 filed on January 14, 1981.

^ S.Tachi and M.Abe: Study on Telexistence (I) -Desigan of Visual Display-, Proceedings of the 21st SICE Annual Conference, pp.167-168, Tokyo, July 28–30, 1982.

^ Tachi, S.; Tanie, K.; Komoriya, K.; Kaneko, M. (1985). "Tele-existence (I): Design and Evaluation of a Visual Display with Sensation of Presence".

Theory and Practice of Robots and Manipulators . pp.

245– 254.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4615-9882-4_27 .

ISBN 978-1-4615-9884-8 .

^ a b Marvin Minsky (June 1980).

"Telepresence" .

Omni .

^ Rosenberg, Louis B. (1993). "Virtual fixtures as tools to enhance operator performance in telepresence environments". In Kim, Won S. (ed.).

Telemanipulator Technology and Space Telerobotics . Vol. 2057. pp.

10– 21.

doi : 10.1117/12.164901 .

^ Rosenberg, Louis B (1992). The Use of Virtual Fixtures as Perceptual Overlays to Enhance Operator Performance in Remote Environments (Report).

DTIC ADA292450 .

[ page needed ] ^ Rosenberg, Louis Barry (November 1994).

'Virtual fixtures': Perceptual overlays enhance operator performance in telepresence tasks (Thesis).

[ page needed ] ^ Human Productivity Lab Whitepaper [ permanent dead link ] ^ Options, Telepresence (28 April 2018).

"Telepresence Options Website" .

www.telepresenceoptions.com .

^ Bushaus, Dawn (March 17, 2008).

"Telepresence: Ready For Its Close-Up" .

^ "Final Report" (PDF) .

toronto.edu .

^ Companies Worldwide Rely on Polycom Video and Telepresence to Cut Carbon Emissions for a Greener Planet Archived 2008-06-09 at the Wayback Machine , CNN June 5, 2008 ^ Herrell, Elizabeth (March 9, 2010).

"Enterprise Communications: The Next Decade" . Forrester Research White Paper. Archived from the original on January 17, 2012 . Retrieved May 23, 2011 .

^ a b Video Conferencing: A guide to making a Telepresence Business Case Archived 2008-06-28 at the Wayback Machine Matt Walker, 2007 ^ Barras, Colin (26 November 2009).

" 'Holographic' Videoconferencing Moves Nearer to Market" .

New Scientist . p. 23 . Retrieved 14 December 2009 .

^ Lehrbaum, Rick (January 11, 2013).

"Attack of the Telepresence Robots!" .

InfoWeek . Retrieved December 8, 2013 .

^ Honig, Zach (March 17, 2014).

"iRobot's Ava 500 telepresence-on-a-stick is rolling out now (update: $69,500!!)" .

Engadget . Retrieved 4 July 2014 .

^ Dataquest Insight: The Telepresence Market in India, 2008 Archived 2013-05-12 at the Wayback Machine , Gartner December 16, 2008 ^ Telepresence Consulting – Human Productivity Lab Archived 2007-04-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sanders, Tom (21 June 2006).

"Cisco Sets Sail For Teleconferencing" . Archived from the original on 2007-09-30.

^ Steuer, Jonathan (December 1992). "Defining Virtual Reality: Dimensions Determining Telepresence".

Journal of Communication .

42 (4): 73– 93.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.1992.tb00812.x .

^ Nerlich, Michael; Schaechinger, Ulrich, eds. (2003).

Integration of Health Telematics Into Medical Practice . IOS Press.

ISBN 978-1-58603-375-0 .

[ page needed ] ^ Khaled w.; Reichling s.; Bruhns o.t.; Boese h.; Baumann m.; Monkman g.; Egersdoerfer s.; Klein d.; Tunayar a.; Freimuth h.; Lorenz a.; Pessavento a.; Ermert h. (2004). "Palpation Imaging Using a Haptic System for Virtual Reality Applications in Medicine".

Medicine Meets Virtual Reality 12 . Studies in Health Technology and Informatics.

doi : 10.3233/978-1-60750-942-4-147 .

^ "Evaluating the Effectiveness of a Telepresence-Enabled Cognitive Apprenticeship Model of Teacher Professional Development by R. Shawn Edmondson, Ph.D.

Archived 2007-04-18 at the Wayback Machine ^ Heyboer, Kelly (10 April 2015).

"Why is Rutgers merging its law schools? The deans answer your questions" .

The Star-Ledger . Retrieved 10 April 2015 .

^ The Weave [ permanent dead link ] , Virtual presence physical beings – from telegraph to telecast – a reflection on virtual beingness Ghislaine Boddington November 2000, commissioned by ResCen, Middlesex University ^ "Excited Atoms" , Excited Atoms outlines a history of virtual mobility in performance, presents the main types of work with inspiring current examples and traces some of the most critical issues and motivations for artists, cultural producers and promoters to collaborate, share, make, question, present and innovate using virtual mobility.

^ "Top 5 Companies Owned by Cisco" .

www.investopedia.com . Retrieved 2025-07-24 .

^ Billingsley, Luanne (December 2020).

"Using Video Conferencing Applications to Share the Death Experience During the COVID-19 Pandemic" .

Journal of Radiology Nursing .

39 (4): 275– 277.

doi : 10.1016/j.jradnu.2020.08.001 .

PMC 7427529 .

PMID 32837394 .

^ "Librestream Is Free While It Lasts" .

www.forbes.com . Retrieved 2025-07-24 .

^ Yang, Paul R.; Meals, Roy A. (January 2014). "How to Establish an Interactive eConference and eJournal Club".

The Journal of Hand Surgery .

39 (1): 129– 133.

doi : 10.1016/j.jhsa.2013.10.004 .

PMID 24315487 .

^ "Getting the electronic loop" .

www.theguardian.com . 31 October 2002 . Retrieved 2025-07-24 .

^ Dave, Paresh (28 February 2018).

"Google launches Slack competitor Hangouts Chat" .

www.reuters.com . Retrieved 2025-07-24 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Telepresence" (Minsky 1980; Sheridan 1992a; Barfield, Zelter, Sheridan, & Slater 1995; Welch, Blackmon, Liu, Mellers, & Stark 1996) "Virtual Presence" (Barfield et al., 1995) Oliver Grau : Virtual Art: From Illusion to Immersion , MIT-Press, Cambridge 2003 ISBN 0-262-57223-0 Eduardo Kac : Telepresence and Bio Art—Networking Humans, Rabbits and Robot (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2005) ISBN 0-472-06810-5 "Being There" (Reeves 1991; Heeter 1992; Barfield et al., 1995; Zhoa 2003) "A perceptual illusion of non-mediation" (Lombard & Ditton 1997) "The suspension of disbelief" (Slater & Ushoh 1994) Sheridan, Thomas B. (1992), "Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Second edition (2003) ISBN 0-262-51547-4 unknown title (Sheridan, 1992, 1992; Barfield & Weghorst, 1993; Slater & Usoh, 1994; Barfield, Sheridan, Zeltzer, Slater, 1995) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Videoconferencing telepresence .

Markoff, John (September 4, 2010).

"The Boss Is Robotic, and Rolling Up Behind You" .

The New York Times .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Telepresence .

v t e Extended reality (XR) From least to most virtual: Augmented reality (AR) Mixed reality (MR) Virtual reality (VR) Virtuality Concepts Main Cinematic virtual reality Computer-mediated reality Immersion Metaverse Avatar Projection augmented model " Room-scale " Six degrees of freedom (6DoF) Spatial computing Telepresence Virtual reality applications Virtual reality sickness Virtual world Other Camera filter Quantified self Screen-door effect Simulation hypothesis Transhumanism Vergence-accommodation conflict VTuber Technologies Display EyeTap Head-mounted display optical Head-up display Pancake lens Smartglasses Virtual reality headset list Virtual retinal display 3D interaction Brain–computer interface Eye tracking Facial motion capture Finger/hand tracking Pose tracking Simultaneous localization and mapping Software Asynchronous reprojection Foveated rendering Image-based modeling and rendering Spatial audio Photography 360-degree video Free viewpoint television Omnidirectional (360-degree) camera VR photography Other Haptic suit Omnidirectional treadmill Wearable computer Peripherals Cyberith Virtualizer Leap Motion Oculus Touch PlayStation Move Razer Hydra Virtuix Omni Wired glove Wizdish ROVR Companies Apple Inc.

Brilliant Labs ByteDance Collabora Google HTC Khronos Group Liquid Image Magic Leap Meta Platforms Reality Labs Microsoft Niantic, Inc.

Pimax Rokoko Samsung Electronics Valve Corporation Varjo Vuzix Devices Current Apple Vision Pro Bigscreen Beyond Golden-i headsets HTC Vive Magic Leap Meta Quest 3 3S Open Source Virtual Reality PICO 4 Ultra Pimax PlayStation VR2 Valve Index Vuzix Former AntVR castAR EyePhone Google Cardboard Google Daydream Google Glass Meta Quest Pro Microsoft HoloLens 2 Oculus Go Oculus Quest Oculus/Meta Quest 2 Oculus Rift CV1 S PICO 4 PlayStation VR Samsung Gear VR Sensorama SixthSense The Sword of Damocles VFX1 Headgear Virtual Boy Virtual fixture Virtuality VR-1 Unreleased Project Iris Sega VR Software General Interactive art Virtual graffiti Metaverse Pervasive game Software related to augmented reality Virtual reality game Operating systems and desktop environments Android XR Meta Horizon OS version history visionOS Windows Mixed Reality Development tools and game engines A-Frame ARCore ARKit ARToolKit Godot Engine Jetpack Compose XR Meta Spatial SDK OpenVR OpenXR RealityKit S&box TabletopKit Unity Universal Scene Description Unreal Engine Vuforia Augmented Reality SDK WebXR Games List of HTC Vive games List of Meta Quest games List of Oculus Rift games List of PlayStation VR games VR2 Communities and social networks AltspaceVR FaceTime for visionOS Horizon Worlds NeosVR Rec Room Resonite Sansar Sensorium Sinespace VRChat VTime XR People Philippe Bekaert Maurice Benayoun Simon Birrell Mark Bolas Brendan Bradley Fred Brooks Boštjan Burger John Carmack Tim Cook Carolina Cruz-Neira Ela Darling Char Davies Thomas A. DeFanti Steven K. Feiner Scott Fisher Jerome Foster II Henry Fuchs Thomas A. Furness III Morton Heilig Eric Howlett Brendan Iribe Myron W. Krueger Jaron Lanier R. Bowen Loftin Palmer Luckey Mark Stephen Meadows Michelle and Uri Kranot Tony Parisi Nonny de la Peña Elia Petridis Warren Robinett Lawrence J. Rosenblum Daniel J. Sandin Dieter Schmalstieg Bob Sproull Nicole Stenger Ivan Sutherland Susumu Tachi Gunpei Yokoi Mark Zuckerberg In fiction Attack of the Killer App (Futurama Episode) Holodeck ( Star Trek ) Netrunner Neuromancer Ready Player One film Ready Player Two Snow Crash Superhot Sword Art Online The Matrix Portals Technology Category Augmented reality Mixed reality Virtual reality Metaverse Spatial computing Commons Augmented reality Mixed reality Virtual reality Metaverse v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐647cb4546b‐k877n
Cached time: 20250814060920
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.633 seconds
Real time usage: 0.816 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3885/1000000
Revision size: 39773/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 150835/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6304/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 118826/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.359/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7133796/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  617.827      1 -total
 47.44%  293.127      1 Template:Reflist
 18.63%  115.099      6 Template:Navbox
 16.22%  100.235      4 Template:Cite_book
 14.76%   91.178      1 Template:Mixed_reality
 12.07%   74.544      8 Template:Fix
 10.53%   65.059      1 Template:Short_description
  6.55%   40.453      7 Template:Cite_news
  6.52%   40.252      8 Template:Cite_web
  6.47%   40.002      3 Template:Pn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:305083:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814060920 and revision id 1305808227. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telepresence&oldid=1305808227 " Categories : Telepresence Videotelephony Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2025 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with unsourced quotes All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009 Pages using div col with small parameter Commons link is locally defined Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 06:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Telepresence 16 languages Add topic

