Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Religion and proselytization 2 Abrahamic religions Toggle Abrahamic religions subsection 2.1 Baháʼí Faith 2.2 Christianity 2.2.1 Comparison between Protestant denominations 2.2.2 Latter Day Saint movement 2.3 Islam 2.4 Judaism 2.5 Spiritism 3 Dharmic religions Toggle Dharmic religions subsection 3.1 Buddhism 3.2 Hinduism 3.3 Jainism 3.4 Sikhism 4 Other religions and sects 5 Fostering conversion 6 International law 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Religious conversion 47 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Adoption of religious beliefs For other uses of "conversion", see Conversion (disambiguation) .

This article is about voluntary acceptance of a religion. For forced conversion, see Forced conversion . For renunciation of a religion, see Apostasy .

Part of a series on Religious conversion Types Secondary Marital Forced Deathbed Related concepts Apostasy Assimilation v t e Religious conversion is the adoption of a set of beliefs identified with one particular religious denomination to the exclusion of others. Thus "religious conversion" would describe the abandoning of adherence to one denomination and affiliating with another. This might be from one to another denomination within the same religion, for example, from Protestant Christianity to Roman Catholicism or from Shi'a Islam to Sunni Islam .

[ 1 ] In some cases, religious conversion "marks a transformation of religious identity and is symbolized by special rituals".

[ 2 ] People convert to a different religion for various reasons, including active conversion by free choice due to a change in beliefs, [ 3 ] secondary conversion , deathbed conversion , conversion for convenience, marital conversion , and forced conversion . Religious conversion can also be driven by practical considerations. Historically, people have converted to evade taxes, to escape military service or to gain political representation.

[ 4 ] Proselytism is the act of attempting to convert by persuasion another individual from a different religion or belief system.

Apostate is a term used by members of a religion or denomination to refer to someone who has left that religion or denomination.

Religion and proselytization [ edit ] The religions of the world are divided into two groups: those that actively seek new followers (missionary religions) and those that do not (non-missionary religions). This classification dates back to a lecture given by Max Müller in 1873, [ 5 ] and is based on whether or not a religion seeks to gain new converts. The three main religions classified as missionary religions are Buddhism , Christianity , and Islam , while the non-missionary religions include Judaism , Zoroastrianism , and Hinduism . Other religions, such as Primal Religions, Confucianism , and Taoism , may also be considered non-missionary religions.

[ 6 ] Abrahamic religions [ edit ] Baháʼí Faith [ edit ] Further information: Baháʼí Faith This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In sharing their faith with others, Baháʼís are cautioned to "obtain a hearing" – meaning to make sure the person they are proposing to teach is open to hearing what they have to say. " Baháʼí pioneers ", rather than attempting to supplant the cultural underpinnings of the people in their adopted communities, are encouraged to integrate into the society and apply Baháʼí principles in living and working with their neighbors.

Baháʼís recognize the divine origins of all revealed religion, and believe that these religions occurred sequentially as part of a divine plan (see Progressive revelation ), with each new revelation superseding and fulfilling that of its predecessors. Baháʼís regard their own faith as the most recent (but not the last), and believe its teachings – which are centered around the principle of the oneness of humanity – are most suited to meeting the needs of a global community.

In most countries conversion is a simple matter of filling out a card stating a declaration of belief. This includes acknowledgement of Bahá'u'llah – the Founder of the Faith – as the Messenger of God for this age, awareness and acceptance of his teachings, and intention to be obedient to the institutions and laws he established.

Conversion to the Baháʼí Faith carries with it an explicit belief in the common foundation of all revealed religion, a commitment to the unity of mankind, and active service to the community at large, especially in areas that will foster unity and concord. Since the Baháʼí Faith has no clergy, converts are encouraged to be active in all aspects of community life. Even a recent convert may be elected to serve on a local Spiritual Assembly – the guiding Baháʼí institution at the community level.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Christianity [ edit ] Main articles: Conversion to Christianity , Christianization , and List of converts to Christianity The Conversion of Saint Paul , a 1600 painting by Italian artist Caravaggio (1571–1610) Within Christianity conversion refers variously to three different phenomena: a person becoming Christian who was previously not Christian; a Christian moving from one Christian denomination to another; a particular spiritual development, sometimes called the "second conversion", or "the conversion of the baptised".

[ 9 ] Conversion to Christianity is the religious conversion of a previously non-Christian person to some form of Christianity. Some Christian sects require full conversion for new members regardless of any history in other Christian sects, or from certain other sects. The exact requirements vary between different churches and denominations .

Baptism is traditionally seen as a sacrament of admission to Christianity.

[ 10 ] Christian baptism has some parallels with Jewish immersion by mikvah .

In the New Testament , Jesus commanded his disciples in the Great Commission to "go and make disciples of all nations".

[ 11 ] Evangelization – sharing the Gospel message or "Good News" in deed and word, is an expectation of Christians.

[ 12 ] Conversions to Christianity have been widespread. Even Christian communities not known for proselytization, such as the Armenian Apostolic Church , are known to have accepted converts among Muslims , Yazidis , and Jews in the nineteenth century.

[ 13 ] Comparison between Protestant denominations [ edit ] While Calvinism is monergistic , [ 14 ] like Lutherism, [ 15 ] its monergism is through the inner calling of the Holy Spirit, which is irresistible according to the tradition. Lutherism, on the other hand, is monergistic through the means of grace , and holds the Word to be resistible . The Arminian view on salvation, unlike the other two, is synergistic , [ 16 ] and considers salvation resistible due to the common grace of free will.

Latter Day Saint movement [ edit ] This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Baptism in Mormonism Much of the theology of Latter Day Saint baptism was established during the early Latter Day Saint movement founded by Joseph Smith, Jr . According to this theology, baptism must be by immersion , for the remission of sins (meaning that through baptism, past sins are forgiven), and occurs after one has shown faith and repentance. Mormon baptism does not purport to remit any sins other than personal ones, as adherents do not believe in original sin .

[ 17 ] Latter Day Saints baptisms also occur only after an " age of accountability " which is defined as the age of eight years.

[ 18 ] The theology thus rejects infant baptism .

[ 19 ] In addition, Latter Day Saint theology requires that baptism may only be performed with one who has been called and ordained by God with priesthood authority.

[ 20 ] Because the churches of the Latter Day Saint movement operate under a lay priesthood, children raised in a Mormon family are usually baptized by a father or close male friend or family member who has achieved the office of priest , which is conferred upon worthy male members at least 16 years old in the LDS Church.

[ 21 ] Baptism is seen as symbolic both of Jesus ' death, burial and resurrection [ 22 ] and is also symbolic of the baptized individual putting off of the natural or sinful man and becoming spiritually reborn as a disciple of Jesus.

[ citation needed ] Membership into a Latter Day Saint church is granted only by baptism whether or not a person has been raised in the church. Latter Day Saint churches do not recognize baptisms of other faiths as valid because they believe baptisms must be performed under the church's unique authority. Thus, all who come into one of the Latter Day Saint faiths as converts are baptized, even if they have previously received baptism in another faith.

When performing a Baptism, Latter Day Saints say the following prayer before performing the ordinance: Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

[ 23 ] Baptisms inside and outside the temples are usually done in a baptistry , although they can be performed in any body of water in which the person may be completely immersed. The person administering the baptism must recite the prayer exactly, and immerse every part, limb, hair and clothing of the person being baptized. If there are any mistakes, or if any part of the person being baptized is not fully immersed, the baptism must be redone. In addition to the baptizer, two members of the church witness the baptism to ensure that it is performed properly.

[ 24 ] Following baptism, Latter Day Saints receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands of a Melchizedek Priesthood holder.

[ 24 ] Latter Day Saints hold that one may be baptized after death through the vicarious act of a living individual. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with a valid temple recommend (beginning in the year they turn twelve, and after being ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood for men and boys) have the opportunity to practice baptism for the dead as a missionary ritual. However, individuals for whom such baptisms are performed are not counted in figures regarding church membership statistics, such as total membership in the church, or the number of convert baptisms in a given year. Other churches of the Latter Day Saint movement also perform baptisms for the dead. This doctrine, in combination with others regarding the time between an individual's death and resurrection, also explains what happens to the righteous non-believer and the unevangelized by providing a post-mortem means of repentance and salvation.

Islam [ edit ] The Shahada , or Islamic creed.

Main articles: Conversion to Islam , Dawah , and Islamic missionary activity Further information: Al-Baqara 256 , Conversion to Islam in prisons , and List of converts to Islam Converting to Islam requires one to declare the shahādah , the Muslim profession of faith ("there is no god but God ; Muhammad is the messenger of God").

[ 25 ] According to Clinton Bennett , British–American scholar of Religious studies , one's declaration of the Muslim profession of faith does not imply faith in God alone, since the conversion to Islam includes other distinct Islamic beliefs as well as part of the Muslim creed ( ʿaqīdah ): [ 25 ] Technically, the Shahadah ( first pillar ) is the only obligatory statement of faith in Islam ; however, over time a list of six items evolved, the essentials of faith ( Iman Mufassal ), namely: belief in God, in God's angels, scriptures, messengers, day of judgment, and God's power.

[ 25 ] In the Islamic religion, it is believed that everyone is Muslim at birth .

[ 26 ] Due to this, those who convert are typically referred to as reverts. In Islam, the practice of religious circumcision is considered a sunnah custom, not a requirement for conversion, and furthermore it is never mentioned in the Quran .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] The majority of clerical opinions holds that circumcision is not required upon entering the Muslim faith.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] In the Sunnī branch of Islam , the Shāfiʿī and Ḥanbalī schools regard both male and female circumcision as legally obligatory for Muslims, while the Mālikī and Ḥanafī schools regard it as non-binding and only recommended for both sexes.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Judaism [ edit ] The traditional normative conversion process to Judaism ( gijur ) of one, two or more years is finalized with ritual immersion in a natural collection of water, e.g. a river, a lake, or a mikveh .

Main articles: Conversion to Judaism , Gerim , and List of converts to Judaism Conversion to Judaism is the religious conversion of non-Jews to become members of the Jewish religion and Jewish ethnoreligious community .

[ 29 ] The procedure and requirements for conversion depend on the sponsoring denomination . A conversion in accordance with the process of a denomination is not a guarantee of recognition by another denomination.

[ 29 ] A formal conversion is also sometimes undertaken by individuals whose Jewish ancestry is questioned, even if they were raised Jewish, but may not actually be considered Jews according to traditional Jewish law .

[ 30 ] As late as the 6th century, the Eastern Roman empire and Caliph Umar ibn Khattab were issuing decrees against conversion to Judaism , implying that this was still occurring.

[ 31 ] Spiritism [ edit ] There are no rituals or dogmas, nor any sort of procedures in conversion to Spiritism . The doctrine is first considered as science, then philosophy and lastly as a religion.

Allan Kardec 's codification of Spiritism occurred between the years 1857 and 1868. Currently there are 25 to 60 million people [ specify ] [ citation needed ] studying Spiritism in various countries, mainly in Brazil, through its essential books , which include The Spirits Book , The Book on Mediums , The Gospel According to Spiritism , Heaven and Hell and The Genesis According to Spiritism .

Chico Xavier wrote over 490 additional books, which expand on the spiritualist doctrine .

As explained in the first of the 1,019 questions and answers in The Spirits Book : 1. What is God? Answer: "God is the Supreme Intelligence-First Cause of all things." [ 32 ] The consensus in Spiritism is that God, the Great Creator, is above everything, including all human things such as rituals, dogmas, denominations or any other thing.

Dharmic religions [ edit ] Buddhism [ edit ] See also: List of converts to Buddhism Persons newly adhering to Buddhism traditionally " Taking Three Refuge " (express faith in the Three Jewels – Buddha , Dhamma , and Sangha ) before a monk , nun , or similar representative, with often the sangha, the community of practitioners, also in ritual attendance.

Throughout the timeline of Buddhism , conversions of entire countries and regions to Buddhism were frequent, as Buddhism spread throughout Asia.  For example, in the 11th century in Burma , king Anoratha converted his entire country to Theravada Buddhism . At the end of the 12th century, Jayavarman VII set the stage for conversion of the Khmer people to Theravada Buddhism.  Mass conversions of areas and communities to Buddhism occur up to the present day, for example, in the Dalit Buddhist movement in India there have been organized mass conversions .

Exceptions to encouraging conversion may occur in some Buddhist movements. In Tibetan Buddhism , for example, the current Dalai Lama discourages active attempts to win converts.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Hinduism [ edit ] See also: List of converts to Hinduism and Shuddhi (Hinduism) A yajna initiation to Hinduism ceremony in progress Hinduism is a diverse system of thought with beliefs spanning monotheism , polytheism , panentheism , pantheism , pandeism , monism , and atheism among others. Hinduism has no traditional ecclesiastical order, no centralized religious authorities, no universally accepted governing body, no binding holy book nor any mandatory prayer attendance requirements.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] In its diffuse and open structure, numerous schools and sects of Hinduism have developed and spun off in India with help from its ascetic scholars, since the Vedic age . The six Astika and two Nastika schools of Hindu philosophy , in its history, did not develop a missionary or proselytization methodology, and they co-existed with each other. Most Hindu sub-schools and sects do not actively seek converts.

[ 38 ] Individuals have had a choice to enter, leave or change their god(s), spiritual convictions, accept or discard any rituals and practices, and pursue spiritual knowledge and liberation ( moksha ) in different ways.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] However, various schools of Hinduism do have some core common beliefs, such as the belief that all living beings have Atman (soul), a belief in karma theory, spirituality, ahimsa (non-violence) as the greatest dharma or virtue, and others.

[ 41 ] Religious conversion to Hinduism has a long history outside India. Merchants and traders of India, particularly from Indian peninsula, carried their religious ideas, which led to religious conversions to Hinduism in Indonesia, Champa, Cambodia and Burma.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Some sects of Hindus, particularly of the Bhakti schools began seeking or accepting converts in early to mid 20th century. For example, groups like the International Society for Krishna Consciousness accept those who have a desire to follow their sects of Hinduism and have their own religious conversion procedure.

[ 45 ] Since 1800 CE, religious conversion from and to Hinduism has been a controversial subject within Hinduism. Some have suggested that the concept of missionary conversion, either way, is contrary to the precepts of Hinduism.

[ 46 ] Religious leaders of some of Hinduism sects such as Brahmo Samaj have seen Hinduism as a non-missionary religion yet welcomed new members, while other leaders of Hinduism's diverse schools have stated that with the arrival of missionary Islam and Christianity in India, the view that "there is no such thing as proselytism in Hinduism" must be re-examined.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] In recent decades, mainstream Hinduism schools have attempted to systematize ways to accept religious converts, with an increase in inter-religious mixed marriages.

[ 41 ] The steps involved in becoming a Hindu have variously included a period where the interested person gets an informal ardha-Hindu name and studies ancient literature on spiritual path and practices (English translations of Upanishads , Agama , Itihasa , ethics in Sutra , Hindu festivals, yoga ).

[ 41 ] If after a period of study, the individual still wants to convert, a Namakarana Samskara ceremony is held, where the individual adopts a traditional Hindu name. The initiation ceremony may also include Yajna (i.e., fire ritual with Sanskrit hymns) under guidance of a local Hindu priest.

[ 41 ] Some of these places are mathas and asramas (hermitage, monastery), where one or more gurus (spiritual guide) conduct the conversion and offer spiritual discussions.

[ 41 ] Some schools encourage the new convert to learn and participate in community activities such as festivals ( Diwali etc.), read and discuss ancient literature, learn and engage in rites of passages (ceremonies of birth, first feeding, first learning day, age of majority, wedding, cremation and others).

[ 41 ] Jainism [ edit ] Jainism accepts anyone who wants to embrace the religion. There is no specific ritual for becoming a Jain. One does not need to ask any authorities for admission. One becomes a Jain on one's own by observing the five vows ( vratas ) [ 48 ] The five main vows as mentioned in the ancient Jain texts like Tattvarthasutra are: [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Ahimsa - Not to injure any living being by actions and thoughts.

[ 51 ] Satya - Not to lie or speak words that hurt others.

Asteya - Not to take anything if not given.

[ 52 ] Brahmacharya - Chastity for householders / Celibacy in action, words and thoughts for monks and nuns.

Aparigraha ( Non-possession ) - non-attachment to possessions.

[ 53 ] Following the five vows is the main requirement in Jainism. All other aspects such as visiting temples are secondary.

Jain monks and nuns are required to observe these five vows strictly.

[ 48 ] Sikhism [ edit ] Sikhism is not known to openly proselytize conversions, however it is open and accepting to anyone wanting to take on the Sikh faith.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Other religions and sects [ edit ] In the second half of the 20th century, the rapid growth of new religious movements (NRMs) led some psychologists and other scholars to propose that these groups were using " brainwashing " or " mind control " techniques to gain converts.  This theory was publicized by the popular news media but disputed by other scholars, including some sociologists of religion .

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] In the 1960s  sociologist John Lofland lived with Unification Church missionary Young Oon Kim and a small group of American church members in California and studied their activities in trying to promote their beliefs and win converts to their church.  Lofland noted that most of their efforts were ineffective and that most of the people who joined did so because of personal relationships – often family relationships – with existing members.

[ 60 ] Lofland summarised his findings in 1964 in a doctoral thesis entitled "The World Savers: A Field Study of Cult Processes", and in 1966 in book form (published by Prentice-Hall ) as Doomsday Cult: A Study of Conversion, Proselytization, and Maintenance of Faith . It is considered [ by whom?

] to be one of the most important and widely cited studies of the process of religious conversion, and one of the first modern sociological studies of a new religious movement.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] The Church of Scientology attempts to gain converts by offering "free stress tests".

[ 63 ] It has also used the celebrity status of some of its members (most notably that of the American actor Tom Cruise ) to attract converts.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] The Church of Scientology requires that all converts sign a legal waiver which covers their relationship with the Church of Scientology before engaging in Scientology services.

[ 66 ] Research in the United States and in the Netherlands has shown a positive correlation between areas lacking mainstream churches and the percentage of people who are members of a new religious movement. This applies also for the presence of New Age centres.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] On the other end of the proselytising scale are religions that do not accept any converts. Often these are relatively small, close-knit minority religions that are ethnically based such as the Yazidis , Druze , and Mandaeans . The Parsis, a Zoroastrianism group based in India, classically does not accept converts, but this issue became controversial in the 20th century due to a rapid decline in membership.

[ 69 ] Chinese traditional religion lacks clear criteria for membership, and hence for conversion. However, Taoism does have its own religious conversion ceremony which seems [ original research?

] to be adopted and modified from Chinese Buddhist refuge-taking ceremonies. The Shakers and some Indian eunuch brotherhoods do not allow procreation, so that every member is a convert.

[ citation needed ] Fostering conversion [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Different factors and circumstances may operate and interact to persuade individuals of groups to convert and adopt a new set of religious doctrines and habits.

Religious enthusiasm for proselytism can play a role. For example, the New Testament chronicles the personal activities of the Apostles and their followers in inspired preaching , miracle -working and the subsequent gathering of followers. Freshly-converted Irish and Anglo-Saxon priests spread their new-found faith among pagan British and Germanic peoples. Missions of the 19th century spread against a background of North Atlantic revivalism with its emotionalism and mass-meeting crowd psychological behaviours.

Messianism may prepare groups for the coming of a Messiah or of a saviour . Thus the 1st-century Levant , steeped in expectations of overturning the political situation , provided fertile ground for nascent Christianity and other Jewish messianic sects, such as the Zealots .

Some religious traditions, rather than stressing emotion in the conversion process, emphasise the importance of philosophical thought as a pathway to adopting a new religion.

Saint Paul in Athens fits here, as do some of the Indic religions (such as Buddhism and Jainism ). The historical God-fearers may represent a philosophical bridge between Hellenism and Abrahamic faith .

A religious creed which can capture the ear and support of secular power can become a prestige movement, encouraging the mass of a people to follow its tenets. Christianity grew after becoming the state religion in Armenia , in the Roman Empire , and in Ethiopia .

Eastern Orthodoxy expanded when it gained official sanction in Kievan Rus' .

Some people convert under the influence of other social conditions. Early Christianity attracted followers by offering community material support and enhanced status for disadvantaged groups such as women and slaves.

[ 70 ] Islam allegedly spread in North Africa through just administration, and in the Balkans by integrating new believers with improved tax conditions and social prestige.

Colonial missions since the 19th century have attracted people to an implied nexus of material well-being, civilisation , and European-style religion.

Force can – at least apparently – coerce people into adopting different ideas.

Religious police in (for example) Iran and Saudi Arabia answer for the correct religious expression of those in their purview. The Inquisition in France and in Iberia worked to convert heretics – with varying success .

Frankish armies spread Roman Catholicism eastwards in the Middle Ages. Religious wars and suppression shaped the histories of the Baltic tribes , the Hussites and the Huguenots .

On the other hand, persecution can drive religious faith and practice underground and strengthen the resolve of oppressed adherents – as in the cases of the Waldenses or the Baháʼí Faith .

International law [ edit ] The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights defines religious conversion as a human right : "Everyone has the right to freedom of thought , conscience and religion ; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief" (Article 18). Despite this UN-declared human right, some groups forbid or restrict religious conversion (see below).

Based on the declaration the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) drafted the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , a legally binding treaty. It states that "Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice" (Article 18.1). "No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice" (Article 18.2).

The UNCHR issued a General Comment on this Article in 1993: "The Committee observes that the freedom to 'have or to adopt' a religion or belief necessarily entails the freedom to choose a religion or belief, including the right to replace one's current religion or belief with another or to adopt atheistic views ... Article 18.2 bars coercion that would impair the right to have or adopt a religion or belief, including the use of threat of physical force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers to adhere to their religious beliefs and congregations, to recant their religion or belief or to convert ." (CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.4, General Comment No. 22.; emphasis added) Some countries distinguish voluntary, motivated conversion from organized proselytism, attempting to restrict the latter. The boundary between them is not easily defined: what one person considers legitimate evangelizing, or witness-bearing, another may consider intrusive and improper. Illustrating the problems that can arise from such subjective viewpoints is this extract from an article by C. Davis, published in Cleveland State University 's Journal of Law and Health : "According to the Union of American Hebrew Congregations , Jews for Jesus and Hebrew Christians constitute two of the most dangerous cults, and its members are appropriate candidates for deprogramming . Anti-cult evangelicals ... protest that 'aggressiveness and proselytizing ... are basic to authentic Christianity,' and that Jews for Jesus and Campus Crusade for Christ are not to be labeled as cults. Furthermore, certain Hassidic groups who physically attacked a meeting of the Hebrew Christian 'cult' have themselves been labeled a 'cult' and equated with the followers of Reverend Moon , by none other than the President of the Central Conference of American Rabbis." [ 71 ] Since the collapse of the former Soviet Union the Russian Orthodox Church has enjoyed a revival. However, it takes exception to what it considers illegitimate proselytizing by the Roman Catholic Church , the Salvation Army , Jehovah's Witnesses , and other religious movements in what it refers to as its canonical territory .

[ citation needed ] Greece has a long history of conflict, mostly with Jehovah's Witnesses, but also with some Pentecostals , over its laws on proselytism. This situation stems from a law passed in the 1930s by the dictator Ioannis Metaxas . A Jehovah's Witness, Minos Kokkinakis , won the equivalent of $14,400 in damages from the Greek state after being arrested for trying to preach his faith from door to door. In another case, Larissis v. Greece , a member of the Pentecostal church also won a case in the European Court of Human Rights .

[ 72 ] See also [ edit ] Apostasy , or renunciation of religion Conversion to Islam in U.S. prisons [ importance?

] Forced conversion of minority girls in Pakistan Inquisition Islamic Missionary Activity Kakure Kirishitan List of converts to Buddhism List of converts to Catholicism List of converts to Christianity List of converts to Hinduism List of converts to Islam List of converts to Judaism List of converts to Sikhism Love Jihad , a conspiracy theory that Muslims feign love to convert others Missionary Missionary (LDS Church) Moral conversion based on the internalist view of morality Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults Safavid conversion of Iran from Sunnism to Shiism The Rage Against God , 2010 book by Peter Hitchens References [ edit ] ^ Stark, Rodney and Roger Finke. "Acts of Faith: Explaining the Human Side of Religion." University of California Press, 2000. p.114.

ISBN 978-0-520-22202-1 ^ Meintel, Deirdre. "When There Is No Conversion: Spiritualists and Personal Religious Change".

Anthropologica .

49 (1): 149– 162.

^ Falkenberg, Steve. "Psychological Explanations of Religious Socialization." Religious Conversion. Eastern Kentucky University. August 31, 2009.

^ Mikdashi, Maya (2022-05-03), "Chapter 3 Regulating Conversion: Sovereignty, Bureaucracy, and the Banality of Religion" , Sextarianism: Sovereignty, Secularism, and the State in Lebanon , Stanford University Press, pp.

83– 116, doi : 10.1515/9781503631564-005 , ISBN 978-1-5036-3156-4 , retrieved 2025-02-26 ^ On Missions (1874), pp. 35–41.

^ Rambo, Lewis R.; Farhadian, Charles E. (2014-03-06).

The Oxford Handbook of Religious Conversion . Oxford University Press. p. 429.

ISBN 978-0-19-971354-7 .

^ Smith, P. (1999).

A Concise Encyclopedia of the Bahá'í Faith . Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 1-85168-184-1 .

^ Momen, M. (1997).

A Short Introduction to the Baháʼí Faith . Oxford, UK: One World Publications.

ISBN 1-85168-209-0 .

^ "The sacrament of penance and reconciliation" .

Catechism of the Catholic Church . The Holy See. Archived from the original on Mar 28, 2016 . Retrieved 24 Mar 2016 .

^ "Baptism, Christianity".

Britannica .

^ Matthew 28:19 , Mark 16:15 ^ "Evangelization." Evangelization. United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, n.d. Web. 05 Oct. 2016.

^ Hamed-Troyansky, Vladimir (2021).

"Becoming Armenian: Religious Conversions in the Late Imperial South Caucasus" .

Comparative Studies in Society and History .

63 (1): 242– 272.

doi : 10.1017/S0010417520000432 .

^ Paul ChulHong Kang, Justification: The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness from Reformation Theology to the American Great Awakening and the Korean Revivals ( Peter Lang , 2006), 70, note 171. Calvin generally defends Augustine’s “monergistic view”.

^ http://www.thefreedictionary.com/Monergism and Paul ChulHong Kang, Justification: The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness from Reformation Theology to the American Great Awakening and the Korean Revivals ( Peter Lang , 2006), 65.

^ Roger E. Olson, Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities (InterVarsity Press, 2009), 18. “Arminian synergism” refers to “evangelical synergism, which affirms the prevenience of grace”.

^ (2010, September 15). The Original Sin – What Do Mormons Believe?. Whatdomormonsbelieve.

https://www.whatdomormonsbelieve.com/15/09/2010/the-original-sin/ Archived Link: https://archive.today/20220314005237/https://www.whatdomormonsbelieve.com/15/09/2010/the-original-sin/ ^ See Doctrine and Covenants 68:25–27 ^ See Moroni 8:4–23 ^ See, e.g., "Guide to the Scriptures: Baptism, Baptize: Proper authority" , churchofjesuschrist.org , LDS Church ^ See, e.g., "Gospel Topics: Priest" , churchofjesuschrist.org , LDS Church ^ See, e.g., "Baptism" , KJV (LDS): LDS Bible Dictionary , LDS Church ^ See 3 Nephi 11:25 ^ a b "Performing Priesthood Ordinances" , Duties and Blessings of the Priesthood: Basic Manual for Priesthood Holders, Part B , LDS Church, 2000, pp.

41– 48 ^ a b c Bennett, Clinton , ed. (2015) [2013].

"Glossary" .

The Bloomsbury Companion to Islamic Studies (1st ed.).

New York and London : Bloomsbury Academic . p. 330.

ISBN 9781441138125 .

OCLC 777652885 .

Aqidah – translates as "creed". Technically, the Shahadah ( first pillar ) is the only obligatory statement of faith in Islam ; however, over time a list of six items evolved, the essentials of faith ( Iman Mufassal ), namely: belief in God, in God's angels, scriptures, messengers, day of judgment, and God's power.

^ a b c d Kueny, Kathryn (2004).

"Abraham's Test: Islamic Male Circumcision as Anti/Ante-Covenantal Practice" . In Reeves, John C. (ed.).

Bible and Qurʼān: Essays in Scriptural Intertextuality .

Symposium Series (Society of Biblical Literature) . Vol. 24.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

161– 173.

ISBN 90-04-12726-7 .

ISSN 1569-3627 .

^ a b c Wensinck, A. J. (2012) [1986].

"K̲h̲itān" . In Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E. J.

; Lewis, B.; Heinrichs, W. P.

; Pellat, Ch.

(eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition . Vol. 5.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

20– 22.

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_islam_SIM_4296 .

ISBN 978-90-04-07819-2 .

^ a b c Aldeeb Abu-Sahlieh, Sami A.

(1994). "To Mutilate in the Name of Jehovah or Allah: Legitimization of Male and Female Circumcision".

Medicine and Law .

13 ( 7– 8).

World Association for Medical Law : 575– 622.

PMID 7731348 .

; Aldeeb Abu-Sahlieh, Sami A. (1995).

"Islamic Law and the Issue of Male and Female Circumcision" .

Third World Legal Studies .

13 .

Valparaiso University School of Law : 73– 101.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2020 .

^ a b "Converting to Judaism" .

BBC . July 12, 2011 . Retrieved November 18, 2016 .

^ Heilman, Uriel (October 6, 2014).

"So You Want to Convert to Judaism? It's Not That Easy" .

Haaretz . Retrieved November 18, 2016 .

^ "Internet History Sourcebooks: Medieval Sourcebook" .

legacy.fordham.edu .

^ The Spirits Book (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-04-17 . Retrieved 2018-10-23 .

^ "Dalai Lama opposed to practice of conversion" . Archived from the original on February 9, 2012.

^ Dawei, Bei (2012).

Conversion to Tibetan Buddhism: Some Reflections , in: Ura, Dasho, Karma: Chophel, Dendup, Buddhism Without Borders, Proceedings of the International Conference of Global Buddhism, Bhumtang, Bhutan, May 211-23, 2012, The Center for Buthane Studies, pp, 53–75 ^ Chakravarti, Sitansu (1991), Hinduism, a way of life , Motilal Banarsidass Publ., p. 71, ISBN 978-81-208-0899-7 ^ Julius J. Lipner , Hindus: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices, 2nd Edition, Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-45677-7 ^ MK Gandhi, The Essence of Hinduism , Editor: VB Kher, Navajivan Publishing, see page 3; According to Gandhi, "a man may not believe in God and still call himself a Hindu." ^ Catharine Cookson (2003), Encyclopedia of religious freedom , Taylor & Francis, p. 180, ISBN 978-0-415-94181-5 ^ Bhavasar and Kiem, Spirituality and Health, in Hindu Spirituality, Editor: Ewert Cousins (1989), ISBN 0-8245-0755-X ^ Gavin Flood, Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Editor: Knut Jacobsen (2010), Volume II, Brill, ISBN 978-90-04-17893-9 ^ a b c d e f SS Subramuniyaswami (2000), How to become a Hindu, 2nd Edition, Himalayan Academy, ISBN 0945497822 ^ Jan Gonda , The Indian Religions in Pre-Islamic Indonesia and their survival in Bali, in Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 3 Southeast Asia, Religions at Google Books , pages 1–47 ^ Richadiana Kartakusama (2006), Archaeology: Indonesian Perspective (Editors: Truman Simanjuntak et al.), Yayasan Obor Indonesia, ISBN 979-2624996 ^ Reuter, Thomas (September 2004).

Java's Hinduism Revivial [ sic ] . Hinduism Today. Archived from the original on 2020-12-29 . Retrieved 2008-03-16 .

^ See, for example: ISKCON Law Book , International Society for Krishna Consciousness, GBC Press ^ a b Sharma, Arvind (22 April 2011).

Hinduism as a Missionary Religion .

Albany, New York : State University of New York Press . pp.

31– 53.

ISBN 978-1-4384-3211-3 .

^ Gauri Viswanathan (1998), Outside the Fold: Conversion, Modernity, and Belief, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691058993 ^ a b Pravin Shah, Five Great Vows (Maha-vratas) of Jainism Jainism Literature Center, Harvard University Archives (2009) ^ Jain 2011 , p. 93.

^ Sangave 2001 , p. 67.

^ "What is Ahimsa?" .

Yoga Journal . 2019-11-08 . Retrieved 2022-03-14 .

^ Jain 2011 , p. 99.

^ Jain 2011 , p. 100.

^ "ThinkQuest – Sikhism" . Archived from the original on 2011-11-30 . Retrieved 2011-07-27 .

^ "Sikhism (Sikhi) the Sikh Faith and Religion in America" . Archived from the original on 2011-09-07 . Retrieved 2011-07-27 .

^ Bromley, David G. (1998). "Brainwashing". In William H. Swatos Jr. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion and Society . Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira. pp.

61– 62.

ISBN 978-0-7619-8956-1 .

^ Barker, Eileen: New Religious Movements: A Practical Introduction . London: Her Majesty's Stationery office, 1989.

^ Wright, Stewart A. (1997). "Media Coverage of Unconventional Religion: Any 'Good News' for Minority Faiths?".

Review of Religious Research .

39 (2). Review of Religious Research, Vol. 39, No. 2: 101– 115.

doi : 10.2307/3512176 .

JSTOR 3512176 .

^ Barker, Eileen (1986). "Religious Movements: Cult and Anti-Cult Since Jonestown".

Annual Review of Sociology .

12 : 329– 346.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.so.12.080186.001553 .

^ Conversion , Unification Church , Encyclopedia of Religion and Society , Hartford Institute for Religion Research, Hartford Seminary ^ Introduction to New and Alternative Religions in America: African diaspora traditions and other American innovations , Volume 5 of Introduction to New and Alternative Religions in America, W. Michael Ashcraft, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2006 ISBN 0-275-98717-5 ^ Exploring New Religions ,
Issues in contemporary religion, George D. Chryssides, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2001 ISBN 0-8264-5959-5 ^ The Foster Report . Chapter 5, "The Practices of Scientology;" section (a), "Recruitment;" pages 75–76.

^ "Artists Find Inspiration, Education at Church of Scientology & Celebrity Centre Nashville." The Tennessee Tribune , Jan 20 – Jan 26, 2011. Vol. 22, Iss. 3, pg. 14A ^ Goodyear, Dana (2008-01-14).

"Château Scientology" .

Letter from California .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 2008-01-10 .

^ Friedman, Roger (3 September 2003).

"Will Scientology Celebs Sign 'Spiritual' Contract?" . FOX News . Retrieved 2008-12-07 .

^ Schepens, T. (Dutch) Religieuze bewegingen in Nederland volume 29, Sekten Ontkerkelijking en religieuze vitaliteit: nieuwe religieuze bewegingen en New Age-centra in Nederland (1994) VU uitgeverij ISBN 90-5383-341-2 ^ Stark, R & W.S. Bainbridge The future of religion: secularization, revival and cult formation (1985) Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: University of California press ^ Sherine, Ariane (8 December 2013).

"Zoroastrianism needs to adapt its archaic laws – or die | Ariane Sherine" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 25 February 2019 .

^ Galatians 3:28 ^ "Joining a Cult: Religious Choice or Psychological Aberration?" .

www.religioustolerance.org .

^ "Justice and reforms after airmen were given criminal convictions for their religious activities" .

Impact of the European Convention on Human Rights . Retrieved 9 November 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barker, Eileen The Making of a Moonie: Choice or Brainwashing?

(1984) Barrett, D. V.

The New Believers: A survey of sects, cults and alternative religions (2001) UK, Cassell & Co ISBN 0-304-35592-5 Buckser, A. S. and S. D. Glazier. eds.

The Anthropology of Religious Conversion Rowman and Littlefield, 2003 Cooper, Richard S. "The Assessment and Collection of Kharaj Tax in Medieval Egypt" Journal of the American Oriental Society , Vol. 96, No. 3. (Jul–Sep., 1976), pp. 365–382.

Curtin, Phillip D.

Cross-Cultural Trade in World History . Cambridge University Press, 1984.

Hoiberg, Dale, and Indu Ramachandran.

Students' Britannica India . Popular Prakashan, 2000.

Idris, Gaefar, Sheikh .

The Process of Islamization . Plainfield, Ind.: Muslim Students' Association of the U.S. and Canada, 1977. vi, 20 p. Without ISBN James, William, The varieties of religious experience: a study in human nature . Being the Gifford lectures on natural religion delivered at Edinburgh in 1901–1902; Longmans, Green & Co, New York (1902) Morris, Harold C., and Lin M. Morris. "Power and purpose: Correlates to conversion." Psychology: A Journal of Human Behavior, Vol 15(4), Nov–Dec 1978, 15–22.

Rambo, Lewis R.

Understanding Religious Conversion . Yale University Press, 1993.

Rambo, Lewis R., & Farhadian, Charles.

Oxford Handbook of Religious Conversion . Oxford University Press, 2014.

Ramstedt, Martin.

Hinduism in Modern Indonesia: A Minority Religion Between Local, National, and Global Interests . Routledge, 2004.

Rawat, Ajay S.

StudentMan and Forests: The Khatta and Gujjar Settlements of Sub-Himalayan Tarai . Indus Publishing, 1993.

Vasu, Srisa Chandra (1919), The Catechism Of Hindu Dharma , New York: Kessinger Publishing, LLC Jain, Vijay K. (2011), Tattvârthsûtra (1st ed.), (Uttarakhand) India: Vikalp Printers, ISBN 978-81-903639-2-1 , Non-Copyright Sangave, Vilas Adinath (2001), Aspects of Jaina religion (3rd ed.), Bharatiya Jnanpith, ISBN 81-263-0626-2 External links [ edit ] Look up convert in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Quotations related to religious conversion at Wikiquote "Conversion: A Family Affair" , Craig Harline, Berfrois , 4 October 2011 v t e Lists of religious converts to and from world religions Abrahamic To Bahá'í from Christianity Islam Judaism From Bahá'í to Christianity Islam To Christianity to Catholicism from Islam Anglicanism from Bahá'í Buddhism Confucianism Hinduism Islam Judaism Nontheism Paganism Sikhism Zoroastrianism From Christianity to Nontheism Buddhism Hinduism Islam Judaism Sikhism To Islam from Nontheism Buddhism Hinduism Christianity Judaism Paganism Zoroastrianism From Islam to Atheism Bahá'í Buddhism Hinduism Christianity Catholicism Judaism To Judaism from Irreligion Christianity Islam Paganism From Judaism to atheism Bahá'í Hinduism Islam Christianity Dharmic To Buddhism from Hinduism Christianity From Buddhism to Hinduism Islam Christianity To Hinduism from Buddhism Christianity Islam From Hinduism to Buddhism Islam Christianity Sikhism To Sikhism from Christianity Hinduism From Sikhism to Christianity Other Other converts Nontheism Paganism Multi-religious conversions v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐22v9p
Cached time: 20250817230108
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.957 seconds
Real time usage: 1.176 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6574/1000000
Revision size: 53932/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 373275/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10846/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 226238/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.532/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9577936/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  857.146      1 -total
 35.84%  307.217      1 Template:Reflist
  7.67%   65.783      1 Template:Conversion
  7.54%   64.596      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.54%   64.587      1 Template:Short_description
  7.03%   60.276     11 Template:ISBN
  6.03%   51.657      1 Template:Religion_topics
  5.71%   48.938      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  5.56%   47.660     10 Template:Citation
  5.33%   45.658      6 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25597:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817230108 and revision id 1306353700. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_conversion&oldid=1306353700 " Category : Religious conversion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from June 2025 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2025 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles needing more detailed references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2021 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 08:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious conversion 47 languages Add topic

