Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 History 3 Rolls 4 Scotland 5 Replacement by the codex 6 Modern technology 7 In popular culture 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Scroll 43 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Беларуская Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Íslenska עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська اردو ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roll of papyrus, parchment, or paper containing writing and illustrations For other uses, see Scroll (disambiguation) .

The Joshua Roll , Vatican Library . An illuminated scroll , probably of the 10th century, created in the Byzantine empire.

Scroll of the Book of Esther , Seville , Spain Ingredients used in making ink for Hebrew scrolls today A scroll (from the Old French escroe or escroue ), also known as a roll , is a roll of papyrus , parchment , or paper containing writing.

[ 1 ] Structure [ edit ] Volumen and Rotulus , two types of scrolls A scroll is usually partitioned into pages, which are sometimes separate sheets of papyrus or parchment glued together at the edges. Scrolls may be marked divisions of a continuous roll of writing material . The scroll is usually unrolled so that one page is exposed at a time, for writing or reading, with the remaining pages rolled and stowed to the left and right of the visible page. Text is written in lines from the top to the bottom of the page. Depending on the language, the letters may be written left to right, right to left, or alternating in direction ( boustrophedon ).

History [ edit ] Main article: History of scrolls Chinese silver scroll weights embossed with dragons , used to stabilize scrolls when unrolled for viewing.

Roman portraiture frescos from Pompeii , 1st century AD, depicting two different men wearing laurel wreaths , one holding the rotulus , the other a volumen See also: Roman Empire § Literacy, books, and education Scrolls were the first form of editable record keeping texts, used in Eastern Mediterranean ancient Egyptian civilizations . Parchment scrolls were used by the Israelites among others before the codex or bound book with parchment pages was invented by the Romans, which became popular around the 1st century AD.

[ 2 ] Scrolls were more highly regarded than codices until well into Roman times.

The ink used in writing scrolls had to adhere to a surface that was rolled and unrolled, so special inks were developed. Even so, ink would slowly flake off scrolls.

Rolls [ edit ] Rolls recording UK Acts of Parliament held in the Parliamentary Archives , Palace of Westminster , London Shorter pieces of parchment or paper are called rolls or rotuli , although usage of the term by modern historians varies with periods. Historians of the classical period tend to use roll instead of scroll . Rolls may still be many meters or feet long, and were used in the medieval and Early Modern period in Europe and various West Asian cultures for administrative manuscript documents intended for various uses, including accounting, rent-rolls, legal agreements, and inventories. A distinction that sometimes applies is that the lines of writing in rotuli run across the width of the roll (that is to say, are parallel with any unrolled portion) rather than along the length, divided into page-like sections. Rolls may be wider than most scrolls, up to perhaps 60 cm or two feet wide. Rolls were often stored together in a special cupboard on shelves.

A special Chinese form of short book, called the "whirlwind book", consists of several pieces of paper bound at the top with bamboo and then rolled up.

[ 3 ] Scotland [ edit ] In Scotland , the term scrow was used from about the 13th to the 17th centuries for scroll, writing, or documents in list or schedule form. There existed an office of Clerk of the Scrow ( Rotulorum Clericus ) meaning the Clerk of the Rolls or Clerk of the Register.

[ 4 ] Replacement by the codex [ edit ] The codex form of the book—that is, folding a scroll into pages, which made reading and handling the document much easier—appears during the Roman period. Stemming from a passage in Suetonius' Divus Julius (56.6), legend has it that Julius Caesar was the first to fold scrolls, concertina-fashion, for dispatches to his forces campaigning in Gaul. But the precise meaning of the passage is by no means clear. As C. H. Roberts and T. C. Skeat point out, the idea that " Julius Caesar may have been the inventor of the codex... is indeed a fascinating proposition; but in view of the uncertainties surrounding the passage, it is doubtful whether any such conclusion can be drawn".

[ 5 ] What the evidence of surviving early codices does make clear is that Christians were among the earliest to make widespread use of the codex. Several Christian papyrus codices known to us date from the second century, including at least one generally accepted as being no later than A.D. 150. "All in all, it is impossible to believe that the Christian adoption of the codex can have taken place any later than circa A.D. 100 (it may, of course, have been earlier)".

[ 6 ] There were certainly practical reasons for the change. Scrolls were awkward to read if a reader wished to consult material at opposite ends of the document. Further, scrolls were written only on one side, while both sides of the codex page were used.

Eventually, the folds were cut into sheets, or "leaves", and bound together along one edge. The bound pages were protected by stiff covers, usually of wood enclosed with leather.

Codex is Latin for a "block of wood": the Latin liber , the root of "library", and the German Buch , the source of "book", both refer to wood. The codex was not only easier to handle than the scroll, but it also fit conveniently on library shelves. The spine generally held the book's title, facing out, affording easier organization of the collection. The surface on which the ink was applied was kept flat, not subjected to weakening by the repeated bending and unbending that scrolls undergo as they are alternately rolled up for storage and unrolled for reading, which creates physical stresses in both the papyrus and the ink of scrolls.

The term codex technically refers only to manuscript books — those that, at one time, were handwritten. More specifically, a codex is the term used primarily for a bound manuscript from Roman times up through the Middle Ages.

From the fourth century on, the codex became the standard format for books, and scrolls were no longer generally used. After the contents of a parchment scroll were copied in codex format, the scroll was seldom preserved. The majority that did survive were found by archaeologists in burial pits and in the buried trash of forgotten communities.

[ 7 ] Modern technology [ edit ] Modern technology may be able to assist in reading ancient scrolls. In January 2015, computer software may be making progress in reading 2,000-year-old Herculaneum scrolls, computer scientists report. After working for more than 10 years on unlocking the contents of damaged Herculaneum scrolls , researchers may be able to progress towards reading the scrolls, which cannot be physically opened.

[ 8 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Many role-playing games (such as Dungeons & Dragons ) feature scrolls as magical items, which cast spells when they are read aloud. Typically, the scroll is consumed in the process.

See also [ edit ] Speech scroll Hanging scroll Handscroll Herculaneum papyri Paleography Rotulus Vellum Woodblock printing References [ edit ] ^ Beal, Peter (2008).

" "scroll" in A Dictionary of English Manuscript Terminology 1450–2000 " . Online edition.

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ Andrews, Evan (20 November 2012).

"10 Innovations That Built Ancient Rome" .

History .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2018 . Retrieved 11 March 2018 .

^ Chinnery, Colin; Yi, Li.

"Bookbinding" .

IDP Education . Archived from the original on 10 January 2016 . Retrieved 6 January 2007 .

^ Beal, 2008, "scrow".

^ Roberts, C.H.; Skeat, T.C. (1987).

The Birth of the Codex . London: The British Academy. p. 19.

ISBN 0-19-726061-6 .

^ Roberts, C. H.; Skeat, T. C. (1987).

The Birth of the Codex . London: The British Academy. p. 61.

^ Murray, Stuart A.P. (2009) The Library: An Illustrated History. Chicago, IL. Skyhorse Publishing. (p.27) ^ Major breakthrough in reading ancient scrolls Archived 23 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Science Daily External links [ edit ] Look up scroll in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to scrolls .

Digital Scrolling Paintings Project Encyclopaedia Romana: "Scroll and codex" v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐c774w
Cached time: 20250816013658
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.473 seconds
Real time usage: 0.617 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1242/1000000
Revision size: 10422/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 35630/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1585/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 38650/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.332/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13502308/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  537.919      1 -total
 23.82%  128.139      1 Template:Reflist
 20.05%  107.848      3 Template:Lang
 16.64%   89.536      3 Template:Cite_web
 15.25%   82.017      1 Template:Books
 14.79%   79.533      1 Template:Navbox
 12.50%   67.257      1 Template:Short_description
  8.94%   48.076      2 Template:Sister_project
  8.51%   45.786      2 Template:Side_box
  6.50%   34.953      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1120048:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816013658 and revision id 1299290269. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scroll&oldid=1299290269 " Categories : Books by type Scribes Manuscripts by type Textual scholarship Writing media Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 14:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scroll 43 languages Add topic

