Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Feminist activism and writing 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Carol Hanisch 16 languages বাংলা Bikol Central Català Dansk Deutsch Español Galego Hausa Italiano עברית Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American radical feminist activist (born 1942) Carol Hanisch Born 1942 (age 82–83) Iowa , U.S.

Occupation Activist Notable work " The personal is political " (1969) Movement Radical feminism Carol Hanisch (born 1942) is an American radical feminist activist. She was an important member of New York Radical Women and Redstockings . She is best known for popularizing the phrase " the personal is political " in a 1970 essay of the same name.

[ 1 ] She does not take responsibility of the phrase, stating in her 2006 updated essay, with a new introduction, that did not name it that, or in fact use it in the essay at all. Instead she claims that the title was done by the editors of Notes from the Second Year: Women's Liberation (where it was published), Shulamith Firestone and Anne Koedt . She also conceived the 1968 Miss America protest and was one of the four women who hung a women's liberation banner over the balcony at the Miss America Pageant , disrupting the proceedings.

[ 2 ] Early life [ edit ] Hanisch was born and raised on a small farm in rural Iowa, and worked as a wire services reporter in Des Moines before leaving to join the Delta Ministry in Mississippi in 1965, inspired by the Freedom Summer reports the year before. There, she met the co-founders of the Southern Conference Education Fund (SCEF), Anne Braden and husband Carl Braden , who hired her to run the SCEF NY office.

[ 3 ] Feminist activism and writing [ edit ] By early 1968, Hanisch had secured the SCEF offices for the weekly meetings of the New York Radical Women, and it remained their base until the group dissolved in the early 1970s.

[ 3 ] In 1970, her most famous essay, 'the personal is political' was published in Notes from the Second Year: Women's Liberation. Hanisch states that the essay was named by the two editors Shulie Firestone and Anne Koedt. In the essay, the phrase is actually not used at all but it instead states: 
One of the first things we discover in these groups is that personal problems are political problems. There are no personal solutions at this time. There is only collective action for a collective solution.

[ 1 ] She co-founded and currently co-edits with Kathy Scarbrough Meeting Ground online , the third version of "Meeting Ground." The statement of purpose from 1977 describes itself as providing "an ongoing place to hammer out ideas about theory, strategy and tactics for the women’s liberation movement and for the general radical movement of working men and women." [ 4 ] In 1996, Hanisch delivered a speech at the 30th Anniversary Symposium on “China’s Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution” at the New School for Social Research . The speech was titled "Impact of the Chinese Cultural Revolution on the Women's Liberation Movement." Hanisch credited William H. Hinton 's book Fanshen as well as the works of Mao Zedong for influencing the emerging women's liberation movement of the 1960s. She cites both Black Liberation and Maoist theory, and in particular Maoist notions of " speaking bitterness " and " self-criticism ", for helping to develop the idea of consciousness raising groups within American radical feminism.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 2013 Hanisch, along with Scarbrough, Ti-Grace Atkinson and Kathie Sarachild initiated "Forbidden Discourse: The Silencing of Feminist Criticism of 'Gender'", which they described as an "open statement from 48 radical feminists from seven countries".

[ 8 ] In August 2014, Michelle Goldberg in The New Yorker described it as expressing their “alarm” at “threats and attacks, some of them physical, on individuals and organizations daring to challenge the currently fashionable concept of gender.” [ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Hanisch, Carol.

"The Personal Is Political" (PDF) . Retrieved March 8, 2024 .

^ Buchanan, Paul D. (2011).

Radical Feminists: A Guide to an American Subculture . ABC-CLIO. p.

124ff .

ISBN 9781598843576 .

^ a b Brownmiller, Susan (1999).

In Our Time: Memoir of a Revolution . Dial Press, pp. 20-23.

^ Meeting Ground online website "about page" with January 1977 statement of purpose. Accessed August 31, 2014.

^ "Impact of the Chinese Cultural Revolution of the Women's Liberation Movement" . Carolhanisch.org . Retrieved August 2, 2020 .

^ "William Hinton and the Women of Long Bow" . Carolhanisch.org . Retrieved August 2, 2020 .

^ Lovell, Julia (2019).

Maoism: A Global History . London: The Bodley Head.

ISBN 978-1847922502 .

^ Forbidden Discourse: The Silencing of Feminist Criticism of 'Gender'" , at Meeting Ground online , August 12, 2013, updated with more signatures September 20, 2013.

^ Goldberg, Michelle (August 4, 2014).

"What Is a Woman? The dispute between radical feminism and transgenderism" , The New Yorker . Accessed March 12, 2024.

External links [ edit ] "The Personal is Political by Carol Hanisch, March 1969.

Writings by Carol Hanisch (official web site) v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Radical feminism People Wim Hora Adema Chude Pam Allen Ti-Grace Atkinson Kathleen Barry Rosalyn Baxandall Linda Bellos Julie Bindel Jenny Brown Judith Brown Susan Brownmiller Phyllis Chesler D. A. Clarke Nikki Craft Kimberlé Crenshaw Mary Daly Christine Delphy Gail Dines Andrea Dworkin Melissa Farley Shulamith Firestone Marilyn French Marilyn Frye Germaine Greer Carol Hanisch Merle Hoffman bell hooks Sheila Jeffreys Robert Jensen Lierre Keith Anne Koedt Marjorie Kramer Holly Lawford-Smith Audre Lorde Catharine A. MacKinnon Sheila Michaels Kate Millett Robin Morgan Meghan Murphy Irene Peslikis Janice Raymond Rosetta Reitz Adrienne Rich Florence Rush Kathie Sarachild Alix Kates Shulman Valerie Solanas Gloria Steinem John Stoltenberg Michele Wallace Marilyn Salzman Webb Ellen Willis Harriet Wistrich Monique Wittig Laura X Groups Cell 16 Chicago Women's Liberation Union Coalition Against Trafficking in Women Deep Green Resistance Lesbian Organization of Toronto Michigan Womyn's Music Festival Mountain Moving Coffeehouse New York Radical Feminists New York Radical Women Redstockings Stop Porn Culture The Feminists The Furies Collective WOMAD Women Against Pornography Women's Liberation Center Women's Liberation Front (WoLF) Issues 4 NOs Child sexual abuse False consciousness Feminism Lesbian Second wave Feminist separatism Feminist views on transgender topics Gender role Male privilege Patriarchy Political lesbianism Pornography Feminist views on pornography Postgenderism Prostitution Feminist views Reproductive rights Sexism Misogyny Internalized sexism Social construction of gender Violence against women Media Books The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution ( 1970) Sexual Politics (1970) Sisterhood Is Powerful (1970) " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm " (1970) The Female Eunuch (1970) Lesbian Nation (1973) Woman Hating (1974) Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (1974) Pornography: Men Possessing Women (1981) Ain't I a Woman?

(1981) Against Sadomasochism (1982) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) Sisterhood Is Global (1984) Intercourse (1987) Feminism Unmodified (1987) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) The Straight Mind and Other Essays (1992) Only Words (1993) Scapegoat: The Jews, Israel, and Women's Liberation (2000) Sisterhood Is Forever (2003) The Industrial Vagina (2008) Other Off Our Backs (1970–2008) SCUM Manifesto (1967) She's Beautiful When She's Angry (2014) Other Consciousness raising Herstory Miss America protest (1968) Radical lesbianism Womyn's land Feminism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carol_Hanisch&oldid=1296724608 " Categories : 1942 births Activists for African-American civil rights American essayists American feminists American newspaper reporters and correspondents American Maoists American anti-racism activists Feminist studies scholars Living people New York Radical Women members Radical feminists Redstockings members Southern Conference Educational Fund Second wave feminists American women founders American founders Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2022 Articles with hCards Articles with excerpts Date of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 21:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carol Hanisch 16 languages Add topic

