Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal life 2 Republican years 3 Formation of the Conservative Caucus 4 Role in formation of the New Right 5 U.S. Taxpayers Party/Constitution Party Toggle U.S. Taxpayers Party/Constitution Party subsection 5.1 Presidential campaigns 6 Death 7 Writings 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Howard Phillips (activist) 6 languages العربية تۆرکجه Español فارسی Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political activist (1941–2013) Howard Phillips Phillips in 2008 Personal details Born Howard Jay Phillips ( 1941-02-03 ) February 3, 1941 Boston, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died April 20, 2013 (2013-04-20) (aged 72) Vienna, Virginia , U.S.

Political party Republican (before 1974) Democratic (1974–1991) Constitution (1991–2013) Spouse Peggy Blanchard (1964–2013) Children 6, including Doug Alma mater Harvard University Website Official website Howard Jay Phillips (February 3, 1941 – April 20, 2013) was an American politician and activist. A political conservative , Phillips was a United States presidential candidate who served as the chairman of The Conservative Caucus , a conservative public policy advocacy group which he founded in 1974. Phillips was a founding member of the U.S. Taxpayers Party , which later became known as the Constitution Party .

Personal life [ edit ] Phillips was born into a Jewish family in Boston in 1941, [ 1 ] Phillips converted to evangelical Christianity as an adult in the 1970s [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and was subsequently associated with Christian Reconstructionism .

[ 5 ] A 1962 graduate of Harvard College in Cambridge , Massachusetts, he was twice elected chairman of the Student Council , and was lauded by "The Cross and the Flag," a Ku Klux Klan magazine, for his "patriotic" ideological bent. Phillips publicly and immediately disavowed the Klan.

[ 6 ] Phillips was also president of Policy Analysis, Inc., [ 7 ] a public policy research organization which publishes the bimonthly Issues and Strategy Bulletin .

Phillips resided in Fairfax County , Virginia in the Washington, D.C.

, suburbs with his wife, the former Margaret "Peggy" Blanchard.

Republican years [ edit ] During the Nixon Administration , Phillips headed two federal agencies, ending his Executive Branch career as director of the U.S.

Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO) in the Executive Office of the President for five months in 1973, a position from which he resigned when U.S. President Richard M. Nixon reneged on his commitment to veto further funding for Great Society programs begun in the administration of Nixon's predecessor, Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Nixon's appointment of Phillips as Acting Director of OEO in January 1973 touched off a national controversy culminating in a court case in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ( Williams v. Phillips , 482 F.2d 669) challenging the legality of Phillips' appointment, since the statute establishing the office did not specifically establish a presidential right to make an interim appointment (one not confirmed by the Senate) under the existing circumstances.  The Court ruled (and the 2nd Circuit subsequently affirmed) that the President had no right to make the interim appointment and voided it, declaring his time in it to have been illegal.

[ 10 ] Formation of the Conservative Caucus [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Phillips left the Republican Party in 1974 after some two decades of service to the GOP as precinct worker, election warden, campaign manager, congressional aide, Boston municipal Republican chairman, and assistant to the chairman of the Republican National Committee . In 1970 , he was the Republican nominee for Massachusetts's 6th congressional district . In 1978 , Phillips finished fourth in the Democratic primary for the U.S. Senate in Massachusetts .

[ 4 ] In 1974, Phillips founded the Conservative Caucus, a nationwide, grass-roots public policy advocacy group.

[ 4 ] [ 11 ] The group opposed the 1978 Panama Canal treaties and the Jimmy Carter - Leonid Brezhnev SALT II treaties in 1979, supported the Strategic Defense Initiative and major tax reductions during the 1980s, and fought to end Federal subsidies to activist groups under the banner of "defunding the Left ." [ 8 ] The fight against Baker was not Phillips' first clash with Reagan. In 1981, he had joined other conservatives, including the Reverend Jerry Falwell , in opposing the nomination of Sandra Day O'Connor to the United States Supreme Court . According to Phillips, "People say you can't tell how a Supreme Court nominee will turn out once on the bench. I respectfully disagree. In most cases, it's very clear. I opposed the nomination of Sandra Day O'Connor because it was very clear that she had a pro-abortion record in the Arizona State Senate and as a judge in Arizona . She was also allied with Planned Parenthood ." [ 8 ] [ 12 ] In 1990, Phillips opposed the first President Bush's nomination of David Souter of New Hampshire to the high court.

[ 8 ] Phillips said that he opposed Souter because "I read his senior thesis at Harvard in which he said he was a legal positivist and one of his heroes was Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

, and that he rejected all higher law theories, such as those spelled out in our Declaration of Independence . In addition, he was a trustee of two hospitals: Dartmouth Hitchcock and Concord Memorial. He successfully changed the policy of those two hospitals from zero abortion to convenience abortion." [ 12 ] Other Conservative Caucus campaigns have involved opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the World Trade Organization , support for a national version of California 's Proposition 187 (to end mandated subsidies for illegal aliens ), as well as continuing efforts to oppose publicly funded health care , abortion and gay rights .

[ 13 ] Phillips was the host of Conservative Roundtable , a weekly public affairs television program .

Role in formation of the New Right [ edit ] Further information: New Right § United States Phillips played an instrumental role in the leadership of the New Right , and in the founding of the religious right in the 1970s.

[ 8 ] He worked with fellow conservatives Paul Weyrich of The Heritage Foundation and both former Christian Voice co-activists Richard Viguerie and Terry Dolan to persuade the Reverend Jerry Falwell to form the Moral Majority , and helped Judie Brown form the American Life League .

[ 8 ] Later, Phillips continued to support the New Right by helping found the Council for National Policy with Dr. Tim LaHaye .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] U.S. Taxpayers Party/Constitution Party [ edit ] Phillips was one of the founders of the U.S. Taxpayers Party (which changed its name to the Constitution Party in 1999), a third party associated with conservative, anti-abortion issues, and constitutional government ideas on both social and fiscal issues.

[ 11 ] He was that party's presidential candidate in the 1992 , 1996 and 2000 elections for U.S. president.

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] Presidential campaigns [ edit ] Phillips first campaigned for president in 1992 , as an independent. He refused to support the re-election of Republican George H. W. Bush or Democratic challenger Bill Clinton . He finished in seventh place in the popular vote. The campaign received 43,369 votes for 0.04% of the total vote.

[ 18 ] Phillips was chosen by an overwhelming majority of delegates at the National Convention of the U.S. Taxpayers Party, in San Diego , California , on August 17, 1996, to serve as its presidential candidate in the 1996 election . Phillips finished sixth, with 184,656 votes, for 0.19% of the total vote.

[ 19 ] In the 2000 U.S presidential election , Phillips received 98,020 votes for 0.1% of the total vote and a sixth-place finish.

[ 20 ] Death [ edit ] Phillips died at his home in Vienna , Virginia, on April 20, 2013, at the age of 72 after a battle with frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] A private service was held on April 29, 2013 [ 8 ] with Chuck Baldwin , the 2008 Constitution Party presidential nominee, officiating.

[ 21 ] Writings [ edit ] The New Right at Harvard (1983) Moscow's Challenge to U.S. Vital Interests in Sub-Saharan Africa (1987) The Next Four Years (1992) Judicial Tyranny: The New Kings of America?

(Amerisearch, 2005) ISBN 0-9753455-6-7 – contributing author References [ edit ] ^ Profile of Howard Phillips Archived March 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , Ontheissues.org ^ Simon, Barbara "Strange Bedfellows: Jews, Apostates, and the Christian Right" Archived May 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , Reform Judaism . Winter 1996.

^ a b "Political activist Howard Phillips dies" .

Washington Times .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2018 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ a b c d e Weber, Bruce (April 23, 2013) "Howard J. Phillips, Stalwart Conservative, Dies at 72" Archived January 16, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times . Retrieved April 24, 2013.

^ Hudson, Deal (2008).

Onward, Christian Soldiers: The Growing Political Power of Catholics and Evangelicals in the United States .

Simon & Schuster . p. 82.

ISBN 9781416565895 .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2023 . Retrieved June 16, 2015 .

^ "The Crimson Klan | Magazine | the Harvard Crimson" .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2021 . Retrieved March 31, 2021 .

^ Phillips, Howard; Barton, Randolph P., 1984-05-14 Memorandum for Helen Gombert ^ a b c d e f g Smith, Peter Jesserer (May 6, 2013) "Catholics Bid Farewell to Pro-Life Lion Howard Phillips" Archived May 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , National Catholic Register . Retrieved May 6, 2013.

^ Chamberlain, John (August 3, 1974) "Some Conservatives Turn Against Nixon" Archived April 29, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , Milwaukee Sentinel . Retrieved May 6, 2013 ^ Circuit, District of Columbia (1973).

"482 F2d 669 Williams v. J Phillips" . OpenJurist. p. 669.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ a b Black, Chris (September 25, 1992) "Political activist loses to win Conservative takes defeats in stride in effort to build national antitax party" , Boston Globe . Retrieved May 6, 2013.

^ a b Flynn, Dan "Interview with Howard Phillips by Dan Flynn" . Flynnfiles.com. Archived from the original on January 3, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ "Howard Phillips Biography" .

www.conservativeusa.net . Retrieved September 11, 2024 .

^ Leaming, Jeremy; Boston, Rob.

"Who Is The Council For National Policy And What Are They Up To? And Why Don't They Want You To Know?" .

Americans United . Archived from the original on May 2, 2009 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 .

^ "Council for National Policy" . NNDB.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2018 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 .

^ "A History of Accomplishments" . The Conservative Caucus.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2019 . Retrieved January 5, 2019 .

^ Kazin, Michael; Edwards, Rebecca; Rothman, Adam (2009).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History .

Princeton University Press . p. 196.

ISBN 9781400833566 .

^ "1992 Presidential General Election Results" Archived August 3, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ,  uselectionatlas.org.

^ "1996 Presidential General Election Results" Archived January 15, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , uselectionatlas.org ^ "2000 Official Presidential General Election Results" Archived September 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , www.fec.gov ^ "Chuck Baldwin, "A Great Man Has Fallen" " . renewamerica.com.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2013 . Retrieved April 26, 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Howard Phillips .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Howard Phillips (politician) .

Howard Phillips' Blog Appearances on C-SPAN Official Website of The Conservative Caucus The Constitutional Education Project , founded by oPhillips.

Official website of Conservative Roundtable Party political offices First Constitution nominee for President of the United States 1992 , 1996 , 2000 Succeeded by Michael Peroutka v t e Directors of the Office of Economic Opportunity Sargent Shriver Bertrand Harding Donald Rumsfeld Frank Carlucci Phillip V. Sanchez Howard Phillips (acting) Arvin J. Arnett Nathan E. Chambers v t e Constitution Party Presidential tickets 1992 : Phillips / Knight 1996 : Phillips / Titus 2000 : Phillips /Frazier 2004 : Peroutka / Baldwin 2008 : Baldwin /Castle 2012 : Goode /Clymer 2016 : Castle/ Bradley 2020 : Blankenship / Mohr 2024 : Terry / Broden Parties by state Colorado Nevada North Carolina Oregon Related articles Electoral history National Convention primaries 2016 2020 2024 Conservatism portal v t e ( ← 1996 ) 2000 United States presidential election ( 2004 → ) General election results Florida results Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: George W. Bush campaign positions VP nominee: Dick Cheney Other candidates Lamar Alexander Gary Bauer Pat Buchanan campaign Herman Cain positions Elizabeth Dole Jack Fellure Steve Forbes Orrin Hatch campaign John Kasich campaign positions Alan Keyes campaign Andy Martin John McCain campaign positions Dan Quayle campaign Bob Smith Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Al Gore campaign VP nominee: Joe Lieberman positions Other candidates: Bill Bradley campaign Lyndon LaRouche campaign positions Constitution Party Convention Nominee: Howard Phillips VP nominee: Curtis Frazier Other candidates: Herb Titus Green Party Convention Nominee: Ralph Nader campaign VP nominee: Winona LaDuke Other candidates: Jello Biafra Stephen Gaskin Joel Kovel Libertarian Party Convention Nominee: Harry Browne campaign VP nominee: Art Olivier Other candidates: L. Neil Smith Reform Party Primaries Nominee: Pat Buchanan campaign VP nominee: Ezola B. Foster Other candidates: John Hagelin Donald Trump campaign positions Natural Law Party Nominee: John Hagelin VP nominee: Nat Goldhaber Prohibition Party Nominee: Earl Dodge VP nominee: W. Dean Watkins Socialist Party Nominee: David McReynolds VP nominee: Mary Cal Hollis Socialist Workers Party Nominee: James Harris VP nominee: Margaret Trowe Workers World Party Nominee: Monica Moorehead VP nominee: Gloria La Riva Independent Cathy Gordon Brown Charles E. Collins Isabell Masters Joe Schriner Florida election recount and legal proceedings Key figures Katherine Harris Jeb Bush David Boies Theodore Olson James Baker Ron Klain Warren Christopher Michael Whouley Benjamin Ginsberg Bob Butterworth Joe Allbaugh Mac Stipanovich Craig Waters Theresa LePore Carol Roberts Election day Florida Central Voter File (scrub list) Volusia error Chad Butterfly ballot Aftermath and legal proceedings Florida election recount Brooks Brothers riot Palm Beach County Canvassing Board v. Harris (Harris I) Gore v. Harris (Harris II) Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board Bush v. Gore Films Recount (2008) Bush Family Fortunes (2004) Unprecedented: The 2000 Presidential Election (2002) Other 2000 elections House Senate Gubernatorial Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Howard_Phillips_(activist)&oldid=1298266052 " Categories : 1941 births 2013 deaths American Independent Party presidential nominees College Republicans Constitution Party (United States) presidential nominees Virginia Constitutionalists Converts to Evangelicalism from Judaism Deaths from Alzheimer's disease in Virginia Deaths from dementia in Virginia Deaths from frontotemporal dementia Harvard College alumni Massachusetts Democrats Massachusetts Republicans New Right (United States) People from Vienna, Virginia Politicians from Boston Candidates in the 1992 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1996 United States presidential election Candidates in the 2000 United States presidential election Virginia Democrats American political party founders 20th-century American Jews Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use American English from August 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Howard Phillips (activist) 6 languages Add topic

