Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical development 2 Lithostratigraphy 3 Biostratigraphy 4 Chronostratigraphy Toggle Chronostratigraphy subsection 4.1 Magnetostratigraphy 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Stratigraphy 77 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Seeltersk Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the branch of geology. For stratigraphy in archaeology, see Stratigraphy (archaeology) .

Study of rock layers and their formation The Permian through Jurassic strata of the Colorado Plateau area of southeastern Utah demonstrate the principles of stratigraphy.

Stratigraphy is a branch of geology concerned with the study of rock layers ( strata ) and layering (stratification). It is primarily used in the study of sedimentary and layered volcanic rocks .
Stratigraphy has three related subfields: lithostratigraphy (lithologic stratigraphy), biostratigraphy (biologic stratigraphy), and chronostratigraphy (stratigraphy by age).

Historical development [ edit ] Engraving from William Smith's monograph on identifying strata based on fossils Catholic priest Nicholas Steno established the theoretical basis for stratigraphy when he introduced the law of superposition , the principle of original horizontality and the principle of lateral continuity in a 1669 work on the fossilization of organic remains in layers of sediment. In 1759 the Italian geologist Giovanni Arduino proposed the division of the earth's crust into four general and successive orders: Primary, Secondary, Tertiary and Quaternary, a classification regarded as the starting point for modern stratigraphy.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The first practical large-scale application of stratigraphy was by William Smith in the 1790s and early 19th century. Known as the "Father of English geology", [ 3 ] Smith recognized the significance of strata or rock layering and the importance of fossil markers for correlating strata; he created the first geological map of England. Other influential applications of stratigraphy in the early 19th century were by Georges Cuvier and Alexandre Brongniart , who studied the geology of the region around Paris.

Strata in Cafayate ( Argentina ) Lithostratigraphy [ edit ] Main article: Lithostratigraphy Chalk layers in Cyprus , showing sedimentary layering Variation in rock units, most obviously displayed as visible layering, is due to physical contrasts in rock type ( lithology ). This variation can occur vertically as layering (bedding), or laterally, and reflects changes in environments of deposition (known as facies change). These variations provide a lithostratigraphy or lithologic stratigraphy of the rock unit. Key concepts in stratigraphy involve understanding how certain geometric relationships between rock layers arise and what these geometries imply about their original depositional environment. The basic concept in stratigraphy, called the law of superposition , states: in an undeformed stratigraphic sequence, the oldest strata occur at the base of the sequence.

Chemostratigraphy studies the changes in the relative proportions of trace elements and isotopes within and between lithologic units.

Carbon and oxygen isotope ratios vary with time, and researchers can use those to map subtle changes that occurred in the paleoenvironment. This has led to the specialized field of isotopic stratigraphy.

Cyclostratigraphy documents the often cyclic changes in the relative proportions of minerals (particularly carbonates ), grain size, thickness of sediment layers ( varves ) and fossil diversity with time, related to seasonal or longer term changes in palaeoclimates .

Biostratigraphy [ edit ] Main article: Biostratigraphy Biostratigraphy or paleontologic stratigraphy is based on fossil evidence in the rock layers. Strata from widespread locations containing the same fossil fauna and flora are said to be correlatable in time. Biologic stratigraphy was based on William Smith's principle of faunal succession , which predated, and was one of the first and most powerful lines of evidence for, biological evolution . It provides strong evidence for the formation ( speciation ) and extinction of species . The geologic time scale was developed during the 19th century, based on the evidence of biologic stratigraphy and faunal succession. This timescale remained a relative scale until the development of radiometric dating , which was based on an absolute time framework, leading to the development of chronostratigraphy.

One important development is the Vail curve , which attempts to define a global historical sea-level curve according to inferences from worldwide stratigraphic patterns. Stratigraphy is also commonly used to delineate the nature and extent of hydrocarbon -bearing reservoir rocks, seals, and traps of petroleum geology .

Chronostratigraphy [ edit ] Main article: Chronostratigraphy Chronostratigraphy is the branch of stratigraphy that places an absolute age, rather than a relative age on rock strata . The branch is concerned with deriving geochronological data for rock units, both directly and inferentially, so that a sequence of time-relative events that created the rocks formation can be derived. The ultimate aim of chronostratigraphy is to place dates on the sequence of deposition of all rocks within a geological region, and then to every region, and by extension to provide an entire geologic record of the Earth.

A gap or missing strata in the geological record of an area is called a stratigraphic hiatus. This may be the result of a halt in the deposition of sediment. Alternatively, the gap may be due to removal by erosion, in which case it may be called a stratigraphic vacuity.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] It is called a hiatus because deposition was on hold for a period of time.

[ 6 ] A physical gap may represent both a period of non-deposition and a period of erosion.

[ 5 ] A geologic fault may cause the appearance of a hiatus.

[ 7 ] Magnetostratigraphy [ edit ] Main articles: Magnetostratigraphy and Paleomagnetism Example of magnetostratigraphy .

Magnetic stripes are the result of reversals of the Earth's magnetic poles and seafloor spreading . New oceanic crust is magnetized as it forms and then it moves away from the midocean ridge in both directions.

Magnetostratigraphy is a chronostratigraphic technique used to date sedimentary and volcanic sequences. The method works by collecting oriented samples at measured intervals throughout a section. The samples are analyzed to determine their detrital remanent magnetism (DRM), that is, the polarity of Earth's magnetic field at the time a stratum was deposited. For sedimentary rocks this is possible because, as they fall through the water column, very fine-grained magnetic minerals (< 17 μm ) behave like tiny compasses , orienting themselves with Earth's magnetic field . Upon burial, that orientation is preserved. For volcanic rocks, magnetic minerals, which form in the melt, orient themselves with the ambient magnetic field, and are fixed in place upon crystallization of the lava.

Oriented paleomagnetic core samples are collected in the field; mudstones , siltstones , and very fine-grained sandstones are the preferred lithologies because the magnetic grains are finer and more likely to orient with the ambient field during deposition. If the ancient magnetic field were oriented similar to today's field ( North Magnetic Pole near the North Rotational Pole ), the strata would retain a normal polarity. If the data indicate that the North Magnetic Pole were near the South Rotational Pole , the strata would exhibit reversed polarity.

Results of the individual samples are analyzed by removing the natural remanent magnetization (NRM) to reveal the DRM. Following statistical analysis, the results are used to generate a local magnetostratigraphic column that can then be compared against the Global Magnetic Polarity Time Scale.

This technique is used to date sequences that generally lack fossils or interbedded igneous rocks. The continuous nature of the sampling means that it is also a powerful technique for the estimation of sediment-accumulation rates.

See also [ edit ] Assise Bed (geology) Conodont biostratigraphy Erygmascope (old instrument for studying strata) Harris matrix International Commission on Stratigraphy Key bed Sedimentary basin analysis Sequence stratigraphy Sadler effect Tectonostratigraphy References [ edit ] ^ Stratigraphy at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ Ellenberger, F. (1994).

Histoire de la Géologie , Volume 2 La grande éclosion et ses prémices 1660– 1810 . Technique et Documentation. Lavoisier. Paris. (English translation by M. Carozzi: History of Geology , vol. 2, Routledge / Taylor and Francis, 1999), pp. 258-265.

^ Davies G.L.H. (2007).

Whatever is Under the Earth the Geological Society of London 1807–2007 . London: Geological Society. p. 78.

ISBN 978-1862392144 .

^ "SEPM Strata" .

sepmstrata.org .

^ a b Martinsen, O. J.

et al.

(1999) "Cenozoic development of the Norwegian margin 60–64N: sequences and sedimentary response to variable basin physiography and tectonic setting" pp. 293–304 In Fleet, A. J. and Boldy, S. A. R. (editors) (1999) Petroleum Geology of Northwest Europe Geological Society, London, page 295 , ISBN 978-1-86239-039-3 ^ Kearey, Philip (2001).

Dictionary of Geology (2nd ed.) London, New York, etc.: Penguin Reference, London, p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-14-051494-0 .

^ Chapman, Richard E. (1983) Petroleum Geology Elsevier Scientific, Amsterdam, p. 33 , ISBN 978-0-444-42165-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Christopherson, R. W., 2008.

Geosystems: An Introduction to Physical Geography , 7th ed., New York: Pearson Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-600598-8 .

Montenari, M., 2016.

Stratigraphy and Timescales , 1st ed., Amsterdam: Academic Press (Elsevier).

ISBN 978-0-12-811549-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Stratigraphy .

ICS Subcommission for Stratigraphic Information University of South Carolina Sequence Stratigraphy Web International Commission on Stratigraphy University of Georgia (USA) Stratigraphy Lab Stratigraphy.net A stratigraphic data provider.

Agenames.org A global index of stratigraphic terms v t e Geologic principles and processes Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Petrologic principles Intrusive Extrusive Volcanic Exfoliation Weathering Soil formation Diagenesis Compaction Metamorphism Geomorphologic processes Plate tectonics Salt tectonics Tectonic uplift Subsidence Marine transgression Marine regression Sediment transport Fluvial processes Aeolian processes Glacial processes Mass wasting processes Geology portal v t e Geology Overviews Outline of geology Glossary of geology History of geology Index of geology articles History of geology Geochronology Geological history of Earth Timeline of geology Composition and structure Cosmochemistry Crystallography Geochemistry Mineralogy Petrology Sedimentology Historical geology Stratigraphy Paleontology Paleoclimatology Palaeogeography Dynamic Earth Structural geology Geodynamics Plate tectonics Geomorphology Volcanology Water Glaciology Hydrogeology Marine geology Geodesy Cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Planetary geodesy Remote sensing Geopositioning Geophysics Geomagnetism Geophysical survey Planetary geophysics Seismology Tectonophysics Applications Biogeology Economic geology Engineering geology Environmental geology Planetary geology Geobiology Geologic modelling Forensic geology Forensic geophysics Meteoritics Mining geology Mineral physics Occupations Geologist Petroleum geologist Volcanologist Geology portal Geology Geology v t e Lists of fossiliferous stratigraphic units by preserved taxon Lists of fossiliferous stratigraphic units by preserved taxon Animals Vertebrates Reptiles Dinosaurs Mosasaurs Phytosaurs Plesiosaurs Pterosaurs Thalattosuchians Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐shkfq
Cached time: 20250811235439
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.327 seconds
Real time usage: 0.423 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1295/1000000
Revision size: 11629/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 56611/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1139/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56028/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.203/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5633520/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  355.107      1 -total
 28.76%  102.117      7 Template:Navbox
 24.73%   87.802      1 Template:Reflist
 20.78%   73.791      1 Template:Geologic_Principles
 17.71%   62.892      1 Template:Cite_book
 12.75%   45.273      1 Template:Commons_category
 12.35%   43.865      1 Template:Sister_project
 12.02%   42.698      1 Template:Side_box
 11.67%   41.442      1 Template:About
  8.40%   29.815      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:182783:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235439 and revision id 1303411563. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stratigraphy&oldid=1303411563 " Categories : Stratigraphy Petrology Methods in archaeology Hidden categories: Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 21:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stratigraphy 77 languages Add topic

