Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Habitats and species 2 Number of groups of plants and animals in Suriname 3 Nature Protection Act 1954 and the Game Act 1954 4 Protected areas 5 Protected areas in hectares in 2010 6 International conventions 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of Suriname 1 language Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Suriname ) Scarlet ibis The biodiversity of Suriname is high, [ 1 ] mostly because of the variety of habitats and warm temperatures. The average annual temperature in the coastal area is between 26° and 28°C. Suriname can be divided into four major ecological zones, namely from north to south; The young coastal plain The old coastal plain The Savannah or Zanderij belt The interior residual uplands [ 2 ] Habitats and species [ edit ] Share of forest area in total land area, top countries (2021). Suriname has the highest percentage of forest cover in the world.

The coast of Suriname is wild and consists of mud banks, sand beaches, mangrove forests and lagoons. The Guiana current flows along the coast of Suriname. The North Brazil Current , a warm water ocean current, is renamed as the Guiana current. The confusion surrounding its name is due partly to the seasonal change in flow of nearby currents.

[ 3 ] The mangrove forests have only one story with a height of 20–25 meters. They are almost completely homogeneous and dominated by black mangrove ( Avicenna germinans ). The mangrove forests are important as staging and wintering areas for birds, such as the scarlet ibis ( Eudocimus ruber ). However, poaching is a major problem in the coastal area. According to Ottema, [ 4 ] a 2006 study reveals that tens of thousands of protected shorebirds and waders are poached annually. The Nature Conservation Division of the Forestry ministry attempts to prevent poaching by employing more forest guards as well as through environmental education. Furthermore, Ottema opined that the large-billed seed finch or twatwa is almost extirpated.

[ 5 ] Inland from the mangroves lie salt water and brackish lagoons , surrounded by grass and fern vegetation with low plant species diversity. The orange-winged amazon (parrot), creates it nest in the lagoons. Further inland, species rich freshwater and shrub swamps can be found. On the coastal plan, parallel to the shoreline, lie old sand and shell ridges. The savannabelt, a mosaic of diverse landscapes and ecosystems, is located south of the coastal plan. Plants and animals, such as the love-vine (lenkiwisi) ( Cassytha filiformis ), sundews ( Drosera sp.), sabana-fungu ( Licaniai acana ), tortoises ( Chelonodis sp.), snakes , iguanas , deer and the long-nosed or naked- tailed armadillo ( Dasypus sp.) grow and live in the savannabelt of Suriname.

Leatherback turtle Four kinds of sea turtles create nests on the beaches. These sea turtles are: Aitkanti or leatherback turtle ( Dermochelys corriacea ) Krape or green turtle ( Chelonia mydas ) Warana or olive ridley sea turtle ( Lepidochelys olivacea ) Karet or hawksbill sea turtle ( Eretmochelys imbricata ).

Suriname is rich in freshwater resources. Suriname has 228 cubic meters of renewable freshwater resources per capita annually. However, these resources are seriously threatened by human activities, such as gold mining. Suriname has more or less 61 endemic freshwater fishes. According to Jan H. Mol, [ 6 ] the Atlantic goliath grouper ( Epinephelus itajara ) is endangered.

White faced saki In the highlands, mountains, such as Bakhuys Mountains , Van Asch Van Wijck Mountains , Julianatop , are part of the Guiana Shield . The Guiana Shield is one of the regions of highest biodiversity in the world, and has many endemic species. It can be said that the white-faced saki is endemic to the Guianas . The Guianan piculet ( Picumnus minutissimis ) is probably endemic to Suriname. It has not been confirmed for neighboring countries.

[ 7 ] The rest of Suriname is covered with forests. Most of the forests are undisturbed because of the low human population density of 2.7 people /km. There are still new species discovered in Suriname. In 2012, Conservation International Suriname (CIS) announced that 60 new species were discovered in het Grensgebergte and Kasikasima . Among the newly discovered species were: the chocolate-colored "cocoa" frog and the juvenile planthopper.

[ 8 ] Number of groups of plants and animals in Suriname [ edit ] Blue poison dart frog The table shows the number of the groups of plants and animals which can be found in Suriname in 2009.

[ 9 ] Species Amount Mammals 192 Birds 715 Reptiles 175 Amphibians 102 Marine fish 360 Freshwater species 318 Plants more or less 5,100 Nature Protection Act 1954 and the Game Act 1954 [ edit ] The Nature Protection Act 1954 [ 10 ] and the Game Act 1954 [ 11 ] are important for the protection of nature in Suriname. The Nature Protection Act 1954 regulates the establishment and the management of nature reserves and other protected areas. The Game Act 1954 states which species of wild life may be hunted and during which period. There are four categories of wild animals, namely protected animals, game species, cage species and predominantly harmful species. The giant anteater , red-faced spider monkey , ocelot , jaguar , bush dog and the Guiana dolphin are some of the mammals that are under complete protection in Suriname.

Protected areas [ edit ] Main article: Protected areas of Suriname Suriname has 11 nature reserves, 1 nature park and 4 multi-use management areas (MUMAs). A protected area is an area set aside for the preservation and protection of highly important natural and cultural features, for the regulation of the scientific, educational and recreational use.

[ 12 ] On March 5, 2015, the leaders of the indigenous peoples in Suriname presented a declaration for the protection of a 7.2 million-hectare preserve, to members of parliament.

Conservation International -Suriname and the World Wide Fund For Nature worked to support the vision of the Trio and Wayana communities to map the preserve and lay out strategies to fund and ensure the success of the initiative. The plan includes the provision of jobs for tribe members as rangers and guards. The indigenous leaders also intent to establish the value maintaining the unspoiled rivers.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Protected areas in hectares in 2010 [ edit ] Leucocoprinus birnbaumii at Brownsberg The table shows the protected areas in Suriname in hectares (ha) in 2010.

[ 15 ] Protected areas Total area (hectares) Boven Coesewijne 27,000 Brinckheuvel 6,000 Central Suriname Nature Reserve 1,592,000 Copi Nature Reserve 28,000 Coppename monding 12,000 Galibi 4,000 Hertenrits 100 Peruvia 31,000 Sipaliwini Savanna 100,000 Wanekreek 45,000 Wia Wia 36,000 Brownsberg Nature Park 12,200 Bigi Pan 67,900 Noord Coronie 27,200 Noord Saramacca 88,400 Noord Commewijne 61,500 Total 2,138,300 International conventions [ edit ] Suriname is signatory to many international conventions aimed at protection and conservation of the biodiversity. The most important are the Convention on Biological Diversity , the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands . In 2007, the Ministry of the Environment presented the National Biodiversity Strategy [ 16 ] and in 2013 the National Biodiversity Action Plan.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] List of birds of Suriname List of mammals of Suriname References [ edit ] ^ "Suriname" .

iNaturalist.org .

^ "Downloads - Milieu Publicatie - Algemeen Bureau voor de Statistiek in Suriname" .

www.statistics-suriname.org . Archived from the original on 2015-02-11 . Retrieved 2015-04-22 .

^ "The Guiana Current" .

oceancurrents.rsmas.miami.edu .

^ "BirdLife Data Zone" (PDF) .

www.birdlife.org .

^ Ottema, 2009, pg 347.

^ Vakblad Bos en Natuur, nr. 4 jaargang 1, oktober 2010 (Dutch), Biodiversiteit van aquatische ecosystemen, Jan H. Mol, pages 8-10.

^ Ottema, 2009, pg 346.

^ Environment Statistics, 2014, pg, 149.

^ Environment Statistics of Suriname, 2014 (Dutch/ English), page 147.

^ "Natuurbeschermingswet 1954 - De Nationale Assemblée" .

www.dna.sr .

^ "Jachtwet 1954 - De Nationale Assemblée" .

www.dna.sr .

^ Environmental statistics(2014), pg 115.

^ "Indigenous leaders present plan to gov't for Suriname's largest official protected area" .

news.mongabay.com .

^ Mittermeier, Dr. Russell A. (14 April 2015).

"New Conservation Corridor Latest Environmental Triumph for..." ^ Environmental Statistics, 2014,pg. 116.

^ "Republic of Suriname Ministry of Labour, Technological Development and Environment Biodiversity Steering Committee National Biodiversity Strategy" (PDF) .

www.cbd.int . 2006 . Retrieved 2019-06-28 .

^ "National Biodiversity Action Plan" (PDF) .

www.cbd.int . 2013 . Retrieved 2019-06-28 .

External links [ edit ] Sipaliwini Savanna v t e Suriname articles History Colonial governors Chairmen of the Estates Colonial forces Colony of Surinam Society of Suriname World War II Within the Kingdom of the Netherlands 1980 coup d'état National Military Council December murders Interior War (1986–1992) 1990 coup d'état Geography Cities Environmental issues Climate change Fauna Flora Biodiversity Protected areas World Heritage Sites Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT rights Law enforcement Military Commander National Assembly Chairman Political parties President Vice President Prime Minister (defunct) Deputy Prime Minister (defunct) Supreme Court Constitutional Court Economy Agriculture Companies Dollar (currency) Energy Mining industry Science and technology Telecommunications Transport Society Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Languages People list indigenous Religion Culture Anthem Coat of arms Cuisine Flag Literature Music Public holidays Sport Outline Index Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biodiversity_of_Suriname&oldid=1274768776 " Category : Environment of Suriname Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 03:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of Suriname 1 language Add topic

