Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Christoph Grienberger 8 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian astronomer (1561–1636) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Christoph Grienberger" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Christoph ( Christophorus ) Grienberger (also variously spelled Gruemberger , Bamberga , Bamberger , Banbergiera , Gamberger , Ghambergier , Granberger , Panberger ) (2 July 1561 – 11 March 1636) was an Austrian Jesuit astronomer , after whom the crater Gruemberger on the Moon is named.

Catalogus veteres affixarum longitudines, ac latitudines conferens cum novis , 1612 Biography [ edit ] Born in Hall in Tirol , in 1580 Christoph Grienberger joined the Jesuits.  He studied in Prague and Vienna , and subsequently succeeded his tutor, Christopher Clavius , as professor of mathematics at the Collegio Romano in 1612.

[ 1 ] In 1610, Jesuit and high church officials had turned to Grienberger, as well as Clavius, Paolo Lembo, and Odo Van Maelcote , the other mathematicians on the faculty of the Collegio Romano, for their opinion on the new phenomena Galileo had discovered with his telescope .  Grienberger sympathized with Galileo's theory of motion.  However, he was asked to defend the Aristotelian view of the universe by Claudio Acquaviva , the Father General of the Jesuits.

Grienberger was not a prolific author–in his lifetime, his name was attached only to a thin volume of star-charts and a set of trigonometric tables –but he occupied a post that allowed him to review and evaluate the works of many other authors. As technical censor of all mathematical works written by Jesuit authors, Grienberger often sent authors his own corrections and calculations, which he recommended that they incorporate before their works could be published.  His contemporaries acknowledged their debt to him.

Mario Bettinus , author of Apiaria Universae Philosophiae Mathematicae , an encyclopedic collection of mathematical curiosities, includes in this text the following confession: "I have benefited, my Reader, from the mind and industry of the very learned and exceedingly modest man, Grienberger, who, while he would have discovered many marvellous things by himself, preferred to make himself serviceable to other people's inventions and other people's praises".

[ 2 ] Giuseppe Biancani also corresponded with Grienberger, with whom he discussed his doubts over Galileo's assertion that there were mountains on the Moon .

Grienberger's lectures in astronomy had also prepared fellow Jesuits for missionary work in China .  He also worked in the field of optics .

Grienberger is buried at Rome.

Works [ edit ] Catalogus veteres affixarum longitudines, ac latitudines conferens cum novis (in Latin). Roma: Bartolomeo Zanetti (2.). 1612.

Nova imaginum caelestium prospectiva (in Latin). Augsburg: Jakob Koppmayer. 1679.

See also [ edit ] List of Jesuit scientists List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics References [ edit ] ^ Hockey, Thomas (2009).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers .

Springer Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 . Retrieved August 22, 2012 .

^ "Mathematics And Modesty In The Society Of Jesus" . Stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 2005-03-13 . Retrieved 2012-09-12 .

Sources [ edit ] (in English) Michael John Gorman, "Mathematics and Modesty in the Society of Jesus: the Problems of Christoph Grienberger (1564-1636)" (in English) Abstract of Franz Daxecker, “The astronomer Christoph Grienberger and the Galilei trial,” Acta Historica Astronomiae, vol. 18, p. 34-39 (in English) The Galileo Project: Collegio Romano External links [ edit ] Grienberger's Catalogus veteres affixarum ...

Rome: 1612.

Archived 2018-09-17 at the Wayback Machine - Full digital facsimile, Linda Hall Library.

Catalogus veteres affixarum Longitudines, ac Latitudines conferens cum novis.Romae, Apud Bartholomaeum Zanettum, MDCXII  da www.atlascoelestis.com Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany France BnF data Italy Portugal Croatia Vatican People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christoph_Grienberger&oldid=1243716736 " Categories : 17th-century Austrian astronomers 17th-century Austrian Jesuits 1561 births 1636 deaths 16th-century Austrian Jesuits Jesuit scientists 16th-century Austrian mathematicians 17th-century Austrian mathematicians 16th-century Austrian astronomers People from Hall in Tirol Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 3 September 2024, at 01:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christoph Grienberger 8 languages Add topic

