Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes 2 Effects 3 Exurb 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Commuter town 33 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Urban community that is primarily residential, from which most of the workforce commutes out "Bedroom community" redirects here. For the record label, see Bedroom Community . For the song by Glass Beach, see The First Glass Beach Album .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Commuter town" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Many municipalities in the US state of New Jersey can be considered commuter towns. Here, riders wait in Maplewood for a train bound for New York City during the morning rush hour .

Hervanta in Tampere , Finland, is mostly known for its residential tower blocks, but there are also some commercial services, a university campus and several high-tech companies.

Cidade Tiradentes is a heavily populated area in the outskirts of São Paulo consisting mainly of public housing projects. On average, its inhabitants spend 2 hours and 45 minutes a day commuting between home and work.

[ 1 ] A commuter town is a populated area that is primarily residential rather than commercial or industrial. Routine travel from home to work and back is called commuting , which is where the term comes from. A commuter town may be called by many other terms: " bedroom community " (Canada and northeastern US), [ citation needed ] " bedroom town ", " bedroom suburb " (US), " dormitory town " (UK). The term " exurb " was used from the 1950s, but since 2006, is generally used for areas beyond suburbs and specifically less densely built than the suburbs to which the exurbs' residents commute.

[ 2 ] Causes [ edit ] Often commuter towns form when workers in a region cannot afford to live where they work and must seek residency in another town with a lower cost of living . The late 20th century, the dot-com bubble and United States housing bubble drove housing costs in Californian metropolitan areas to historic highs, spawning exurban growth in adjacent counties.

[ citation needed ] Workers with jobs in San Francisco found themselves moving further and further away to nearby cities like Oakland, Burlingame, and San Mateo. As rental and housing costs kept increasing, even renters that would normally be considered affluent elsewhere would struggle with the prospect of home ownership in an area with higher quality schools and amenities. As of 2003 [update] , over 80% of the workforce of Tracy, California , was employed in the San Francisco Bay Area .

[ citation needed ] In some cases, commuter towns can result from changing economic conditions.

Steubenville, Ohio along with neighboring Weirton, West Virginia had an independent regional identity until the collapse of the steel industry in the 1980s.

Steubenville Pike and the Parkway West also created easier access to the much larger city of Pittsburgh . In 2013, Jefferson County, Ohio (where Steubenville is located) was added to the Pittsburgh metropolitan area as part of its larger Combined Statistical Area .

[ 3 ] In Japan, most of the national railway network was privatized by the 1980s but unlike in the UK , both the national railway's tracks, trains, stations and real estate were included in the privatization agreements. Japan's privately operated railroads view real estate investment and development of commuter towns as central to their business model. These railroads continuously develop new residential and commercial areas alongside their existing and new routes and stations and adjust their train schedules in order to provide existing and prospective commuters with convenient work-commute routines.

[ 4 ] This is quite different from North American commuter towns that are almost exclusively the result of transportation by car.

Effects [ edit ] Where commuters are wealthier and small town housing markets are weaker than city housing markets, the development of a bedroom community may raise local housing prices and attract upscale service businesses in a process akin to gentrification . Long-time residents may be displaced by new commuter residents due to rising house prices. This can also be influenced by zoning restrictions in urbanized areas that prevent the construction of suitably cheap housing closer to places of employment.

The number of commuter towns increased in the US and the UK during the 20th century because of a trend for people to move out of the cities into the surrounding green belt . In the United States, it is common for commuter towns to create disparities in municipal tax rates. When a commuter town collects few business taxes, residents must pay the brunt of the public operating budget in higher property or income taxes . Such municipalities may scramble to encourage commercial growth once an established residential base has been reached.

In the UK, commuter towns were developed by railway companies to create demand for their lines. One 1920s pioneer of this form of development was the Metropolitan Railway (now part of London Underground ) which marketed its Metro-land developments. This initiative encouraged many to move out of central and inner-city London to suburbs such as Harrow , or out of London itself, to commuter villages in Buckinghamshire or Hertfordshire .

[ citation needed ] Commuter towns have more recently been built ahead of adequate transportation infrastructure, thus spurring the development of roads and public transportation systems. These can take the form of light rail lines extending from the city center to new streetcar suburbs and new or expanded highways , whose construction and traffic can lead to the community becoming part of a larger conurbation .

A 2014 study by the British Office for National Statistics found that commuting also affects wellbeing. Commuters are more likely to be anxious, dissatisfied and have the sense that their daily activities lack meaning than those who don't have to travel to work, even if they are paid more.

[ 5 ] Exurb [ edit ] Main article: Exurb The term exurb (a portmanteau of "extra & urban") was coined by Auguste Comte Spectorsky in his 1955 book The Exurbanites , to describe the ring of prosperous communities beyond the suburbs that are commuter towns for an urban area.

[ 6 ] However, since a landmark report by the Brookings Institution in 2006, the term is generally used for areas beyond suburbs and specifically less densely built than the suburbs to which the exurbs' residents commute.

[ 2 ] Comparatively low density towns – often featuring large lots and large homes – create heavy motor vehicle dependency .

"They begin as embryonic subdivisions of a few hundred homes at the far edge of beyond, surrounded by scrub. Then, they grow – first gradually, but soon with explosive force – attracting stores, creating jobs and struggling to keep pace with the need for more schools, more roads, more everything. And eventually, when no more land is available and home prices have skyrocketed, the whole cycle starts again, another 15 minutes down the turnpike." — Rick Lyman, The New York Times [ 7 ] Others argue that exurban environments, such as those that have emerged in Oregon over the last 40 years as a result of the state's unique land use laws , have helped to protect local agriculture and local businesses by creating strict urban growth boundaries that encourage greater population densities in centralized towns, while slowing or greatly reducing urban and suburban sprawl into agricultural, timber land, and natural areas.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Automotive city Daily urban system Edge city Garden city movement Railway town Satellite city Transit-oriented development Transit-proximate development Transit village Travel to work area Urban sprawl References [ edit ] ^ "Mobilidade: paulistano leva uma hora e meia para ir e voltar do trabalho" .

Cidade de São Paulo (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 4 December 2021 .

^ a b Berube, Alan (2006).

Finding Exurbia: America's Fast-Growing Communities at the Metropolitan Fringe (PDF) . Brookings Institution.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Office of Management and Budget .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-01-21 . Retrieved 2014-08-31 – via National Archives .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Harding, Robin (2019-01-28).

"Rail privatisation: the UK looks for secrets of Japan's success" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 2023-08-15 .

^ "Commuting and Personal Well-being, 2014" . Office for National Statistics. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .

^ Spectorsky, Auguste C. (1955).

The Exurbanites . Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co.

OCLC 476943 .

^ Rick (December 18, 2005).

"In Exurbs, Life Framed by Hours Spent in the Car" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2009 . Retrieved April 28, 2008 .

^ Wuerthner, George (March 19, 2007).

"The Oregon Example: Statewide Planning Works" .

Bozeman New West .

Archived from the original on June 6, 2011 . Retrieved January 27, 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Central City White Flight: Racial and Nonracial Causes Rybczynski, Witold (Nov. 7, 2005).

"Suburban Despair" .

Slate .

Spectorsky, Auguste C. (1955).

The Exurbanites . Lippincott, Philadelphia. OCLC 476943 .

Lyman, Rick (2005).

Living Large, by Design, in Middle of Nowhere The New York Times v t e Cities Urban geography Urban area City centre Downtown Suburb Exurb Core city Twin cities Satellite city Edge city Commuter town City proper limits Conurbation Metropolitan area Metropolis Megacity Megalopolis Cities with the most skyscrapers Urbanization Suburbanization Shrinking cities Ghost town Abandoned village Lost city Tent city Closed city College town Urban government City status Municipality direct-controlled Independent city City-state Autonomous city Capital city Urban economics World's cities by GDP Global city Central business district GDP density Most expensive cities Cheapest cities Most livable cities Urban decay Ghetto Modern ruins No-go area Shanty town Skid row Slum Squatting Urban renewal Municipal bond Habitat III Peri-urban agriculture Urban planning History of urban planning Theories of urban planning Technical aspects of urban planning Urban planners Public open space Green space Urban wild Zoning Mixed-use development Urban design Grid plan Concentric zone model Sector model Multiple nuclei model Linear settlement Land use Smart city Bicycle-friendly Cyclability Cycling infrastructure Pedestrian zone Walkability Urban population World's largest cities throughout history Most densely populated cities Most populous national capitals Most populous satellite cities Urbanism New Urbanism Urban warfare Urban studies Urban morphology Urban culture Urban sociology Anti-urbanism Urban exploration Urban homesteading Unitary urbanism Environment Climate change Eco-cities Ecological engineering Green infrastructure Green urbanism Million Tree Initiative Sustainable city Sustainable Development Goal 11 Sustainable urbanism Urban ecology Urban forest inequity Urban forest Urban forestry Urban heat island Urban park Urban prairie Urban reforestation Zero-carbon city Cities portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐5wxrl
Cached time: 20250812020720
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.458 seconds
Real time usage: 0.591 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2207/1000000
Revision size: 12489/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 82002/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13701/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 52335/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.290/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6689556/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  513.440      1 -total
 25.64%  131.636      1 Template:Reflist
 16.04%   82.342      3 Template:Cite_web
 15.87%   81.484      1 Template:Cities
 15.49%   79.529      1 Template:Navbox
 14.11%   72.428      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.44%   63.874      1 Template:Short_description
  9.07%   46.565      2 Template:Ambox
  7.82%   40.143      1 Template:Redirect
  7.39%   37.956      4 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:33708322:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020720 and revision id 1289194021. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commuter_town&oldid=1289194021 " Categories : Types of towns Urban studies and planning terminology Urbanization Rural geography Transportation planning Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from June 2021 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from June 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2003 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2007 This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 01:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commuter town 33 languages Add topic

