Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bundle-sheath cells 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Vascular bundle 29 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Беларуская Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Longitudinal strand of vascular tissue in the roots, stems & leaves, of higher plants.

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(February 2019) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,202 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Faisceau cribro-vasculaire]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Faisceau cribro-vasculaire}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Types of Vascular bundles (blue: Xylem, green: Phloem, white: Cambium) A concentric, periphloematic(Hadrocentric) B concentric, perixylematic(Leptocentric) C radial with inner xylem, here with four xylem-poles, left closed, right open D collateral closed E collateral open F bicollateral open Cross section of celery stalk, showing vascular bundles, which includes both phloem and xylem Detail of vascular bundle: closed, collateral vascular bundles of the stem axis of Zea mays Vascular bundle in the leaf of Metasequoia glyptostroboides The vascular bundle of pine leaf showing xylem and phloem A vascular bundle is a part of the transport system in vascular plants . The transport itself happens in the stem , which exists in two forms: xylem and phloem . Both these tissues are present in a vascular bundle, which in addition will include supporting and protective tissues. There is also a tissue between xylem and phloem, which is the cambium .

The xylem typically lies towards the axis ( adaxial ) with phloem positioned away from the axis ( abaxial ). In a stem or root this means that the xylem is closer to the centre of the stem or root while the phloem is closer to the exterior. In a leaf, the adaxial surface of the leaf will usually be the upper side, with the abaxial surface the lower side.

The sugars synthesized by the plant with sun light are transported by the phloem, which is closer to the lower surface.

Aphids and leaf hoppers feed off of these sugars by tapping into the phloem.  This is why aphids and leaf hoppers are typically found on the underside of a leaf rather than on the top. 
The position of vascular bundles relative to each other may vary considerably: see stele . The vascular bundle are depend on size of veins Cross section of a leaf showing parts of a vascular bundle Bundle-sheath cells [ edit ] The bundle-sheath cells are the photosynthetic cells arranged into a tightly packed sheath around the vein of a leaf. It forms a protective covering on the leaf vein and consists of one or more cell layers, usually parenchyma . Loosely-arranged mesophyll cells lie between the bundle sheath and the leaf surface. The Calvin cycle is confined to the chloroplasts of these bundle sheath cells in C 4 plants .

C 2 plants also use a variation of this structure.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Sage, Rowan F.; Khoshravesh, Roxana; Sage, Tammy L. (1 July 2014).

"From proto-Kranz to C4 Kranz: building the bridge to C4 photosynthesis" .

Journal of Experimental Botany .

65 (13): 3341– 3356.

doi : 10.1093/jxb/eru180 .

PMID 24803502 .

Further reading [ edit ] Campbell, N. A. & Reece, J. B. (2005). Photosynthesis.

Biology (7th ed.). San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings.

External links [ edit ] Curtis, Lersten, and Nowak cross section of a vascular bundle Mauseth another cross section of a vascular bundle v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vascular_bundle&oldid=1290634214 " Categories : Plant physiology Plant anatomy Tissues (biology) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from French Wikipedia This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 01:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vascular bundle 29 languages Add topic

