Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Economic and social changes 1.2 Political issues 1.3 World War I 2 February Revolution 3 Dual power: Dvoyevlastiye 4 October Revolution 5 Russian Civil War Toggle Russian Civil War subsection 5.1 Revolutionary tribunals 6 Murder of the imperial family 7 Symbolism 8 The revolution and the world 9 Historiography 10 Cultural portrayal Toggle Cultural portrayal subsection 10.1 Literature 10.2 Film 11 See also 12 Explanatory footnotes 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Sources 14 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 14.1 Historiography 14.2 Participants' accounts 14.3 Primary sources 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Russian Revolution 113 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1917–1922 conflict in Russia This article is about the revolution that began in 1917. For the revolution in 1905, see Russian Revolution of 1905 .

Russian Revolution Part of the opposition to World War I and revolutions of 1917–1923 Clockwise from top left: Protesters holding banners at Nevsky Prospect , February Revolution .

Crowd scattered by gunfire during the July Days in Petrograd .

Rebel troops lay down their weapons after the Kornilov affair .

The Winter Palace stormed, October Revolution .

Native name Революция 1917 года (Revolution of 1917) Date 8 March 1917 – 25 October 1922 (5 years, 3 months and 8 days) Duration February Revolution (8–16 March 1917) Dual power (16 March – 7 November 1917) October Revolution and Russian Civil War (7 November 1917 – 25 October 1922) Location Russia Participants SRs , Kadets , Bolsheviks , Mensheviks , Provisional Govt.

, army , nationalists (early) Red Army , White Armies , anarchists , Greens , Allies , Central Powers , separatists , Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly (later) Outcome End of the Russian monarchy Dissolution of the Russian Empire Failure of the short-lived Russian Republic and Russian State End of Russia's involvement in the First World War Establishment of Bolshevik Soviet republics in Russia proper , most of Ukraine , Belarus , Central Asia and the Southern Caucasus Independence of Poland , Finland , Estonia , Latvia , and Lithuania Establishment of the Soviet Union v t e Russian Revolution February Revolution Kronstadt mutiny April Crisis July Days Kornilov affair October Revolution Kerensky–Krasnov uprising Junker mutiny Russian Civil War Kolchak Coup The Russian Revolution was a period of political and social change in Russia , starting in 1917. This period saw Russia abolish its monarchy and adopt a socialist form of government following two successive revolutions and a civil war . It can be seen as the precursor for other revolutions that occurred in the aftermath of World War I , such as the German Revolution of 1918–1919 . The Russian Revolution was a key event of the 20th century .

The Russian Revolution was inaugurated with the February Revolution in 1917, in the midst of World War I . With the German Empire inflicting defeats on the front, and increasing logistical problems causing shortages of bread and grain, the Russian Army was losing morale, with large scale mutiny looming.

[ 1 ] Officials were convinced that if Tsar Nicholas II abdicated, the unrest would subside. Nicholas stepped down, ushering in a provisional government led by the Duma (parliament). During the unrest, Soviet councils were formed by locals in Petrograd that initially did not oppose the new government; however, the Soviets insisted on their influence in the government and control over militias. By March, Russia had two rival governments . The Provisional Government held state power in military and international affairs, whereas the network of Soviets held domestic power. Critically, the Soviets held the allegiance of the working class , and urban middle class. There were mutinies, protests and strikes. Socialist and other leftist political organizations competed for influence within the Provisional Government and Soviets. Factions included the Mensheviks , Social Revolutionaries , Anarchists , and the Bolsheviks , a far-left party led by Vladimir Lenin .

The Bolsheviks won popularity with their program promising peace, land, and bread : an end to the war, land for the peasantry, and ending famine.

[ 2 ] After assuming power, the Provisional Government continued fighting the war in spite of public opposition. Taking advantage, the Bolsheviks and other factions gained popular support to advance the revolution. Responding to discontent in Petrograd, the Provisional Government repressed protestors leading to the July Days . The Bolsheviks merged workers' militias loyal to them into the Red Guards .

[ 3 ] The volatile situation reached its climax with the October Revolution , a Bolshevik armed insurrection in Petrograd that overthrew the Provisional Government. The Bolsheviks established their own government and proclaimed the establishment of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR). Under pressure from German military offensives, the Bolsheviks relocated the capital to Moscow . The RSFSR began reorganizing the empire into the world's first socialist state , to practice soviet democracy on a national and international scale. Their promise to end Russia's participation in World War I was fulfilled when Bolshevik leaders signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany in March 1918. The Bolsheviks established the Cheka , a secret police and revolutionary security service working to uncover, punish, and eliminate those considered to be " enemies of the people " in campaigns called the Red Terror .

Although the Bolsheviks held large support in urban areas, they had foreign and domestic enemies that refused to recognize their government. Russia erupted into a bloody civil war , which pitted the Reds (Bolsheviks), against their enemies, which included nationalist movements , anti-Bolshevik socialist parties, anarchists, monarchists and liberals ; the latter two parties strongly supported the Russian White movement which was led mainly by right-leaning officers and seen as fighting for the restoration of the imperial order. The Bolshevik commissar Leon Trotsky began organizing workers' militias loyal to the Bolsheviks into the Red Army . While key events occurred in Moscow and Petrograd, every city in the empire was convulsed, including the provinces of national minorities, and in the rural areas peasants took over and redistributed land.

As the war progressed, the RSFSR established Soviet power in Armenia , Azerbaijan , Byelorussia , Georgia , and Ukraine . Wartime cohesion and intervention from foreign powers prompted the RSFSR to begin unifying these nations under one flag and created the Soviet Union . Historians consider the end of the revolutionary period to be in 1922, when the civil war concluded with the defeat of the White Army and separatist factions, leading to mass emigration from Russia . The victorious Bolshevik Party reconstituted itself into the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and remained in power for six decades.

Background Main article: History of Russia (1892–1917) Soldiers blocking Narva Gate on Bloody Sunday The Russian Revolution of 1905 was a major factor contributing to the cause of the Revolutions of 1917. The events of Bloody Sunday triggered nationwide protests and soldier mutinies . A council of workers called the St. Petersburg Soviet was created in this chaos.

[ 4 ] While the 1905 Revolution was ultimately crushed, and the leaders of the St. Petersburg Soviet were arrested, this laid the groundwork for the later Petrograd Soviet and other revolutionary movements during the leadup to 1917. The 1905 Revolution also led to the creation of a Duma (parliament) that would later form the Provisional Government following February 1917.

[ 5 ] Russia's poor performance in 1914–1915 prompted growing complaints directed at Tsar Nicholas II and the Romanov family . A short wave of patriotic nationalism ended in the face of defeats and poor conditions on the Eastern Front of World War I . The Tsar made the situation worse by taking personal control of the Imperial Russian Army in 1915, a challenge far beyond his skills. He was now held personally responsible for Russia's continuing defeats and losses. In addition, Tsarina Alexandra , left to rule while the Tsar commanded at the front, was German born, leading to suspicion of collusion, only to be exacerbated by rumors relating to her relationship with the controversial mystic Grigori Rasputin . Rasputin's influence led to disastrous ministerial appointments and corruption, resulting in a worsening of conditions within Russia.

[ 5 ] After the entry of the Ottoman Empire on the side of the Central Powers in October 1914, Russia was deprived of a major trade route to the Mediterranean Sea , which worsened the economic crisis and the munitions shortages. Meanwhile, Germany was able to produce great amounts of munitions whilst constantly fighting on two major battlefronts.

[ 6 ] Vladimir Lenin , founder of the Soviet Union and leader of the Bolshevik party .

Leon Trotsky , founder of the Red Army and key figure in the October Revolution .

The conditions during the war resulted in a devastating loss of morale within the Russian army and the general population of Russia itself. This was particularly apparent in the cities, owing to a lack of food in response to the disruption of agriculture. Food scarcity had become a considerable problem in Russia, but the cause of this did not lie in any failure of the harvests , which had not been significantly altered during wartime. The indirect reason was that the government, in order to finance the war, printed millions of rouble notes, and by 1917, inflation had made prices increase up to four times what they had been in 1914. Farmers were consequently faced with a higher cost of living, but with little increase in income. As a result, they tended to hoard their grain and to revert to subsistence farming . Thus the cities were constantly short of food. At the same time, rising prices led to demands for higher wages in the factories, and in January and February 1916, revolutionary propaganda , in part aided by German funds, led to widespread strikes. This resulted in growing criticism of the government, including an increased participation of workers in revolutionary parties.

Liberal parties too had an increased platform to voice their complaints, as the initial fervor of the war resulted in the Tsarist government creating a variety of political organizations. In July 1915, a Central War Industries Committee was established under the chairmanship of a prominent Octobrist , Alexander Guchkov (1862–1936), including ten workers' representatives. The Petrograd Mensheviks agreed to join despite the objections of their leaders abroad. All this activity gave renewed encouragement to political ambitions, and in September 1915, a combination of Octobrists and Kadets in the Duma demanded the forming of a responsible government, which the Tsar rejected.

[ 7 ] All these factors had given rise to a sharp loss of confidence in the regime, even within the ruling class, growing throughout the war. Early in 1916, Guchkov discussed with senior army officers and members of the Central War Industries Committee about a possible coup to force the abdication of the Tsar. In December, a small group of nobles assassinated Rasputin , and in January 1917 the Tsar's cousin, Grand Duke Nicholas , was asked indirectly by Prince Lvov whether he would be prepared to take over the throne from his nephew, Tsar Nicholas II. None of these incidents were in themselves the immediate cause of the February Revolution, but they do help to explain why the monarchy survived only a few days after it had broken out.

[ 7 ] Meanwhile, Socialist Revolutionary leaders in exile, many of them living in Switzerland , had been the glum spectators of the collapse of international socialist solidarity.

French and German Social Democrats had voted in favour of their respective governments' war efforts.

Georgi Plekhanov in Paris had adopted a violently anti-German stand, while Alexander Parvus supported the German war effort as the best means of ensuring a revolution in Russia. The Mensheviks largely maintained that Russia had the right to defend herself against Germany, although Julius Martov (a prominent Menshevik), now on the left of his group, demanded an end to the war and a settlement on the basis of national self-determination, with no annexations or indemnities.

[ 7 ] It was these views of Martov that predominated in a manifesto drawn up by Leon Trotsky (at the time a Menshevik) at a conference in Zimmerwald , attended by 35 Socialist leaders in September 1915. Inevitably, Vladimir Lenin supported by Zinoviev and Radek , strongly contested them. Their attitudes became known as the Zimmerwald Left . Lenin rejected both the defence of Russia and the cry for peace. Since the autumn of 1914, he had insisted that "from the standpoint of the working class and of the labouring masses the lesser evil would be the defeat of the Tsarist Monarchy"; the war must be turned into a civil war of the proletarian soldiers against their own governments, and if a proletarian victory should emerge from this in Russia, then their duty would be to wage a revolutionary war for the liberation of the masses throughout Europe.

[ 8 ] Economic and social changes Provisional Government 's volunteer soldiers secure Petrograd's Palace Square with the Austin Armoured Car , summer 1917.

An elementary theory of property , believed by many peasants, was that land should belong to those who work on it. At the same time, peasant life and culture was changing constantly. Change was facilitated by the physical movement of growing numbers of peasant villagers who migrated to and from industrial and urban environments, but also by the introduction of city culture into the village through material goods, the press, and word of mouth.

[ nb 1 ] Workers also had good reasons for discontent: overcrowded housing with often deplorable sanitary conditions, long hours at work (on the eve of the war, a 10-hour workday six days a week was the average and many were working 11–12 hours a day by 1916), constant risk of injury and death from poor safety and sanitary conditions, harsh discipline (not only rules and fines, but foremen's fists), and inadequate wages (made worse after 1914 by steep wartime increases in the cost of living). At the same time, urban industrial life had its benefits, though these could be just as dangerous (in terms of social and political stability) as the hardships. There were many encouragements to expect more from life. Acquiring new skills gave many workers a sense of self-respect and confidence, heightening expectations and desires. Living in cities, workers encountered material goods they had never seen in villages. Most importantly, workers living in cities were exposed to new ideas about the social and political order.

[ nb 2 ] The social causes of the Russian Revolution can be derived from centuries of oppression of the lower classes by the Tsarist regime and Nicholas's failures in World War I. While rural agrarian peasants had been emancipated from serfdom in 1861, they still resented paying redemption payments to the state, and demanded communal tender of the land they worked. The problem was further compounded by the failure of Sergei Witte 's land reforms of the early 20th century. Increasing peasant disturbances and sometimes actual revolts occurred, with the goal of securing ownership of the land they worked. Russia consisted mainly of poor farming peasants and substantial inequality of land ownership, with 1.5% of the population owning 25% of the land.

[ 9 ] The rapid industrialization of Russia also resulted in urban overcrowding and poor conditions for urban industrial workers (as mentioned above). Between 1890 and 1910, the population of the capital, Saint Petersburg, nearly doubled from 1,033,600 to 1,905,600, with Moscow experiencing similar growth. This created a new 'proletariat' which, due to being crowded together in the cities, was much more likely to protest and go on strike than the peasantry had been in previous times. One 1904 survey found that an average of 16 people shared each apartment in Saint Petersburg, with six people per room. There was also no running water, and piles of human waste were a threat to the health of the workers. The poor conditions only aggravated the situation, with the number of strikes and incidents of public disorder rapidly increasing in the years shortly before World War I. Because of late industrialization, Russia's workers were highly concentrated. By 1914, 40% of Russian workers were employed in factories of 1,000+ workers (32% in 1901). 42% worked in 100–1,000 worker enterprises, 18% in 1–100 worker businesses (in the US, 1914, the figures were 18%, 47% and 35% respectively).

[ 10 ] Years Average annual strikes [ 11 ] 1862–69 6 1870–84 20 1885–94 33 1895–1905 176 World War I added to the chaos.

Conscription across Russia resulted in unwilling citizens being sent off to war. The vast demand for factory production of war supplies and workers resulted in many more labor riots and strikes. Conscription stripped skilled workers from the cities, who had to be replaced with unskilled peasants. When famine began to hit due to the poor railway system , workers abandoned the cities in droves seeking food. Finally, the soldiers themselves, who suffered from a lack of equipment and protection from the elements, began to turn against the Tsar. This was mainly because, as the war progressed, many of the officers who were loyal to the Tsar were killed, being replaced by discontented conscripts from the major cities who had little loyalty to the Tsar.

Political issues The Petrograd Soviet Assembly meeting in 1917 Many sections of the country had reason to be dissatisfied with the existing autocracy. Nicholas II was a deeply conservative ruler and maintained a strict authoritarian system. Individuals and society in general were expected to show self-restraint, devotion to community, deference to the social hierarchy and a sense of duty to the country. Religious faith helped bind all of these tenets together as a source of comfort and reassurance in the face of difficult conditions and as a means of political authority exercised through the clergy. Perhaps more than any other modern monarch, Nicholas II attached his fate and the future of his dynasty to the notion of the ruler as a saintly and infallible father to his people.

[ nb 3 ] [ 12 ] This vision of the Romanov monarchy left him unaware of the state of his country. With a firm belief that his power to rule was granted by Divine Right , Nicholas assumed that the Russian people were devoted to him with unquestioning loyalty. This ironclad belief rendered Nicholas unwilling to allow the progressive reforms that might have alleviated the suffering of the Russian people. Even after the 1905 Revolution spurred the Tsar to decree limited civil rights and democratic representation, he worked to limit even these liberties in order to preserve the ultimate authority of the crown.

[ nb 3 ] Despite constant oppression, the desire of the people for democratic participation in government decisions was strong. Since the Age of Enlightenment , Russian intellectuals had promoted Enlightenment ideals such as the dignity of the individual and the rectitude of democratic representation. These ideals were championed most vociferously by Russia's liberals, although populists, Marxists, and anarchists also claimed to support democratic reforms. A growing opposition movement had begun to challenge the Romanov monarchy openly well before the turmoil of World War I.

Dissatisfaction with Russian autocracy culminated in the huge national upheaval that followed the Bloody Sunday massacre of January 1905, in which hundreds of unarmed protesters were shot by the Tsar's troops. Workers responded to the massacre with a crippling general strike, forcing Nicholas to put forth the October Manifesto , which established a democratically elected parliament (the State Duma ). Although the Tsar accepted the 1906 Fundamental State Laws one year later, he subsequently dismissed the first two Dumas when they proved uncooperative. Unfulfilled hopes of democracy fueled revolutionary ideas and violent outbursts targeted at the monarchy.

One of the Tsar's principal rationales for risking war in 1914 was his desire to restore the prestige that Russia had lost amid the debacles of the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905). Nicholas also sought to foster a greater sense of national unity with a war against a common and old enemy. The Russian Empire was an agglomeration of diverse ethnicities that had demonstrated significant signs of disunity in the years before the First World War. Nicholas believed in part that the shared peril and tribulation of a foreign war would mitigate the social unrest over the persistent issues of poverty, inequality, and inhumane working conditions. Instead of restoring Russia's political and military standing, World War I led to the slaughter of Russian troops and military defeats that undermined both the monarchy and Russian society to the point of collapse.

World War I Main article: Eastern Front (World War I) The outbreak of war in August 1914 initially served to quiet the prevalent social and political protests, focusing hostilities against a common external enemy, but this patriotic unity did not last long. As the war dragged on inconclusively, war-weariness gradually took its toll. Although many ordinary Russians joined anti-German demonstrations in the first few weeks of the war, hostility toward the Kaiser and the desire to defend their land and their lives did not necessarily translate into enthusiasm for the Tsar or the government.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Russia's first major battle of the war was a disaster; in the 1914 Battle of Tannenberg , over 30,000 Russian troops were killed or wounded and 90,000 captured, while Germany suffered just 12,000 casualties. However, Austro-Hungarian forces allied to Germany were driven back deep into the Galicia region by the end of the year. In the autumn of 1915, Nicholas had taken direct command of the army, personally overseeing Russia's main theatre of war and leaving his ambitious but incapable wife Alexandra in charge of the government. Reports of corruption and incompetence in the Imperial government began to emerge, and the growing influence of Grigori Rasputin in the Imperial family was widely resented.

In 1915, things took a critical turn for the worse when Germany shifted its focus of attack to the Eastern Front. The superior German Army – better led, better trained, and better supplied – was quite effective against the ill-equipped Russian forces, driving the Russians out of Galicia, as well as Russian Poland during the Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive campaign. By the end of October 1916, Russia had lost between 1,600,000 and 1,800,000 soldiers, with an additional 2,000,000 prisoners of war and 1,000,000 missing, all making up a total of nearly 5,000,000 men.

These staggering losses played a definite role in the mutinies and revolts that began to occur. In 1916, reports of fraternizing with the enemy began to circulate. Soldiers went hungry, lacked shoes, munitions, and even weapons. Rampant discontent lowered morale, which was further undermined by a series of military defeats.

Russian troops in trenches awaiting a German attack Casualty rates were the most vivid sign of this disaster. By the end of 1914, only five months into the war, around 390,000 Russian men had lost their lives and nearly 1,000,000 were injured. Far sooner than expected, inadequately trained recruits were called for active duty, a process repeated throughout the war as staggering losses continued to mount. The officer class also saw remarkable changes, especially within the lower echelons, which were quickly filled with soldiers rising up through the ranks. These men, usually of peasant or working-class backgrounds, were to play a large role in the politicization of the troops in 1917.

The army quickly ran short of rifles and ammunition (as well as uniforms and food), and by mid-1915, men were being sent to the front bearing no arms. It was hoped that they could equip themselves with arms recovered from fallen soldiers, of both sides, on the battlefields. The soldiers did not feel as if they were valuable, rather they felt as if they were expendable.

By the spring of 1915, the army was in steady retreat, which was not always orderly; desertion , plundering , and chaotic flight were not uncommon. By 1916, however, the situation had improved in many respects. Russian troops stopped retreating, and there were even some modest successes in the offensives that were staged that year, albeit at great loss of life. Also, the problem of shortages was largely solved by a major effort to increase domestic production. Nevertheless, by the end of 1916, morale among soldiers was even worse than it had been during the great retreat of 1915 . The fortunes of war may have improved, but the fact of war remained which continually took Russian lives. The crisis in morale (as was argued by Allan Wildman, a leading historian of the Russian army in war and revolution) "was rooted fundamentally in the feeling of utter despair that the slaughter would ever end and that anything resembling victory could be achieved." [ 16 ] The war did not only devastate soldiers. By the end of 1915, there were manifold signs that the economy was breaking down under the heightened strain of wartime demand. The main problems were food shortages and rising prices.

Inflation dragged incomes down at an alarmingly rapid rate, and shortages made it difficult for an individual to sustain oneself. These shortages were a problem especially in the capital, St. Petersburg , where distance from supplies and poor transportation networks made matters particularly worse. Shops closed early or entirely for lack of bread, sugar, meat, and other provisions, and lines lengthened massively for what remained. Conditions became increasingly difficult to afford food and physically obtain it.

Strikes increased steadily from the middle of 1915, and so did crime, but, for the most part, people suffered and endured, scouring the city for food. Working-class women in St. Petersburg reportedly spent about forty hours a week in food lines, begging, turning to prostitution or crime, tearing down wooden fences to keep stoves heated for warmth, and continued to resent the rich.

Government officials responsible for public order worried about how long people's patience would last. A report by the St. Petersburg branch of the security police, the Okhrana , in October 1916, warned bluntly of "the possibility in the near future of riots by the lower classes of the empire enraged by the burdens of daily existence." [ 17 ] Tsar Nicholas was blamed for all of these crises, and what little support he had left began to crumble. As discontent grew, the State Duma issued a warning to Nicholas in November 1916, stating that, inevitably, a terrible disaster would grip the country unless a constitutional form of government was put in place. Nicholas ignored these warnings and Russia's Tsarist regime collapsed a few months later during the February Revolution of 1917. One year later, the Tsar and his entire family were executed.

February Revolution Main article: February Revolution Revolutionaries protesting in February 1917 Soldiers marching in Petrograd , March 1917 Russian troops meeting German troops in No Man's Land Meeting before the Russian wire entanglements At the beginning of February, Petrograd workers began several strikes and demonstrations. On 7 March [ O.S.

22 February], Putilov , Petrograd's largest industrial plant was closed by a workers' strike.

[ 18 ] The next day, a series of meetings and rallies were held for International Women's Day , which gradually turned into economic and political gatherings. Demonstrations were organised to demand bread, and these were supported by the industrial working force who considered them a reason for continuing the strikes. The women workers marched to nearby factories bringing out over 50,000 workers on strike.

[ 19 ] By 10 March [ O.S.

25 February], virtually every industrial enterprise in Petrograd had been shut down, together with many commercial and service enterprises. Students, white-collar workers, and teachers joined the workers in the streets and at public meetings.

[ 20 ] To quell the riots, the Tsar looked to the army. At least 180,000 troops were available in the capital, but most were either untrained or injured. Historian Ian Beckett suggests around 12,000 could be regarded as reliable, but even these proved reluctant to move in on the crowd, since it included so many women. It was for this reason that on 11 March [ O.S.

26 February], when the Tsar ordered the army to suppress the rioting by force, troops began to revolt.

[ 21 ] Although few actively joined the rioting, many officers were either shot or went into hiding; the ability of the garrison to hold back the protests was all but nullified, symbols of the Tsarist regime were rapidly torn down around the city, and governmental authority in the capital collapsed – not helped by the fact that Nicholas had prorogued the Duma that morning, leaving it with no legal authority to act. The response of the Duma, urged on by the liberal bloc, was to establish a Temporary Committee to restore law and order; meanwhile, the socialist parties established the Petrograd Soviet to represent workers and soldiers. The remaining loyal units switched allegiance the next day.

[ 22 ] The Tsar directed the royal train back towards Petrograd, which was stopped on 14 March [ O.S.

1 March], [ 21 ] by a group of revolutionaries at Malaya Vishera . When the Tsar finally arrived at Pskov , the Army Chief Nikolai Ruzsky , and the Duma deputies Alexander Guchkov and Vasily Shulgin suggested in unison that he abdicate the throne. He did so on 15 March [ O.S.

2 March], on behalf of himself, and then, having taken advice on behalf of his son, the Tsarevich . Nicholas nominated his brother, the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich , to succeed him. But the Grand Duke realised that he would have little support as ruler, so he declined the crown on 16 March [ O.S.

3 March], [ 21 ] stating that he would take it only if that was the consensus of democratic action.

[ 23 ] Six days later, Nicholas, no longer Tsar and addressed with contempt by the sentries as "Nicholas Romanov", was reunited with his family at the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo .

[ 24 ] He was placed under house arrest with his family by the Provisional Government.

The immediate effect of the February Revolution was a widespread atmosphere of elation and excitement in Petrograd.

[ 25 ] On 16 March [ O.S.

3 March], a provisional government was announced. The center-left was well represented, and the government was initially chaired by a liberal aristocrat, Prince Georgy Yevgenievich Lvov , a member of the Constitutional Democratic Party (KD).

[ 26 ] The socialists had formed their rival body, the Petrograd Soviet (or workers' council) four days earlier. The Petrograd Soviet and the Provisional Government competed for power over Russia.

Dual power: Dvoyevlastiye Main article: Dual power The effective power of the Provisional Government was challenged by the authority of an institution that claimed to represent the will of workers and soldiers and could, in fact, mobilize and control these groups during the early months of the revolution – the Petrograd Soviet Council of Workers' Deputies. The model for the Soviets were workers' councils that had been established in scores of Russian cities during the 1905 Revolution. In February 1917, striking workers elected deputies to represent them and socialist activists began organizing a citywide council to unite these deputies with representatives of the socialist parties. On 27 February, socialist Duma deputies, mainly Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, took the lead in organizing a citywide council. The Petrograd Soviet met in the Tauride Palace , room 13, permitted by the Provisional Government.

[ 27 ] The leaders of the Petrograd Soviet believed that they represented particular classes of the population, not the whole nation. They also believed Russia was not ready for socialism. They viewed their role as limited to pressuring hesitant " bourgeoisie " to rule and to introduce extensive democratic reforms in Russia (the replacement of the monarchy by a republic, guaranteed civil rights, a democratic police and army, abolition of religious and ethnic discrimination, preparation of elections to a constituent assembly, and so on). They met in the same building as the emerging Provisional Government not to compete with the Duma Committee for state power, but to best exert pressure on the new government, to act, in other words, as a popular democratic lobby.

[ 28 ] The relationship between these two major powers was complex from the beginning and would shape the politics of 1917. The representatives of the Provisional Government agreed to "take into account the opinions of the Soviet of Workers' Deputies", though they were also determined to prevent interference which would create an unacceptable situation of dual power. In fact, this was precisely what was being created, though this "dual power" (dvoyevlastiye) was the result less of the actions or attitudes of the leaders of these two institutions than of actions outside their control, especially the ongoing social movement taking place on the streets of Russia's cities, factories, shops, barracks, villages, and in the trenches.

[ 29 ] The 2nd Moscow Women Death Battalion protecting the Winter Palace as the last guards of the stronghold A series of political crises – see the chronology below – in the relationship between population and government and between the Provisional Government and the Soviets (which developed into a nationwide movement with a national leadership). The All-Russian Central Executive Committee of Soviets (VTsIK) undermined the authority of the Provisional Government but also of the moderate socialist leaders of the Soviets. Although the Soviet leadership initially refused to participate in the "bourgeois" Provisional Government, Alexander Kerensky , a young, popular lawyer and a member of the Socialist Revolutionary Party (SRP), agreed to join the new cabinet, and became an increasingly central figure in the government, eventually taking leadership of the Provisional Government. As minister of war and later Prime Minister, Kerensky promoted freedom of speech , released thousands of political prisoners , continued the war effort, even organizing another offensive (which, however, was no more successful than its predecessors). Nevertheless, Kerensky still faced several great challenges, highlighted by the soldiers, urban workers, and peasants, who claimed that they had gained nothing by the revolution: Other political groups were trying to undermine him.

Heavy military losses were being suffered on the front.

The soldiers were dissatisfied and demoralised and had started to defect. (On arrival back in Russia, these soldiers were either imprisoned or sent straight back into the front.) There was enormous discontent with Russia's involvement in the war, and many were calling for an end to it.

There were great shortages of food and supplies, which was difficult to remedy because of the wartime economic conditions.

The political group that proved most troublesome for Kerensky, and would eventually overthrow him, was the Bolshevik Party , led by Vladimir Lenin . Lenin had been living in exile in neutral Switzerland and, due to democratization of politics after the February Revolution, which legalized formerly banned political parties , he perceived the opportunity for his Marxist revolution. Although return to Russia had become a possibility, the war made it logistically difficult. Eventually, German officials arranged for Lenin to pass through their territory, hoping that his activities would weaken Russia or even – if the Bolsheviks came to power – lead to Russia's withdrawal from the war. Lenin and his associates, however, had to agree to travel to Russia in a sealed train : Germany would not take the chance that he would foment revolution in Germany. After passing through the front, he arrived in Petrograd in April 1917.

On the way to Russia, Lenin prepared the April Theses , which outlined central Bolshevik policies. These included that the Soviets take power (as seen in the slogan "all power to the Soviets") and denouncing the liberals and social revolutionaries in the Provisional Government, forbidding co-operation with it. Many Bolsheviks, however, had supported the Provisional Government, including Lev Kamenev .

[ 30 ] Revolutionaries attacking the tsarist police in the early days of the February Revolution With Lenin's arrival, the popularity of the Bolsheviks increased steadily. Over the course of the spring, public dissatisfaction with the Provisional Government and the war, in particular among workers, soldiers and peasants, pushed these groups to radical parties. Despite growing support for the Bolsheviks, buoyed by maxims that called most famously for "all power to the Soviets", the party held very little real power in the moderate-dominated Petrograd Soviet. In fact, historians such as Sheila Fitzpatrick have asserted that Lenin's exhortations for the Soviet Council to take power were intended to arouse indignation both with the Provisional Government, whose policies were viewed as conservative, and the Soviets themselves, which were viewed as subservients to the conservative government. By some other historians' accounts, Lenin and his followers were unprepared for how their groundswell of support, especially among influential worker and soldier groups, would translate into real power in the summer of 1917.

On 18 June, the Provisional Government launched an attack against Germany that failed miserably. Soon after, the government ordered soldiers to go to the front, reneging on a promise. The soldiers refused to follow the new orders. The arrival of radical Kronstadt sailors – who had tried and executed many officers, including one admiral – further fueled the growing revolutionary atmosphere. Sailors and soldiers, along with Petrograd workers, took to the streets in violent protest, calling for "all power to the Soviets". The revolt, however, was disowned by Lenin and the Bolshevik leaders and dissipated within a few days.

[ 31 ] In the aftermath, Lenin fled to Finland under threat of arrest while Trotsky, among other prominent Bolsheviks, was arrested. The July Days confirmed the popularity of the anti-war, radical Bolsheviks, but their unpreparedness at the moment of revolt was an embarrassing gaffe that lost them support among their main constituent groups: soldiers and workers.

The Bolshevik failure in the July Days proved temporary. The Bolsheviks had undergone a spectacular growth in membership. Whereas, in February 1917, the Bolsheviks were limited to only 24,000 members, by September 1917 there were 200,000 members of the Bolshevik faction.

[ 32 ] Previously, the Bolsheviks had been in the minority in the two leading cities of Russia – St. Petersburg and Moscow behind the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, by September the Bolsheviks were in the majority in both cities.

[ 32 ] Furthermore, the Bolshevik-controlled Moscow Regional Bureau of the Party also controlled the Party organizations of the 13 provinces around Moscow. These 13 provinces held 37% of Russia's population and 20% of the membership of the Bolshevik faction.

[ 32 ] In August, poor and misleading communication led General Lavr Kornilov , the recently appointed Supreme Commander of Russian military forces, to believe that the Petrograd government had already been captured by radicals, or was in serious danger thereof.

[ dubious – discuss ] In response, he ordered troops to Petrograd to pacify the city. To secure his position, Kerensky had to ask for Bolshevik assistance. He also sought help from the Petrograd Soviet, which called upon armed Red Guards to "defend the revolution". The Kornilov Affair failed largely due to the efforts of the Bolsheviks, whose influence over railroad and telegraph workers proved vital in stopping the movement of troops. With his coup failing, Kornilov surrendered and was relieved of his position. The Bolsheviks' role in stopping the attempted coup further strengthened their position.

In early September, the Petrograd Soviet freed all jailed Bolsheviks and Trotsky became chairman of the Petrograd Soviet. Growing numbers of socialists and lower-class Russians viewed the government less as a force in support of their needs and interests. The Bolsheviks benefited as the only major organized opposition party that had refused to compromise with the Provisional Government, and they benefited from growing frustration and even disgust with other parties, such as the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, who stubbornly refused to break with the idea of national unity across all classes.

A revolutionary meeting of Russian soldiers in March 1917 in Dalkarby of Jomala , Åland In Finland, Lenin had worked on his book State and Revolution and continued to lead his party, writing newspaper articles and policy decrees.

[ 33 ] By October, he returned to Petrograd (present-day St. Petersburg), aware that the increasingly radical city presented him no legal danger and a second opportunity for revolution. Recognising the strength of the Bolsheviks, Lenin began pressing for the immediate overthrow of the Kerensky government by the Bolsheviks. Lenin was of the opinion that taking power should occur in both St. Petersburg and Moscow simultaneously, parenthetically stating that it made no difference which city rose up first.

[ 34 ] The Bolshevik Central Committee drafted a resolution, calling for the dissolution of the Provisional Government in favor of the Petrograd Soviet. The resolution was passed 10–2 ( Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev prominently dissenting) promoting the October Revolution .

October Revolution Main articles: October Revolution , Kerensky-Krasnov uprising , Junker mutiny , and Volunteer Army The October Revolution, which unfolded on Wednesday 7 November 1917 according to the Gregorian calendar and on Wednesday 25 October according to the Julian calendar in use under tsarist Russia, was organized by the Bolshevik party. Lenin did not have any direct role in the revolution and he was hiding for his personal safety. However, in late October, Lenin secretly and at great personal risk entered Petrograd and attended a private gathering of the Bolshevik Central Committee on the evening of 23 October.

[ 35 ] The Revolutionary Military Committee established by the Bolshevik party was organizing the insurrection and Leon Trotsky was the chairman. 50,000 workers had passed a resolution in favour of Bolshevik demand for transfer of power to the soviets .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] However, Lenin played a crucial role in the debate in the leadership of the Bolshevik party for a revolutionary insurrection as the party in the autumn of 1917 received a majority in the soviets. An ally in the left fraction of the Revolutionary-Socialist Party , with huge support among the peasants who opposed Russia's participation in the war, supported the slogan 'All power to the Soviets'.

[ 38 ] The initial stage of the October Revolution which involved the assault on Petrograd occurred largely without any human casualties .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ page needed ] Liberal and monarchist forces, loosely organized into the White Army , immediately went to war against the Bolsheviks' Red Army , in a series of battles that would become known as the Russian Civil War.  The Civil War began in early 1918 with domestic anti-Bolshevik forces confronting the nascent Red Army. In autumn of 1918 Allied countries needed to block German access to Russian supplies. They sent troops to support the "Whites" with supplies of weapons, ammunition and logistic equipment being sent from the main Western countries but this was not at all coordinated. Germany did not participate in the civil war as it surrendered to the Allies.

[ 42 ] The provisional government with its second and third coalition was led by a right wing fraction of the Socialist-Revolutionary party, SR. This non-elected provisional government faced the revolutionary situation and the growing mood against the war by avoiding elections to the state Duma. However, the October revolution forced the political parties behind the newly dissolved provisional government to move and move fast for immediate elections. All happened so fast that the left SR fraction did not have time to reach out and be represented in ballots of the SR party which was part of the coalition in the provisional government. This non-elected government supported continuation of the war on the side of the allied forces. The elections to the State Duma 25 November 1917 therefore did not mirror the true political situation among peasants even if we don't know how the outcome would be if the anti-war left SR fraction had a fair chance to challenge the party leaders. In the elections, the Bolshevik party received 25% of the votes and the Socialist-Revolutionaries as much as 58%. It is possible the left SR had a good chance to reach more than 25% of the votes and thereby legitimate the October revolution but we can only guess.

After the majority of the petrograd Soviet passed into the hands of the Bolsheviks, [Trotsky] was elected its chairman and in that position organized and led the insurrection of October 25.

Lenin on the organization of the October Revolution, Vol.XIV of the Collected Works .

[ 43 ] Lenin did not believe that a socialist revolution necessarily presupposed a fully developed capitalist economy. A semi-capitalist country would suffice and Russia had a working class base of 5% of the population.

[ 44 ] Though Lenin was the leader of the Bolshevik Party, it has been argued that since Lenin was not present during the actual takeover of the Winter Palace, it was really Trotsky's organization and direction that led the revolution, merely spurred by the motivation Lenin instigated within his party. Bolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky , Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky agreed that Lenin’s influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky’s, not to Lenin’s plan.

[ 45 ] Critics on the Right have long argued that the financial and logistical assistance of German intelligence via their key agent, Alexander Parvus was a key component as well, though historians are divided, since there is little evidence supporting that claim.

[ 46 ] The dissolution of the Constituent Assembly on 6 January 1918. The Tauride Palace is locked and guarded by Trotsky , Sverdlov , Zinoviev and Lashevich .

Soviet membership was initially freely elected, but many members of the Socialist Revolutionary Party , anarchists, and other leftists created opposition to the Bolsheviks through the Soviets themselves. The elections to the Russian Constituent Assembly took place 25 November 1917. The Bolsheviks gained 25% of the vote. When it became clear that the Bolsheviks had little support outside of the industrialized areas of Saint Petersburg and Moscow, they simply barred non-Bolsheviks from membership in the Soviets. The Bolsheviks dissolved the Constituent Assembly in January 1918.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Russian Civil War Main articles: Russian Civil War and Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Part of a series on Anti-communism History Conflicts and military engagements Revolutions and violence after 1917 Russia White movement Basmachi Finland Whites Hungary Germany Chinese Civil War Spanish Civil War Bando nacional World War II and aftermath Axis powers Anti-Comintern Pact Collaboration Eastern Front Anti-Soviet insurgencies Yugoslav Front Chetniks Post-war period in Germany Resistance in Poland (1944–1989) Greek Civil War Reverse Course Malayan Emergency Korean War Indochina wars Vietnam War Central American crisis New Order Afghan conflict Afghan mujahideen Operation Cyclone Revolutions of 1989 Repression and mass killings White Terror Russia Pogroms Hungary China Shanghai Spain Greece Taiwan Finnish Civil War prison camps First Red Scare Palmer Raids The Holocaust Bodo League massacre Guatemalan genocide Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 Operation Condor 1981–1982 Iran Massacres East Timor genocide Miscellaneous McCarthyism Decommunization Russia Ukraine Ideologies Anti-imperialism Anti-Marxism Anti-Stalinist Left Liberal socialism Anti-Sovietism Christian democracy Class collaboration Conservatism Authoritarian Neo- Fascism Nazism Neo- Para- Post- Islamism Liberalism Classical Cold War Neo- Personal ideologies Chiangism Fujimorism Khomeinism Metaxism Orthodox Peronism Pinochetism Reaganism Thatcherism Nationalisms Afghan Chinese French Révolution nationale Hong Kong Hungarian Szeged Idea Indonesian Pancasila Korean Ilminism Polish Romanian Russian Spanish National Catholicism Taiwanese Huadu Ukrainian Natsdems Vietnamese Person Dignity Theory Prominent figures Adenauer Antonescu Bandera Batista Berlusconi Boris III Bordaberry Buckley Bush Castelo Branco Chiang Churchill Cohn Dollfuss Dulles Duvalier (François) Duvalier (Jean-Claude) Eisenhower Franco Fujimori Goldwater Habre Habyarimana Hácha Hitler Hoover Horthy John Paul II Johnson Kennedy Khomeini Kishi Kohl Kolchak Lee K. Y.

MacArthur Mannerheim Marcos McCarthy Médici Metaxas Mihailović Milei Montt Mulroney Mussolini Nedić Ngo Nicholas II Nol Pahlavi II Palmer Papadopoulos Park Pavelić Pétain Piłsudski Pinochet Pius XII Poroshenko Reagan Rhee Sann Saakashvili Salazar Selassie Smith Stroessner Suharto Thanom Thatcher Tiso Tunku Vargas (earlier) Videla Wałęsa Welch Yeltsin Political parties Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Party (United States) Democratic Progressive Party Democratic Republican Party (South Korea) FET y de las JONS Golkar Greater Japan Patriotic Party Independent Anti-Communist Party of the West Kataeb Party Khmer Serei Kuomintang (historical, now factions) Law and Justice Liberal Democratic Party (Japan) Liberal Party Brazil South Korea Liberty Korea Party Nazi Party National Fascist Party Republican Party Chile United States Social Republican Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Anti-Communist Action Argentine Anticommunist Alliance CIA activities Indonesia Italy Japan Vietnam Contras Falun Gong The Epoch Times Freikorps Iron Front John Birch Society National Revolutionary Army NATO Pancasila Youth Propaganda Due Ukrainian Insurgent Army Unification Church Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation World League for Freedom and Democracy By region China Central and Eastern Europe Japan Tenkō Uyoku dantai Taiwan " Green Terror " Laws and systems Anti-Socialist Laws Peace Preservation Law Temporary Provisions (Taiwan) National Security Act (South Korea) Decree against Communism Communist Control Act of 1954 Ukrainian decommunization laws Anti-Infiltration Act Crucial Communism Teaching Act See also Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Lavender Scare Anti-national sentiments Chinese PRC Jewish Judeo-Bolshevism North Korean Soviet Union Russian Anti anti-communism Capitalism Cold War Post Second Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism Totalitarianism Western Bloc " Free World " Pro-Americanism Pro-ROC sentiment " Free China " Red Scare Red-baiting U.S. policy toward authoritarian governments Communism portal Politics portal v t e American, British, and Japanese Troops parade through Vladivostok in armed support to the White Army.

The October Revolution led by the Bolsheviks was not recognized by a variety of social and political groups, including army officers and cossacks , the "bourgeoisie" and the landowners, and political groups ranging from the far Right to the moderate socialists, the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, who opposed the drastic restructuring championed by the Bolsheviks following the collapse of the Provisional Government.

[ 49 ] The Russian Civil War , which broke out in the months following the revolution, resulted in the deaths and suffering of millions of people regardless of their political orientation. The war was fought mainly between the Red Army ("Reds"), consisting of the Bolsheviks and the supporters of the Soviets, and the White movement ("Whites"), and their loosely allied " White Armies " [ 50 ] led mainly by the right-leaning and conservative [ 51 ] officers of the Russian Empire and the Cossacks and supported by the classes which lost their power and privileges with the Bolshevik revolution; the Civil War also included armed conflicts with nationalist movements for independence , armed struggle and terrorism by anti-Bolshevik socialists and anarchists, and uprisings of the peasants who organized themselves into the " Green armies ". Although the views within the Russian Whites ranged from monarchism to socialism, [ 50 ] the Whites generally preferred the Russian Empire to the revolution, [ 52 ] and they were commonly seen as restorers of the old order as they fought the movements of the non-Russian nationalities in favour of "indivisible Russia" and opposed the land reform and defended the property rights of the upper classes; the socialists who opposed both factions saw the rule of the Whites (a military dictatorship headed by Alexander Kolchak [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] and by the commanders of the White forces) as a right-wing dictatorship . The Russian Whites had backing from other countries such as the United Kingdom , France , the United States , and Japan , while the Reds possessed internal support, proving to be much more effective. Though the Allied nations, using external interference, provided substantial military aid to the Whites, they were ultimately defeated.

[ 50 ] The Bolsheviks firstly assumed power in Petrograd, expanding their rule outwards. They eventually reached the Easterly Siberian Russian coast in Vladivostok , four years after the war began, an occupation that is believed to have ended all significant military campaigns in the nation. Less than one year later, the last area controlled by the White Army, the Ayano-Maysky District , directly to the north of the Krai containing Vladivostok, was given up when General Anatoly Pepelyayev capitulated in 1923.

Several revolts were initiated against the Bolsheviks and their army near the end of the war, notably the Kronstadt Rebellion . This was a naval mutiny engineered by Soviet Baltic sailors, former Red Army soldiers, and the people of Kronstadt . This armed uprising was fought against the antagonizing Bolshevik economic policies that farmers were subjected to, including seizures of grain crops by the Communists.

[ 56 ] This all amounted to large-scale discontent. When delegates representing the Kronstadt sailors arrived at Petrograd for negotiations, they raised 15 demands primarily pertaining to the Russian right to freedom.

[ 57 ] The Government firmly denounced the rebellions and labelled the requests as a reminder of the Social Revolutionaries, a political party that was popular among Soviets before Lenin, but refused to cooperate with the Bolshevik Army. The Government then responded with an armed suppression of these revolts and suffered ten thousand casualties before entering the city of Kronstadt.

[ 58 ] This ended the rebellions fairly quickly, causing many of the rebels to flee seeking political exile.

[ 59 ] During the Civil War, Nestor Makhno led a Ukrainian anarchist movement. Makhno's Insurgent Army allied to the Bolsheviks thrice, with one of the powers ending the alliance each time. However, a Bolshevik force under Mikhail Frunze destroyed the Makhnovshchina , when the Makhnovists refused to merge into the Red Army . In addition, the so-called " Green Army " (peasants defending their property against the opposing forces) played a secondary role in the war, mainly in Ukraine.

Revolutionary tribunals Revolutionary tribunals were present during both the Revolution and the Civil War, intended for the purpose of combatting forces of counter-revolution. At the Civil War's zenith, it is reported that upwards of 200,000 cases were investigated by approximately 200 tribunals.

[ 60 ] These tribunals established themselves more so from the Cheka as a more moderate force that acted under the banner of revolutionary justice, rather than a utilizer of strict brute force as the former did. However, these tribunals did come with their own set of inefficiencies, such as responding to cases in a matter of months and not having a concrete definition of " counter-revolution " that was determined on a case-by-case basis.

[ 60 ] The "Decree on Revolutionary Tribunals" used by the People's Commissar of Justice, states in article 2 that "In fixing the penalty, the Revolutionary Tribunal shall be guided by the circumstances of the case and the dictates of the revolutionary conscience." [ 61 ] Revolutionary tribunals ultimately demonstrated that a form of justice was still prevalent in Russian society where the Russian Provisional Government failed. This, in part, triggered the political transition of the October Revolution and the Civil War that followed in its aftermath.

Murder of the imperial family Main article: Murder of the Romanov family Murder of the Romanov family, Le Petit Journal The Bolsheviks murdered the Tsar and his family on 16 July 1918.

[ 62 ] In early March 1917, the Provisional Government had placed Nicholas and his family under house arrest in the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo , 24 kilometres (15 mi) south of Petrograd. But in August 1917, they evacuated the Romanovs to Tobolsk in the Urals to protect them from the rising tide of revolution. After the Bolsheviks came to power in October 1917, the conditions of their imprisonment grew stricter and talk of putting Nicholas on trial increased. In April and May 1918, the looming civil war led the Bolsheviks to move the family to the stronghold of Yekaterinburg .

During the early morning of 16 July, Nicholas, Alexandra, their children, their physician, and several servants were taken into the basement and shot. According to Edvard Radzinsky and Dmitrii Volkogonov , the order came directly from Lenin and Yakov Sverdlov in Moscow. However, this claim has never been confirmed. The murder may have been carried out on the initiative of local Bolshevik officials, or it may have been an option pre-approved in Moscow as White troops were rapidly approaching Yekaterinburg. Radzinsky noted that Lenin's bodyguard personally delivered the telegram ordering the killing and that he was ordered to destroy the evidence.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Symbolism Soviet painting Vladimir Lenin , by Isaac Brodsky The Russian Revolution became the site for many instances of symbolism , both physical and non-physical.

Communist symbolism is perhaps the most notable of this time period, such as the debut of the iconic hammer and sickle as a representation of the October Revolution in 1917, eventually becoming the official symbol of the USSR in 1924, and later the symbol of Communism as a whole. Although the Bolsheviks did not have extensive political experience, their portrayal of the revolution itself as both a political and symbolic order resulted in Communism's portrayal as a messianic faith, formally known as communist messianism.

[ 65 ] Portrayals of notable revolutionary figures such as Lenin were done in iconographic methods, equating them similarly to religious figures, though religion itself was banned in the USSR and groups such as the Russian Orthodox Church were persecuted.

[ 65 ] The revolution and the world Main article: Revolutions of 1917–1923 v t e Revolutions of 1917–1923 1917 Russian Revolution Pistolerismo French Army mutinies Potato riots Conscription disturbance at the Brisbane School of Arts Australian general strike Étaples mutiny Brazil strike movement 1918 Austro-Hungarian strike German strike of January Finnish Civil War Cattaro mutiny Arab Revolt Rice riots British police strikes Canadian Labour Revolt Aster Revolution German Revolution Revolutions and interventions in Hungary Red Week Swiss general strike 1918 protest in Zagreb Darwin rebellion Greater Poland uprising 1919 Christmas Uprising Biennio Rosso Tragic Week Southampton mutiny Irish War of Independence 1919 Egyptian Revolution First Red Scare La Canadenca strike Kinmel Park mutiny March First Movement Black Sea mutiny May Fourth Movement Alawite revolt of 1919 Turkish War of Independence Sette Giugno Epsom riot Luton Peace Day Riots 1920 Franco-Syrian War Kapp Putsch Ruhr uprising Iraqi Revolt Patagonia Rebelde Husino rebellion 1921 Mongolian Revolution March Action Charles IV of Hungary's attempts to retake the throne Uprising in West Hungary Rand Rebellion 1922 Second Italo-Senussi War Irish Civil War Tenente revolts 11 September 1922 Revolution 1923 1923 Bulgarian coup d'état September Uprising Küstrin Putsch German October Beer Hall Putsch Hamburg Uprising Kraków riot The revolution ultimately led to the establishment of the future Soviet Union as an ideocracy ; however, the establishment of such a state came as an ideological paradox , as Marx's ideals of how a socialist state ought to be created were based on the formation being natural and not artificially incited (i.e. by means of revolution).

[ 66 ] Leon Trotsky said that the goal of socialism in Russia would not be realized without the success of the world revolution . A revolutionary wave caused by the Russian Revolution lasted until 1923, but despite initial hopes for success in the German Revolution of 1918–19 , the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic , and others like it, only the Mongolian Revolution of 1921 saw a Marxist movement at the time succeed in keeping power in its hands.

This issue is subject to conflicting views on communist history by various Marxist groups and parties.

Joseph Stalin later rejected this concept, stating that socialism was possible in one country .The confusion regarding Stalin's position on the issue stems from the fact that, after Lenin's death in 1924, he successfully used Lenin's argument – the argument that socialism's success needs the support of workers of other countries in order to happen – to defeat his competitors within the party by accusing them of betraying Lenin and, therefore, the ideals of the October Revolution.

The Russian Revolution was perceived as a rupture with imperialism for various civil rights and decolonization struggles and providing a space for oppressed groups across the world. This was given further credence with the Soviet Union supporting many anti-colonial third world movements with financial funds against European colonial powers.

[ 67 ] Historiography Main article: October Revolution § Historiography Few events in historical research have been as conditioned by political influences as the October Revolution. The historiography of the Revolution generally divides into three schools of thought: the Soviet-Marxist ( Marxist-Leninist ) view, the Western ' totalitarian ' view, and the 'revisionist' view.

[ 68 ] The 'totalitarian' historians are also referred to as 'traditionalists' and 'Cold War historians' for relying on interpretations rooted in the early years of the Cold War and described as a conservative direction; the Western Revisionists have lacked a full-fledged doctrine or philosophy of history, but were distinguished in the 1960s-1970s by their criticism of the 'traditionalist' bias towards the USSR and the left in general and their focus on "history from below" and social perspectives. While the 'totalitarian' historians described the Bolshevik revolution as a coup carried out by a minority which turned Russia into a totalitarian dictatorship, the 'revisionists' opposed such description and stressed the genuinely 'popular' nature of the Revolution. Since the Revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Western-Totalitarian view has again become dominant and the Soviet-Marxist view has practically vanished in mainstream political analysis. The 'revisionists' achieved some success in challenging the 'traditionalists' and became accepted in academic circles, while 'totalitarian' historians retained popularity and influence in politics and public spheres.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Following the death of Vladimir Lenin, the Bolshevik government was thrown into a crisis. Lenin failed to designate who his successor would be or how they would be chosen. A power struggle broke out in the party between Leon Trotsky and his enemies. Trotsky was defeated by the anti-Trotsky bloc by the mid-1920s and his hopes for party leadership were dashed. Among Trotsky's opponents, Joseph Stalin would rise to assume unchallenged party leadership by 1928. In 1927, Trotsky was expelled from the party and in 1929 he lost his citizenship and was sent into exile. While in exile he began honing his own interpretation of Marxism called Trotskyism . The schism between Trotsky and Stalin is the focal point where the Revisionist view comes into existence. Trotsky traveled across the world denouncing Stalin and the Soviet Union under his leadership. He specifically focused his criticism on Stalin's doctrine, Socialism in One Country , claiming that it was incongruent with the ideology of the revolution.

[ 72 ] Eventually, Trotsky settled in Mexico City and founded a base of operations for him and his supporters.

[ 73 ] In 1937 at the height of the Great Purge , he published The Revolution Betrayed which outlined his ideological contradictions with Stalin, and how Stalin was guilty of subverting and debasing the 1917 revolution. He continued to vocally criticize Stalin and Stalinism until his assassination in 1940 on Stalin's orders.

The Soviet-Marxist interpretation is the belief that the Russian Revolution under the Bolsheviks was a proud and glorious effort of the working class which saw the removal of the Tsar, nobility, and capitalists from positions of power. The Bolsheviks and later the Communist Party took the first steps in liberating the proletariat and building a workers' state that practiced equality. Outside of Eastern Europe this view was heavily criticized as following the death of Lenin the Soviet Union became more authoritarian. Even though the Soviet Union no longer exists, the Soviet-Marxist view is still used as an interpretation in academia today. Both academics and Soviet supporters argue this view is supported by several events. First, the RSFSR made substantial advances to women's rights . It was the first country to decriminalize abortion and allowed women to be educated, which was forbidden under the Tsar.

[ 74 ] Furthermore, the RSFSR decriminalized homosexuality between consenting adults, which was seen as radical for the time period.

[ 75 ] The Bolshevik government also actively recruited working class citizens into positions of party leadership, thereby ensuring the proletariat was represented in policymaking.

[ 76 ] One of the most important aspects to this view was the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War.

[ 77 ] On paper, [ tone ] the Bolsheviks should have been defeated in part due to the broad international support their enemies were receiving.

Britain , France , the United States , Japan , and other countries sent aid to the White Army and expedition forces against the Bolsheviks.

[ 78 ] The Bolsheviks were further at a disadvantage due to factors such as: the small land area under their control, lack of professional officers, and supply shortages. In spite of this, the Red Army prevailed. The Red Army unlike many White factions maintained a high morale among their troops and civilians throughout the duration of the civil war.

[ 79 ] This was in part due to their skillful use of propaganda. Bolshevik propaganda portrayed the Red Army as liberators and stewards of the poor and downtrodden.

[ 80 ] Bolshevik support was further elevated by Lenin's initiatives to distribute land to the peasantry, and ending the war with Germany. During the civil war, the Bolsheviks were able to raise an army numbering around five million active soldiers. Domestic support and patriotism played a decisive role in the Russian Civil War. By 1923 the Bolsheviks had controlled the last of the White Army holdouts and the Russian Civil War concluded with a Bolshevik victory. This victory ultimately influenced how the Soviet Union interpreted its own ideology and the October Revolution itself. Starting in 1919, the Soviets would commemorate the event with a military parade and a public holiday. This tradition lasted up until the collapse of the Soviet Union. As time went on the Soviet-Marxist interpretation evolved with an " anti-Stalinist " version of it. This subsection attempts to draw a distinction between the "Lenin period" (1917–24) and the "Stalin period" (1928–53).

[ 81 ] Nikita Khrushchev , Stalin's successor, argued that Stalin's regime differed greatly from the leadership of Lenin in his " Secret Speech ", delivered in 1956. He was critical of the cult of the individual which was constructed around Stalin whereas Lenin stressed "the role of the people as the creator of history".

[ 82 ] He also emphasized that Lenin favored a collective leadership which relied on personal persuasion and recommended the removal of Stalin from the position of General Secretary. Khrushchev contrasted this with the "despotism" of Stalin which require absolute submission to his position and also highlighted that many of the people who were later annihilated as "enemies of the party", "had worked with Lenin during his life".

[ 82 ] He also contrasted the "severe methods" used by Lenin in the "most necessary cases" as a "struggle for survival" during the Civil War with the extreme methods and mass repressions used by Stalin even when the Revolution was "already victorious".

[ 82 ] Views from the west were mixed. Socialists and labor organizations tended to support the October Revolution and the Bolshevik seizure of power. On the other hand, western governments were mortified.

[ 83 ] Western leaders, and later some academics concluded that the Russian Revolution only replaced one form of tyranny (Tsarism), with another (communism).

[ 84 ] Initially, the Bolsheviks were tolerant of opposing political factions. Upon seizing state power, they organized a parliament, the Russian Constituent Assembly. On 25 November, an election was held. Despite the Bolsheviks being the party that overthrew the Provisional Government and organizing the assembly, they lost the election. Rather than govern as a coalition, the Bolsheviks banned all political opposition. Historians point to this as the start of communist authoritarianism.

[ 47 ] Conservative historian Robert Service states, "he (Lenin) aided the foundations of dictatorship and lawlessness. He had consolidated the principle of state penetration of the whole society, its economy and its culture. Lenin had practiced terror and advocated revolutionary amoralism." [ 85 ] Lenin allowed for certain disagreement and debate but only within the highest organs of the Bolshevik party, and practicing democratic centralism . The RSFSR and later the Soviet Union continued to practice political repression until its dissolution in 1991.

Trotskyist theoreticians have disputed the view that a one-party state was a natural outgrowth of the Bolsheviks' actions.

[ 86 ] George Novack stressed the initial efforts by the Bolsheviks to form a government with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries and bring other parties such as the Mensheviks into political legality.

[ 87 ] Tony Cliff argued the Bolshevik–Left Socialist Revolutionary coalition government dissolved the Constituent Assembly due to a number of reasons. They cited the outdated voter-rolls which did not acknowledge the split among the Socialist Revolutionary party and the assemblies conflict with the Congress of the Soviets as an alternative democratic structure.

[ 88 ] Trotskyist historian Vadim Rogovin believed Stalinism had "discredited the idea of socialism in the eyes of millions of people throughout the world". Rogovin also argued that the Left Opposition , led by Leon Trotsky, was a political movement "which offered a real alternative to Stalinism, and that to crush this movement was the primary function of the Stalinist terror".

[ 89 ] Cultural portrayal Literature The Twelve (1918) by the Symbolist poet Aleksandr Blok and Mystery-Bouffe (1918) and 150 000 000 by the Futurist poet Vladimir Mayakovsky were among the first poetic responses to the Revolution.

The White Guard by Mikhail Bulgakov (1925), partially autobiographical novel, portraying the life of one family torn apart by uncertainty of the Civil War times; his short novel Heart of a Dog (1925) has been interpreted as a satirical allegory of the Revolution.

The Life of Klim Samgin (1927–1936) by Maxim Gorky , a novel with a controversial reputation sometimes described as an example of Modernist literature, portrays the decline of Russian intelligentsia from the early 1870s to the Revolution as seen by a middle class intellectual during the course of his life.

Chevengur (1929) by Andrei Platonov depicts the Revolution and the Civil War in a grotesque way in a form of a Modernist parable, [ 90 ] as a struggle between the Utopia and the Dystopia that confounds the both, and as associated by the motifs of death and apocalypse.

[ 91 ] Mikhail Sholokhov 's novel Quiet Flows the Don (1928–1940) describes the lives of Don Cossacks during the World War I, the Revolution, and the Civil War.

George Orwell 's classic novella Animal Farm (1945) is an allegory of the Russian Revolution and its aftermath. It describes the dictator Joseph Stalin as a big Berkshire boar named, "Napoleon". Trotsky is represented by a pig called Snowball who is a brilliant talker and makes magnificent speeches. However, Napoleon overthrows Snowball as Stalin overthrew Trotsky and Napoleon takes over the farm the animals live on. Napoleon becomes a tyrant and uses force and propaganda to oppress the animals, while culturally teaching them that they are free.

[ 92 ] Doctor Zhivago (1957) by Boris Pasternak describes the fate of Russian intelligentsia ; the events take place between the Revolution of 1905 and World War II.

The Red Wheel (1984–1991) by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn , a cycle of novels that describes the fall of the Russian Empire and the establishment of the Soviet Union.

Film The Russian Revolution has been portrayed in or served as backdrop for many films. Among them, in order of release date: [ 93 ] The End of Saint Petersburg . 1927. Directed by Vsevolod Pudovkin and Mikhail Doller , USSR October: Ten Days That Shook the World . 1927. Directed by Sergei Eisenstein and Grigori Aleksandrov . Soviet Union. Black and qhite. Silent.

Scarlet Dawn , a 1932 Pre-Code American romantic drama starring Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.

and Nancy Carroll caught up in the fallout of the Russian Revolution.

Knight Without Armour . 1937. A British historical drama starring Marlene Dietrich and Robert Donat , with Dietrich as an imperiled aristocrat on the eve of the Russian Revolution.

Lenin in 1918 . 1939. Directed by Mikhail Romm , E. Aron, and I. Simkov. Historical-revolutionary film about Lenin's activities in the first years of Soviet power.

Doctor Zhivago . 1965. A drama-romance-war film directed by David Lean , filmed in Europe with a largely European cast, loosely based on the famous novel of the same name by Boris Pasternak .

Reds . 1981. Directed by Warren Beatty , it is based on the book Ten Days that Shook the World .

Anastasia . 1997. An American animated feature, directed by Don Bluth and Gary Goldman .

See also Socialism portal Communism portal Russia portal Soviet Union portal Index of articles related to the Russian Revolution and Civil War April Crisis Foreign relations of the Soviet Union Iranian Revolution Arthur Ransome Paris Commune Preference falsification Ten Days That Shook the World Explanatory footnotes ^ For recent research on peasants, see Worobec, Christine (1955).

Peasant Russia: Family and Community in the Post Emancipation Period . Princeton University Press.

; Frank, Stephen P.; Steinberg, Mark D., eds. (1994).

Cultures in Flux . Princeton University Press.

; Engel, Barbara Alpern (1994).

Between the Fields and the City: Women, Work, and Family in Russia, 1861–1914 . Cambridge.

; Burds, Jeffrey (1998).

Peasant Dreams and Market Politics . Pittsburgh.

; Frank, Stephen (1999).

Crime, Cultural Conflict and Justice in Rural Russia, 1856–1914 . University of California at Berkeley Press.

.

^ For research on Russian workers, see especially Zelnik, Reginald (1971).

Labor and Society in Tsarist Russia: The Factory Workers of St. Petersburg, 1855–1870 . Stanford University Press.

; Bonnell, Victoria (1983).

Roots of Rebellion: Workers' Politics and Organizations in St. Petersburg and Moscow, 1900–1914 . University of California at Berkeley Press.

^ a b See, especially, Lieven, Dominic (1993).

Nicholas II: Emperor of all the Russias . London.

; Verner, Andrew (1990).

The Crisis of the Russian Autocracy: Nicholas II and the 1905 Revolution . Princeton University Press.

; Steinberg, Mark; Khrustalev, Vladimir (1995).

The Fall of the Romanovs: Political Dreams and Personal Struggles in a Time of Revolution . New Haven: Yale University Press.

; Wortman, Richard (2000).

Scenarios of Power . Vol. 2. Princeton University Press.

References ^ Petrone, Karen (8 October 2017).

"David R. Stone, The Russian Army in the Great War: The Eastern Front 1914–1917" .

The Journal of Power Institutions in Post-Soviet Societies (18).

doi : 10.4000/pipss.4270 .

ISSN 1769-7069 .

^ "Food and Nutrition (Russian Empire) | International Encyclopedia of the First World War (WW1)" .

1914-1918-Online . Retrieved 14 January 2022 .

^ Figes 1996 , p. 370.

^ Wood 2004 , p. 18.

^ a b Perfect; Ryan; Sweeny (2016).

Reinventing Russia . Collingwood: History Teachers Association of Victoria.

ISBN 978-1-8755-8505-2 .

^ Wood 2004 , p. 24.

^ a b c Wood 2004 , p. 25.

^ Wood 2004 , p. 26.

^ "The Russian Revolution | Boundless World History" .

courses.lumenlearning.com . Retrieved 3 March 2021 .

^ Carmichael, Joel .

A short history of the Russian Revolution . pp.

23– 24.

^ Ascher, Abraham.

The Revolution of 1905: A Short History . p. 6.

^ Figes 1996 .

^ Wildman, Allan (1980).

The End of the Russian Imperial Army . Vol. 1. Princeton University Press. pp.

76– 80.

^ Hubertus, Jahn (1995).

Patriotic Culture in Russia During World War I . Ithaca College Press.

^ Figes 1996 , pp. 257–258.

^ Wildman 1980 , pp. 85–89, 99–105, 106 (quotation).

^ "Doklad petrogradskogo okhrannogo otdeleniia osobomu otdelu departamenta politsii" ["Report of the Petrograd Okhrana to the Special Department of the Department of the Police"], October 1916, Krasnyi arkhiv 17 (1926), 4–35 (quotation 4).

^ Service 2005 , p. 32.

^ When women set Russia ablaze , Fifth International 11 July 2007.

^ Burdzhalov, Ėduard Nikolaevich (1987).

Russia's second revolution: the February 1917 uprising in Petrograd . Indiana University Press.

^ a b c Beckett 2007 , p. 523.

^ Wade 2017 , pp. 40–43.

^ Browder & Kerensky 1961 , p. 116.

^ Tames 1972 .

^ Malone 2004 , p. 91.

^ Service 2005 , p. 34.

^ Orlovsky, Daniel (1997). "Corporatism or democracy: the Russian Provisional Government of 1917".

Soviet and Post-Soviet Review .

24 (1): 15– 25.

doi : 10.1163/187633297X00031 .

^ Sukhanov, N. N. (1955) [1922]. Carmichael, Joel (ed.).

The Russian Revolution: A Personal Record . Translated by Carmichael, Joel. originally published in Russian. Oxford University Press. pp.

101– 108.

^ Hasegawa 2018 .

^ Smele 2017 , p. 27.

^ Lenin, Vladimir I.

(1964) [1917]. Apresyan, Stephen (ed.).

One of the Fundamental Questions of the Revolution (in Russian). Vol. 25. Jim Riordan (4th ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp.

370– 77.

^ a b c Cohen, Stephen (1980).

Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution: A Political Biography 1888–1938 . London: Oxford University Press. p. 46.

^ Lenin, Vladimir I.

(1974). "State and Revolution".

Collected Works of Lenin . Vol. 25. Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp.

3395– 3487.

^ Lenin, Vladimir I.

(1972). "The Bolsheviks Must Assume Power".

Collected Works of Lenin . Vol. 26. Moscow: Progress Publishers. p. 21.

^ Resis, Albert (22 August 2024).

"Leadership in the Russian Revolution of Vladimir Lenin" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Britannica . Retrieved 25 August 2024 .

^ Head, Michael (2007).

Evgeny Pashukanis: A Critical Reappraisal . Routledge. pp.

1– 288.

ISBN 978-1-1353-0787-5 .

^ Shukman 1994 , p.

21 .

^ Daniels, Robert V. (1967).

Red October: The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 . Macmillan.

^ Shukman 1994 , p.

343 .

^ Bergman, Jay (2019).

The French Revolutionary Tradition in Russian and Soviet Politics, Political Thought, and Culture .

Oxford University Press . p. 224.

ISBN 978-0-1988-4270-5 .

^ McMeekin, Sean (30 May 2017).

The Russian Revolution: A New History .

Basic Books .

ISBN 978-0-4650-9497-4 .

^ "Allied War in Russia, 1918–22" .

Critical Enquiry .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1962).

The Stalin School of Falsification . Pioneer Publishers. p. 12.

^ Lane, David (2021).

"Lenin's Theory of Socialist Revolution" .

Critical Sociology .

47 (3): 455–473 [462].

doi : 10.1177/0896920520958451 .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (5 January 2015).

The Prophet: The Life of Leon Trotsky . Verso Books. p. 1283.

ISBN 978-1-7816-8721-5 .

^ Isaac Deutscher The Prophet Armed ^ a b Dando 1966 , pp. 314–319.

^ Rabinowitch, Alexander (2008).

The Bolsheviks in power: the first year of Soviet rule in Petrograd .

Indiana University Press .

^ article "Civil War and military intervention in Russia 1918–20", Big Soviet Encyclopedia, third edition (30 volumes), 1969–78 ^ a b c Riasanovsky & Steinberg 2011 .

^ Kenez, Peter (1980). "The Ideology of the White Movement".

Soviet Studies .

32 (32): 58– 83.

doi : 10.1080/09668138008411280 .

^ Peter Kenez (2008).

Red Advance, White Defeat: Civil War in South Russia 1919–1920 . New Acdemia+ORM.

ISBN 978-1-9558-3517-6 .

^ Behind the Front Lines of the Civil War: Political Parties and Social Movements in Russia, 1918-1922 . Princeton University Press. 8 March 2015.

ISBN 978-1-4008-7286-2 .

^ The Russian Civil War, 1918–1921: An Operational-Strategic Sketch of the Red Army's Combat Operations . Casemate Academic. 30 June 2020.

ISBN 978-1-9527-1505-1 .

^ International Encyclopedia of Military History . Routledge. December 2004.

ISBN 978-1-1359-5034-7 .

^ "The Kronstadt Mutiny notes on Figes 1996 ^ Petrograd on the Eve of Kronstadt rising 1921 Archived 15 July 2012 at archive.today . Flag.blackened.net (10 March 1921). Retrieved on 26 July 2013.

^ Figes 1996 , p. 767.

^ Wessmann, Erkki.

Kronstadtin kapina 1921 ja sen perilliset Suomessa [ Kronstadt Rebellion 1921 and Its Descendants in Finland ] (in Finnish).

^ a b Rendle, Matthew (25 November 2016). "Quantifying Counter-Revolution: Legal Statistics and Revolutionary Justice during Russia's Civil War, 1917–1922".

Europe-Asia Studies .

68 (10): 1672– 1692.

doi : 10.1080/09668136.2016.1255310 .

hdl : 10871/24150 .

ISSN 0966-8136 .

S2CID 152131615 .

^ People's Commissar of Justice.

"Decree on Revolutionary Tribunals" .

Marxists.org . Retrieved 26 November 2018 .

^ Massie, Robert K.

(2012).

The Romanovs: The Final Chapter . Random House. pp.

3–24 .

ISBN 978-0-3078-7386-6 .

^ Volkogonov, Dmitrii (1994).

Lenin: A New Biography (in Russian). Translated by Shukman, Harold. New York: Free Press.

ISBN 978-0-0073-9267-4 .

OL 258246W .

^ Radzinsky, Edvard (1993).

The Last Tsar: The Life And Death Of Nicholas II . Translated by Schwartz, Marian. New York: Knopf.

ISBN 0-3854-2371-3 .

OL 16232957W .

^ a b Wydra, Harald (September 2012). "The Power of Symbols—Communism and Beyond".

International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society .

25 ( 1– 3): 49– 69.

doi : 10.1007/s10767-011-9116-x .

ISSN 0891-4486 .

S2CID 145251624 .

^ Qualls, Karl D. (2003).

"The Russian Revolutions: The Impact and Limitations of Western Influence" . Dickinson College Faculty Publications | Paper 8. (2) . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ Thorpe, Charles (28 February 2022).

Sociology in Post-Normal Times . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-1-7936-2598-4 .

^ Critical companion to the Russian Revolution , pp. 5–7.

^ Critical companion to the Russian Revolution , pp. 3–17.

^ Mawdsley, Evan (2011).

The Russian Civil War . Birlinn.

ISBN 9780857901231 .

^ Suny 2017 .

^ Dawsey, Jason (12 September 2018).

"Trotsky's Struggle against Stalin" .

The National WWII Museum | New Orleans . Retrieved 17 March 2022 .

^ McNeal, Robert H. (1961).

"Trotsky's Interpretation of Stalin" .

Canadian Slavonic Papers / Revue Canadienne des Slavistes .

5 : 87– 97.

doi : 10.1080/00085006.1961.11417867 .

ISSN 0008-5006 .

JSTOR 40867583 .

^ McElvanney, Katie.

"Women and the Russian Revolution" .

www.bl.uk . British Library. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 October 2022 .

^ Merrick, Jeffrey (2003).

"Review of Homosexual Desire in Revolutionary Russia: The Regulation of Sexual and Gender Dissent" .

Journal of Social History .

36 (4): 1089– 1091.

doi : 10.1353/jsh.2003.0104 .

ISSN 0022-4529 .

JSTOR 3790378 .

S2CID 142653153 .

^ Fitzpatrick, Sheila (1988).

"The Bolsheviks' Dilemma: Class, Culture, and Politics in the Early Soviet Years" .

Slavic Review .

47 (4): 599– 613.

doi : 10.2307/2498180 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 2498180 .

S2CID 155792014 .

^ "The Russian Civil War » HI 446 Revolutionary Russia | Boston University" .

sites.bu.edu . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Carley, Michael Jabara (1989). Kettle, Michael; Luckett, Richard; Got'e, Iurii Vladimirovich; Emmons, Terence; Raleigh, Donald J. (eds.).

"Allied Intervention and the Russian Civil War, 1917–1922" .

The International History Review .

11 (4): 689– 700.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.1989.9640530 .

ISSN 0707-5332 .

JSTOR 40106089 .

^ "The Red Army" .

Russian Revolution . 16 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 .

^ "Russian Revolution: Ten propaganda posters from 1917" .

BBC News . 5 November 2017 . Retrieved 21 March 2022 .

^ Francis, Norbert (2017).

"Revolution in Russia and China: 100 Years" (PDF) .

International Journal of Russian Studies : 130– 143.

ISSN 2158-7051 .

^ a b c Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeevich (1956).

The Crimes Of The Stalin Era, Special Report To The 20th Congress Of The Communist Party Of The Soviet Union . pp.

1– 65.

^ Johnstone, Diana (1 July 2017).

"The Western Left and the Russian Revolution" .

Monthly Review .

69 (3): 77.

doi : 10.14452/MR-069-03-2017-07_6 . Retrieved 4 October 2022 .

^ "A Century of 1917s: Ideas, Representations, and Interpretations of the October Revolution, 1917–2017" .

Harvard Ukrainian Studies . Retrieved 4 October 2022 .

^ Service, Robert.

Lenin .

in Critical companion to the Russian Revolution , p. 19 ^ Grant, Alex (1 November 2017).

"Top 10 lies about the Bolshevik Revolution" .

In Defence of Marxism .

^ Novack, George (1971).

Democracy and Revolution . Pathfinder. pp.

307– 347.

ISBN 978-0-8734-8192-2 .

^ Cliff, Tony.

"Revolution Besieged. The Dissolution of the Constituent Assembly)" .

www.marxists.org .

^ Rogovin, Vadim Zakharovich (2021).

Was There an Alternative? Trotskyism: a Look Back Through the Years . Mehring Books. pp.

1– 2.

ISBN 978-1-8936-3897-6 .

^ Karetnyk, Bryan (8 December 2023).

"Chevengur — Andrey Platonov's risky critique of early Stalinism" .

Financial Times .

^ Reference Guide to Russian Literature . Taylor & Francis. 1998.

ISBN 978-1-8849-6410-7 .

^ Robert W. Menchhofer (1990).

Animal Farm . Lorenz Educational Press. pp.

1– 8.

ISBN 978-0-7877-8061-6 .

^ Devlin, Judith (2007).

"Recreating 'History' on Film" .

Media History .

13 ( 2– 3): 149– 168.

doi : 10.1080/13688800701608403 .

Sources Acton, Edward; Cherniaev, Vladimir Iu; Rosenberg, William G., eds. (1997).

Critical companion to the Russian Revolution, 1914 - 1921 . Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press .

ISBN 978-0-2533-3333-9 .

Beckett, Ian F. W. (2007).

The Great War, 1914 - 1918 . Modern wars in perspective (2nd ed.). London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-3178-6614-5 .

Browder, Robert Paul; Kerensky, Aleksandr Fyodorovich (1961).

The Russian Provisional Government, 1917: documents . Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press .

LCCN 60009052 .

OCLC 406909 .

OL 5106276W .

Dando, William A. (1966). "A Map of the Election to the Russian Constituent Assembly of 1917".

Slavic Review .

25 (2): 314– 319.

doi : 10.2307/2492782 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 2492782 .

S2CID 156132823 .

Figes, Orlando (1996).

A people's tragedy: the history of the Russian Revolution . Jonathan Cape.

ISBN 978-0-2240-4162-1 .

Hasegawa, Tsuyoshi (2018).

The February Revolution, Petrograd, 1917: The End of the Tsarist Regime and the Birth of Dual Power (PDF) . Historical materialism book series (Revised ed.). Leiden; Boston: Brill Publishers .

ISBN 978-9-0042-2560-2 .

Malone, Richard (2004).

Analysing the Russian Revolution . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-5215-4141-1 .

Riasanovsky, Nicholas Valentine ; Steinberg, Mark D.

(2011).

A history of Russia (8th ed.). New York Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-1953-4197-3 .

Smele, Jonathan (2017).

The 'Russian' Civil Wars, 1916–1926: Ten Years That Shook the World . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Service, Robert (2005).

A history of modern Russia: from Nicolas II to Vladimir Putin . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-6740-1801-3 .

Shukman, Harold , ed. (1994).

The Blackwell encyclopedia of the Russian revolution (Updated ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell .

ISBN 978-0-6311-9525-2 .

Suny, Ronald Grigor (2017).

Red flag unfurled: history, historians, and the Russian Revolution . London (GB): Verso Books .

ISBN 978-1-7847-8564-2 .

Tames, Richard (1972).

Last of the Tsars: the life and death of Nicholas and Alexandra . Panorama of history. London: Pan Books .

ISBN 978-0-3300-2902-5 .

OL 5079896M .

Wade, Rex Arvin (2017).

The Russian Revolution, 1917 . New approaches to European history (3rd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-1071-3032-6 .

Wood, Alan (2004).

The Origins of the Russian Revolution, 1861–1917 . Lancaster pamphlets (3rd ed.). London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-4153-0733-8 .

Further reading See also: Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Ascher, Abraham (2014).

The Russian Revolution . Oneworld beginner's guides. London: Oneworld Publications .

ISBN 978-1-7807-4388-2 .

Brenton, Tony, ed. (2017).

Was revolution inevitable? turning points of the Russian Revolution . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-1906-5891-5 .

Lieven, Dominic , ed. (2006).

The Cambridge history of Russia . Vol. 2: Imperial Russia, 1689– 1917. Cambridge (GB): Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-5218-1529-1 .

Suny, Ronald Grigor , ed. (2006).

The Cambridge history of Russia . Vol. 3: The Twentieth Century. Cambridge (GB): Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-5218-1144-6 .

Chamberlin, William Henry (1935).

The Russian revolution, 1917-1921 . Vol. 1. 1917-1918: From the overthrow of the Czar to the assumption of power by the Bolsheviks. New York: Grosset & Dunlap .

ISBN 978-0-4480-0189-0 .

OCLC 1151177013 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) —— (1957).

The Russian revolution, 1917-1921 . Vol. 2. 1918-1921: From the civil war to the consolidation of power. New York: Grosset & Dunlap .

OCLC 1151163731 .

Daly, Jonathan W.; Trofimov, Leonid (2009).

Russia in war and revolution, 1914-1922: a documentary history . Indianapolis (Ind.): Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-8722-0987-9 .

Fitzpatrick, Sheila (2017).

The Russian Revolution (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-1988-0670-7 .

Lincoln, W. Bruce (1986).

Passage through Armageddon: The Russians in war and revolution 1914-1918 . Oxford paperbacks. New York: Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-0-6715-5709-6 .

Marples, David R.

(2014).

Lenin's Revolution: Russia, 1917-1921 . Seminar studies in history. Oxfordshire: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-3178-8259-6 .

Mawdsley, Evan (2011).

The Russian Civil War . Edinburgh: Birlinn .

ISBN 978-0-8579-0123-1 .

Palat, Madhavan K.

, ed. (2001).

Social identities in revolutionary Russia (PDF) . Basingstoke: Palgrave .

ISBN 978-0-3339-2947-6 .

Piper, Jessica E. (2016).

The story of the Russian Revolution 100 years later . Events that changed the course of history. Ocala, Florida: Atlantic Publishing Group, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-6202-3143-2 .

Pipes, Richard (1991).

The Russian Revolution . New York: Vintage Books .

ISBN 978-0-6797-3660-8 .

—— (1997).

Three 'whys' of the Russian Revolution . New York: Vintage Books .

ISBN 978-0-6797-7646-8 .

—— (1995).

A concise history of the Russian Revolution . New York: Alfred A. Knopf .

ISBN 978-0-6794-2277-8 .

Rabinowitch, Alexander (1976).

The Bolsheviks come to power: the revolution of 1917 in Petrograd . New York: Norton Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-3930-5586-3 .

Rappaport, Helen (2016).

Caught in the revolution: Petrograd 1917 . London: Hutchinson Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-0919-5895-4 .

Rubenstein, Joshua (2011).

Leon Trotsky: a revolutionary's life . Jewish lives. New Haven: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-3001-3724-8 .

Service, Robert (1998).

The Russian Revolution, 1900-1927 . Studies in European history (2nd ed.). Basingstoke: Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-3335-6036-5 .

—— (2000).

Lenin: a biography . Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-6740-0330-9 .

—— (2006).

Stalin: a biography . Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-6740-1697-2 .

Steinberg, Mark D.

(2017).

The Russian Revolution, 1905-1921 . Oxford histories. Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-1992-2762-4 .

Stoff, Laurie S. (2006).

They fought for the motherland: Russia's women soldiers in World War I and the Revolution . Modern war studies. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas .

ISBN 978-0-7006-1485-1 .

Swain, Geoffrey (2014).

Trotsky and the Russian revolution . Seminar studies in history. London; New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-4157-3667-1 .

White, James D. (2017).

Lenin: The Practice and Theory of Revolution . European history in perspective. London: Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-3339-8537-3 .

Wolfe, Bertram David (1984).

Three who made a revolution: a biographical history . New York: Stein and Day .

ISBN 978-0-8128-6212-6 .

Yarmolinsky, Avrahm (1959).

Road to Revolution: A Century of Russian Radicalism . New York: Macmillan Company .

OCLC 1049326 .

Historiography Gatrell, Peter (September 2015).

"Tsarist Russia at War: The View from Above, 1914–February 1917" .

The Journal of Modern History .

87 (3): 668– 700.

doi : 10.1086/682414 .

ISSN 0022-2801 .

JSTOR 10.1086/682414 .

Haynes, Michael; Wolfreys, Jim, eds. (2007).

History and revolution: refuting revisionism . London: Verso Books .

ISBN 978-1-8446-7151-9 .

OCLC 137222121 .

Lyandres, Semion; Nikolaev, Andrei Borisovich (3 July 2017). "Contemporary Russian Scholarship on the February Revolution in Petrograd: Some Centenary Observations".

Revolutionary Russia .

30 (2): 158– 181.

doi : 10.1080/09546545.2017.1406886 .

ISSN 0954-6545 .

Smith, S. A. (September 2015). "The Historiography of the Russian Revolution 100 Years On".

Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History .

16 (4): 733– 749.

doi : 10.1353/kri.2015.0065 .

ISSN 1538-5000 .

Smith, Steve (January 1994). "Writing the history of the Russian revolution after the fall of communism".

Europe-Asia Studies .

46 (4): 563– 578.

doi : 10.1080/09668139408412183 .

ISSN 0966-8136 .

JSTOR 152927 .

Tereshchuk, Andrei V. (April 2012). "The Last Autocrat: Reassessing Nicholas II Guest Editor's Introduction".

Russian Studies in History .

50 (4): 3– 6.

doi : 10.2753/RSH1061-1983500400 .

ISSN 1061-1983 .

Volkogonov, D. A.

; Shukman, Harold (1994).

Lenin: a new biography . Translated by Shukman, Harold . New York: Free Press .

ISBN 978-0-0293-3435-5 .

Wade, Rex A.

(17 October 2016). "The Revolution at One Hundred: Issues and Trends in the English Language Historiography of the Russian Revolution of 1917".

Journal of Modern Russian History and Historiography .

9 (1): 9– 38.

doi : 10.1163/22102388-00900003 .

ISSN 1947-9956 .

Warth, Robert D. (June 1967). "On the Historiography of the Russian Revolution".

Slavic Review .

26 (2): 247– 264.

doi : 10.2307/2492453 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 2492453 .

Participants' accounts Reed, John (1919).

Ten days that shook the world . Transcribed by David Walters (2001). New York: Boni and Liveright.

OCLC 3347135 .

—— (1982).

Ten days that shook the world . New York: International Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-7178-0200-5 .

Serge, Victor (1972) [1932].

Year one of the Russian revolution . Translated by Sedgwick, Peter . London: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston .

ISBN 978-0-7139-0135-1 .

OCLC 489470 .

Steinberg, Mark D.; Schwartz, Marian; Peregudova, Zinaida Ivanovna; Tiutiunnik, Liubov (2001).

Voices of revolution, 1917 . Annals of communism. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-3000-9016-1 .

Trockij, Lev Davidovič (1992).

The history of the Russian revolution . Translated by Eastman, Max (3rd ed.). New York: Pathfinder Press .

ISBN 978-0-9134-6083-2 .

Primary sources Ascher, Abraham, ed. (1976).

The Mensheviks in the Russian Revolution . Documents of revolution. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8014-0989-9 .

Bunyan, James; Fisher, Harold H.; Golder, Frank Albert, eds. (1934).

The Bolshevik Revolution, 1917–1918: Documents and Materials . Stanford; London: Stanford University Press ; H. Milford ; Oxford University Press .

LCCN 34035285 .

OCLC 2521770 .

OL 6312935M .

Daly, Jonathan W.; Trofimov, Leonid, eds. (2009).

Russia in war and revolution, 1914-1922: a documentary history . Indianapolis (Ind.): Hackett Publishing Company .

ISBN 978-0-8722-0987-9 .

Includes private letters, press editorials, government decrees, diaries, philosophical tracts, belles-lettres, and memoirs.

Golder, Frank Alfred , ed. (1927).

Documents of Russian history, 1914-1917 . Translated by Aronsberg, Emanuel. New York: The Century Company .

OCLC 2672434 .

Miller, Martin A., ed. (2001).

The Russian revolution: the essential readings . Blackwell essential readings in history. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-6312-1638-4 .

Zeman, Z. A. B.

, ed. (1958).

Germany and the Revolution in Russia, 1915-1918; documents from the Archives of the German Foreign Ministry . London: Oxford University Press .

OCLC 1465338736 .

External links Library resources about Russian Revolution Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Russian Revolution at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Albert, Gleb: Labour Movements, Trade Unions and Strikes (Russian Empire) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

The Bolsheviks and workers' control: the state and counter-revolution - Maurice Brinton Brudek, Paweł: Revolutions (East Central Europe) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Orlando Figes's free educational website on the Russian Revolution and Soviet history , May 2014 Gaida, Fedor Aleksandrovich: Governments, Parliaments and Parties (Russian Empire) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Gatrell, Peter: Organization of War Economies (Russian Empire) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Violence and Revolution in 1917 . Mike Haynes for Jacobin . 17 July 2017.

Marks, Steven G.: War Finance (Russian Empire) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Mawdsley, Evan: International Responses to the Russian Civil War (Russian Empire) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Melancon, Michael S.: Social Conflict and Control, Protest and Repression (Russian Empire) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Kevin Murphy's Isaac and Tamara Deutscher Memorial Prize lecture "Can we Write the History of the Russian Revolutionæ , which examines historical accounts of 1917 in the light of newly accessible archive material.

Read, Christopher: Revolutions (Russian Empire) , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Sanborn, Joshua A.: Russian Empire , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Schell, Jonathan "The Mass Minority in Action: France and Russia" —Chapter 6 of The Unconquerable World: Power, Nonviolence and the Will of the People . Thanks to Trotsky, the 'insurrection' was bloodless.

Sumpf, Alexandre: Russian Civil War , in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Soviet history archive at www.marxists.org Archival footage of the Russian Revolution // Net-Film Newsreels and Documentary Films Archive Précis of Russian Revolution ( Archived 27 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine )—A summary of the key events and factors of the 1917 Russian Revolution.

v t e Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Events Revolution February Revolution July Days Kornilov affair October Revolution Kerensky–Krasnov uprising Junker mutiny Civil War Russian Civil War Red Terror (Outline) Ukrainian War of Independence Ukrainian–Soviet War Kiev Bolshevik Uprising Polish–Ukrainian War Finnish Civil War Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic Heimosodat Polish–Soviet War Estonian War of Independence Latvian War of Independence Lithuanian Wars of Independence Red Army invasion of Georgia Armenian–Azerbaijani war (1918–1920) Left SR uprising Tambov Rebellion Workers' Opposition Kronstadt rebellion Interventions Allied Central Powers Siberian Groups Provisional Committee of the State Duma Russian Provisional Government White movement Pro-independence movements Mossoviet Petrograd Soviet All-Russian Central Executive Committee First All-Russian Congress Second All-Russian Congress Third All-Russian Congress Council of the People's Commissars Red Army Military Revolutionary Committee Petrograd MRC Moscow MRC Russian Constituent Assembly elections Black Guards Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine Green armies Red Guards Group of forces in battle with the counterrevolution in the South of Russia Tsentralna Rada Ukrainian People's Republic Parties Kadets Nabat Russian Social Democratic Labour Party Bolsheviks Mensheviks Socialist Revolutionary Party Left SRs Union of October 17 General Jewish Labour Bund Figures Monarchists Nicholas II of Russia Nikolai Golitsyn Provisional Government Georgy Lvov Alexander Kerensky Pavel Milyukov Alexander Guchkov White movement Pyotr Wrangel Alexander Kolchak Anton Denikin Pyotr Krasnov Nikolai Yudenich Lavr Kornilov Bolsheviks Vladimir Lenin Lev Kamenev Grigory Zinoviev Leon Trotsky Mikhail Frunze Joseph Stalin Semyon Budyonny Yakov Sverdlov Nikolai Bukharin Felix Dzerzhinsky Alexei Rykov Right SRs Viktor Chernov Alexander Kerensky Boris Savinkov Boris Sokoloff Left SRs Yakov Blumkin Boris Kamkov Mark Natanson Maria Spiridonova Alexander Antonov Anarchists Nestor Makhno Maria Nikiforova Stepan Petrichenko Lev Chernyi Semen Karetnyk Fedir Shchus Viktor Bilash Fanya Baron Peter Kropotkin International Revolutions of 1917–1923 German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic Hungarian Soviet Republic Hungarian–Romanian War Workers' Councils in Poland Polish–Ukrainian War Polish–Soviet War Slovak Soviet Republic Belarusian-Soviet conflict v t e Revolutions of 1917–1923 Revolts Russian Revolution Russian Civil War Finnish Civil War Aster Revolution Revolutions and interventions in Hungary German Revolution of 1918–1919 1919 Egyptian revolution Greater Poland Uprising Biennio Rosso Ruhr uprising Iraqi Revolt Provisional Polish Revolutionary Committee Mongolian Revolution of 1921 March Action September Uprising Hamburg Uprising Protests French Army Mutinies Red Week (Netherlands) 1919 Southampton mutiny Seattle General Strike March 1st Movement May Fourth Movement 1923 Kraków riot Luxembourg rebellions Reactions First Red Scare Related World communism World revolution v t e Soviet Union topics Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Post Stalinist Soviet Union History Index of Soviet Union–related articles Outline Russian Revolution February October Russian Civil War Russian SFSR Creation treaty New Economic Policy Stalinism Great Purge Great Patriotic War (World War II) Evacuation The Holocaust Cold War Khrushchev thaw Sino-Soviet split Soviet space program Caribbean Crisis Stagnation Soviet–Afghan War Perestroika Glasnost Chernobyl disaster Revolutions of 1989 August Coup Parade of sovereignties Dissolution Transition period and cessation of the existence Succession, continuity and legacy Post-Soviet states Nostalgia Geography Subdivisions Republics Autonomous Krais Oblasts Autonomous Autonomous okrugs Closed city Regions Baltic States Caspian Sea Caucasus Mountains Central Asia Crimea European Russia North Caucasus Russian Far East Siberia Transcaucasia Ural Mountains Volga Region West Siberian Plain Politics General Conscription Constitution 1924 1936 1977 Elections Foreign relations Brezhnev Doctrine Gun control Government List Ministries State Committees Human rights LGBT Law Capital punishment Leaders Collective leadership National delimitation Passport system Propiska Political parties State ideology Marxism–Leninism Leninism Stalinism Soviet anti-Zionism Bodies Communist Party organisation Congress Central Committee Presidium/Politburo Secretariat General Secretary Congress of Soviets (1922–1936) Supreme Soviet (1938–1991) Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991) Supreme Court Military Collegium All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions Creative unions Offices Heads of state President Premier Deputy Premier First Deputy Premier Security services Cheka GPU NKVD Destruction battalions MVD Militsiya MGB KGB Chairmen Soviet Border Troops Soviet Armed Forces Soviet Army / Spetsnaz GRU • Soviet Navy • Soviet Air Forces / Soviet Airborne Forces Political repression Red Terror Collectivization Great Purge Population transfer Forced labor Foreign forced labor POW labor Gulag List Holodomor Political abuse of psychiatry Anti-abuse struggle War crimes Atrocities against prisoners of war Ideological repression Persecution of Christians Eastern Catholics Science Censorship Censorship of images Economy Agriculture Banking Central Bank State Labor Savings Banks System Economic planning Energy policy Enterprises Five-year plans Industrialization Internet domain Inventions Net material product OGAS Economic reforms 1956–1962 Wage reform 1957 1965 1973 1979 Rouble (currency) Monetary reforms 1947 1961 1991 Automotive industry Construction Transport Ministry of Railways Railway system Rail transport Railway electrification List of metro systems Vehicle registration plates Science Communist Academy Cybernetics Academy of Sciences Academy of Medical Sciences Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences Sharashkas Naukograds List Society Antisemitism Crime Demographics Soviet people Working class 1989 census Drug policy Ethnic conflicts Family Languages Linguistics Cyrillisation Prohibition Racism Culture Ballet Cinema Fashion Literature Music Opera Phraseology Printed media Propaganda Publishing houses Religion Islam Sports Stalinist architecture Broadcasting Radio Television Opposition Anti-Soviet agitation Soviet dissidents and their groups List Symbols Anthem Republics Emblem Republics Flag Republics Hammer and sickle Soviet Union portal Category v t e Soviet Union–United States relations Diplomatic posts Embassy Washington D.C.

Soviet Ambassadors Mrs. George Pullman House Moscow US Ambassadors Spaso House Kuybyshev Consulates New York John Hammond House San Francisco Saint Petersburg Vladivostok United Nations Headquarters Representatives Russian Mission Residency Other Elmcroft Estate Killenworth Lothrop Mansion Pioneer Point Diplomacy World War II Summits Declaration of the Four Nations Lend-Lease Lend-Lease Sherman tanks Moscow Conference (1941) Moscow Conference (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Moscow Conference (1944) Moscow Conference (1945) Potsdam Conference Council of Foreign Ministers Tehran Conference Yalta Conference Cold War Summits 1973 United States–Soviet Union wheat deal Berlin Conference (1954) Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls Council for American–Soviet Trade Dartmouth Conference Eighteen Nation Committee on Disarmament European Advisory Commission Geneva Accords (1988) Geneva Conference (1973) Geneva Summit (1955) Geneva Summit (1985) Glassboro Summit Conference Governors Island Summit Helsinki Summit (1990) Lacy-Zarubin Agreement Madrid Conference Letter Malta Summit Moscow Summit (1972) Moscow Summit (1974) Moscow Summit (1988) Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions NATO Double-Track Decision Reykjavík Summit Stalin Note State visit by Nikita Khrushchev to the United States United Nations Security Council Resolution 135 United States restitution to the Soviet Union US/USSR Acceptance of Law Governing Innocent Passage Vienna Summit Washington Summit (1987) Washington Summit (1973) Vladivostok Summit Meeting on Arms Control Policies Containment Détente Linkage Rollback Stimson Doctrine Welles Declaration Triangular diplomacy Zero Option Speeches 1989 visit by Boris Yeltsin to the United States American University speech And you are lynching Negroes Chicken Kiev speech Evil Empire speech Ich bin ein Berliner Kitchen Debate Kuzma's mother Shoe-banging incident Tear down this wall!

We will bury you Other Pushinka Soviet Military Power publication Historical Relations Russia–United States Russian Empire–United States Treaties and Agreements Arms Control 1990 Chemical Weapons Accord Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty INF McCloy–Zorin Accords Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty SALT I NTM SALT II START I Threshold Test Ban Treaty Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Space Outer Space Treaty Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes Territory Four Power Agreement on Berlin Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany USSR–USA Maritime Boundary Agreement Wanfried agreement World War II Moscow Declarations Potsdam Agreement Other Baruch Plan Bush legs Moscow–Washington hotline U.S.–Soviet Incidents at Sea agreement Legislation Executive Order 8484 Former Soviet Union Demilitarization Act of 1992 FRIENDSHIP Act of 1993 Jackson–Vanik amendment Russian Famine Relief Act Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991 Science Space APAS Apollo–Soyuz Bion satellites Kosmos 782 Kosmos 936 Kosmos 1129 Kosmos 1514 Kosmos 1667 Kosmos 1887 Kosmos 2044 International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Mir SAGE Space Race TOPAZ-I U.S.–Soviet Space Bridge Yardymly Other International Conference of Laser Applications Shvetsov M-25 Uzel Culture Chess US vs. USSR radio chess match 1945 World Chess Championship 1972 Bobby Fischer Education Anglo-American School of Moscow St. Petersburg Russian Cultural Center Russian Embassy School in Washington, D.C.

Russian Mission School in New York Literature Amerika (magazine) Deep Black Eagles East International Publishers Russian Life Sovfoto The Admiral's Daughter Who's Who in the CIA X Article Radio / Music Ordinary People Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Wave Sports 1972 Olympic men's basketball final 1976 Philadelphia Flyers–Red Army game Glasnost Bowl Goodwill Games Miracle on Ice Super Series USA–USSR Track and Field Dual Meet Series TV / Film Free to Be... a Family Soviet submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film Stalingrad The Extraordinary Adventures of Mr. West in the Land of the Bolsheviks Other American National Exhibition Apollo-Soyuz (cigarette) In Soviet Georgia Soviet Interview Project White Coke Cold War Overview Origins Timeline 1947–1948 1948–1953 1953–1962 1962–1979 1979–1985 1985–1991 Nuclear arms race Space Race Timeline Espionage Americans Soviets Atomic spies Cold War in Asia Operations Operation Anadyr Operation Breakthrough Operation Cedar Operation Chrome Dome Operation Cyclone Operation Denver Operation Dropshot Operation Giant Lance Operation Gold Operation Ivy Bells Operation Keelhaul Operation Lincoln Operation Monopoly Operation RYAN Operation Safe Haven (1957) Operation Shocker Operation Sunrise Projects Project Azorian Project Coldfeet Project Dark Gene Project Genetrix Project Grab Bag Project HOMERUN Project Hula Project Moby Dick Project Mogul Venona project Other 7th Air Escadrille Active Measures Working Group Bomber gap CIA activities in the Soviet Union Cold War tensions and the polio vaccine GIUK gap Missile gap Nitrophenyl pentadienal NSC 68 Plan Totality Red Scare Seven Days to the River Rhine Sheldon names Smolensk Archive SDI The Moscow rules United States aerial reconnaissance of the Soviet Union United States war plans (1945–1950) U.S. Army Field Manual 30-31B Incidents World War II Gorin v. United States Niš incident Cold War 1958 C-130 shootdown incident 1960 RB-47 shootdown incident 1960 U-2 incident 1961 F-84 Thunderstreak incident 1964 T-39 shootdown incident 1980 Summer Olympics boycott 1983 Soviet nuclear false alarm incident 1984 Summer Olympics boycott 1986 Black Sea incident 1988 Black Sea bumping incident Able Archer 83 Autumn Forge 83 Aeroflot Flight 244 Air-to-air combat losses between the Soviet Union and the United States Arrest of Mark Kaminsky and Harvey Bennett Arthur D. Nicholson Berlin Blockade Berlin Crisis of 1958–1959 Berlin Crisis of 1961 Capture of the Tuapse Cuban Missile Crisis Crateology Dymshits–Kuznetsov hijacking affair Feodor Fedorenko Gambell incident Hollow Nickel Case Iran crisis of 1946 John Anthony Walker Karl Linnas Kasenkina Case Korean Air Lines Flight 007 Martin and Mitchell defection Moscow Signal Pan Am Flight 708 Seaboard World Airlines Flight 253A Shostakovich v. Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp.

Siberian Seven Soviet submarine K-129 Soviet submarine K-219 Sputnik crisis SS Metallurg Anosov Transfermium Wars Turkish Straits crisis United States grain embargo against the Soviet Union Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline We begin bombing in five minutes Yellow rain Yeniseysk-15 Military relations Russian Revolution American Expeditionary Force, North Russia American Expeditionary Force, Siberia North Russia intervention Siberian intervention United States and the Russian Revolution White movement World War II Allied Control Council Allied Kommandatura Allied technological cooperation during World War II ALSIB Arctic convoys of World War II Belorussia-class cargo ship Berlin Victory Parade of 1945 Elbe Day Four Policemen Line of Contact Northwest Staging Route Pacific Route Persian Corridor Persian Gulf Command SS Dakotan SS Iowan Tripartite Naval Commission USS West Bridge Warsaw airlift Cold War Eisenhower Doctrine Four Power Naval Commission Four-Power Authorities Military liaison missions Reagan Doctrine Truman Doctrine Armaments AG submarines Bell P-63 Kingcobra Comparison of the AK-47 and M16 SS Indigirka Tupolev Tu-4 Tupolev Tu-70 Tupolev Tu-80 USCGC Southwind Organizations Soviet Union Amtorg Trading Corporation Ansonia Clock Company Foundation for Social Inventions Gennady Alferenko Institute for US and Canadian Studies Russian Soviet Government Bureau Soviet Government Purchasing Commission in the U.S.

United States American Committee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia Ark Project American Peace Mobilization American Relief Administration American Russian Institute American–Soviet friendship movement American-Soviet Peace Walks Center for Citizen Initiatives Communist Party USA Dewey Commission Freedom Sunday for Soviet Jews Friends of Soviet Russia Friendship Flight '89 Friendship Flight (Alaska Airlines) Fund for Armenian Relief Kennan Institute Kersten Committee National Committee for a Free Europe National Council of American–Soviet Friendship Organization for Jewish Colonization in Russia Russian-American Industrial Corporation Russian War Relief Society for Technical Aid to Soviet Russia Student Struggle for Soviet Jewry U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine U.S. Peace Council Related Baltic Freedom Day Captive Nations Captive Nations Week GAZ Georgi Bolshakov Little Joe New world order (politics) Refusenik Roswell Garst Samantha Smith Self-propelled barge T-36 Sisson Documents Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War Suzanne Massie Category:Soviet Union–United States relations v t e History of Europe Prehistory Paleolithic Europe Neolithic Europe Bronze Age Europe Iron Age Europe Classical antiquity Classical Greece Roman Republic Hellenistic period Roman Empire Early Christianity Christianity in late antiquity Crisis of the Third Century Fall of the Western Roman Empire Late antiquity Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Francia Anglo-Saxon England Byzantine Empire Papal States Bulgarian Empire First Second Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Viking Age Kievan Rus' Crown of Aragon ( Aragon , Catalonia , Valencia , Majorca ) Holy Roman Empire High Middle Ages Republic of Florence Feudalism Crusades Mongol invasion Serbian Empire Late Middle Ages Black Death Hundred Years' War Kalmar Union Modern period Renaissance Early modern Christianity in the modern era Reformation Age of Discovery Baroque Grand Duchy of Tuscany Thirty Years' War Absolute monarchy Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Early modern France Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic British Empire Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Age of Enlightenment Great Divergence Industrial Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic Wars Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 World War I Russian Revolution Interwar period World War II Cold War European integration Euro area crisis COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine See also Art of Europe Bibliography of European history Genetic history of Europe History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region History of the European Union History of Western civilization Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe Crusading movement Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐r29ct
Cached time: 20250817043628
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.831 seconds
Real time usage: 2.244 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12239/1000000
Revision size: 122302/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 578348/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15572/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 494105/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.115/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13647436/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1772.670      1 -total
 38.11%  675.616    100 Template:Cite_book
 36.38%  644.905      2 Template:Reflist
  7.26%  128.708     21 Template:Cite_journal
  7.01%  124.272     32 Template:Sfn
  5.13%   90.852      1 Template:Infobox_event
  5.04%   89.273     18 Template:Navbox
  4.57%   80.933     13 Template:Cite_web
  3.31%   58.748      1 Template:Short_description
  3.26%   57.834      1 Template:Use_dmy_dates Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25762:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043628 and revision id 1300018649. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Russian_Revolution&oldid=1300018649 " Categories : Russian Revolution 1917 in Russia 20th-century revolutions Aftermath of World War I in Russia and in the Soviet Union Communism in Russia Communist revolutions Conflicts in 1917 Rebellions against the Russian Empire Revolutions in the Russian Empire Uprisings during World War I Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from February 2025 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from February 2018 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2025 Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2024 All articles with style issues CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 20:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Russian Revolution 113 languages Add topic

