Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Phases 2 References Toggle References subsection 2.1 General 2.2 Notes 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Future workshop 3 languages Dansk Deutsch Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e The future workshop is a futures technique developed by Robert Jungk , Ruediger Lutz and Norbert R. Muellert in the 1970s. It enables a group of people to develop new ideas or solutions of social problems. A future workshop is particularly suitable for participants who have little experience with processes of creative decision making , for example children or youth . However it is a useful method for any kind of complex problem that requires many stakeholders' involvement. The future workshop method requires an intensive preparation and support by trained moderators. It is used in spatial planning to involve citizens in the planning process,  in software engineering [ 1 ] to create a common vision of the future, and in health care to solve complex and multifaceted problems.

The method is similar to Open Space Technology , Future Search, BarCamp or Unconferences .

Future workshop may also be used as a kind of action research method.

[ 2 ] Phases [ edit ] Preparation phase: The method, its rules and the scheduled course of the workshop (in accordance with the participants) is introduced.

Critique phase: The problem is investigated critically and thoroughly. First of all, a visualised brainstorming is performed and a general and critical question concerning the problem is framed.

Fantasy or visionary phase: All participants try to work out a vision of the future, to draw a picture of future possibilities.

Implementation phase: The ideas found are checked and evaluated with regard to their practicability. Discussions are related to the first step in order to achieve the vision.

References [ edit ] General [ edit ] Jungk, Robert, Müllert, Norbert (1987): Future workshops: How to Create Desirable Futures. London, England, Institute for Social Inventions ISBN 0-948826-39-8 Robert Jungk, Norbert R. Müllert: Zukunftswerkstätten. Mit Phantasie gegen Routine und Resignation.

München 1989 (Erstveröffentlichung 1981) ISBN 3-453-03743-X Beate Kuhnt, Norbert R. Müllert: Moderationsfibel - Zukunftswerkstätten verstehen, anleiten, einsetzen.

Neu-Ulm 2004 (Neuauflage) ISBN 3-930830-45-0 Olaf-Axel Burow & Marina Neumann-Schönwetter (Hrsg.): Zukunftswerkstatt in Schule und Unterricht.

Hamburg: Bergmann & Helbig 1997. (2. Auflage) ISBN 3-925836-40-3 Petra Eickhoff, Stephan G. Geffers: Power of Imagination Studio - A Further Development of the Future Workshop Concept , chapter 26 in Peggy Holman, Tom Devane, Steven Cady (ed.): The Change Handbook - The Definitive Resource on Today's Best Methods for Engaging Whole Systems - 2nd edition , San Francisco 2006 ISBN 1-57675-379-4 Notes [ edit ] ^ "Hardenborg, Niklas. 2007. "Designing Work and IT Systems: A Participatory Process that Supports Usability and Sustainability" (PhD dissertation). Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, Uppsala" .

Archived from the original on 2018-06-13 . Retrieved 2018-06-13 .

^ "Åkerblom, Petter. 2005. "Capacity Building for School Gardening: A Swedish Case Study." Canadian Journal of Environmental Education , 10, Spring 2005" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-03-10 . Retrieved 2014-03-10 .

External links [ edit ] Heino Apel: The Future Workshop urn:nbn:de:hebis:34-1507 Heiko Rüppel: Zukunftswerkstatt-online "Workshop Methods" (section on "The Future Workshop") , The Danish Board of Technology (accessed 10 March 2014) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Future_workshop&oldid=1225295216 " Categories : Meetings Social science methodology Futures techniques Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 23 May 2024, at 15:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Future workshop 3 languages Add topic

