Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Function 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 lac operon 2.2 ara operon 3 Potency 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Inducer 10 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Galego Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Molecule that regulates gene expression For the pump component, see Pump inducer .

In molecular biology , an inducer is a molecule that regulates gene expression .

[ 1 ] An inducer functions in two ways; namely: By disabling repressors . The gene is expressed because an inducer binds to the repressor. The binding of the inducer to the repressor prevents the repressor from binding to the operator .

RNA polymerase can then begin to transcribe operon genes.

By binding to activators . Activators generally bind poorly to activator DNA sequences unless an inducer is present. Activator binds to an inducer and the complex binds to the activation sequence and activates target gene.

[ 2 ] Removing the inducer stops transcription.

[ 2 ] Because a small inducer molecule is required, the increased expression of the target gene is called induction .

[ 2 ] The lactose operon is one example of an inducible system.

[ 2 ] Function [ edit ] Repressor proteins bind to the DNA strand and prevent RNA polymerase from being able to attach to the DNA and synthesize mRNA. Inducers bind to repressors, causing them to change shape and preventing them from binding to DNA. Therefore, they allow transcription, and thus gene expression, to take place.

For a gene to be expressed, its DNA sequence must be copied (in a process known as transcription ) to make a smaller, mobile molecule called messenger RNA (mRNA), which carries the instructions for making a protein to the site where the protein is manufactured (in a process known as translation ). Many different types of proteins can affect the level of gene expression by promoting or preventing transcription. In prokaryotes (such as bacteria), these proteins often act on a portion of DNA known as the operator at the beginning of the gene. Transcription begins when RNA polymerase , the enzyme that copies the genetic sequence and synthesizes the mRNA, attaches to the DNA strand, which it does at a spot called a promoter .

Some genes are modulated by activators , which have the opposite effect on gene expression as repressors. Inducers can also bind to activator proteins, allowing them to bind to the operator DNA where they promote RNA transcription.

Ligands that bind to deactivate activator proteins are not, in the technical sense, classified as inducers, since they have the effect of preventing transcription.

Examples [ edit ] lac operon [ edit ] The inducer in the lac operon is allolactose .

[ 2 ] If lactose is present in the medium, then a small amount of it will be converted to allolactose by a few molecules of β-galactosidase that are present in the cell.

[ 3 ] Allolactose binds to the repressor and decreases the repressor's affinity for the operator site.

[ 3 ] However, when lactose and glucose are both available in the system, the lac operon is repressed. This is because glucose actively prevents the induction of lacZYA .

[ 2 ] ara operon [ edit ] In the ara operon (also known as the ara or araBAD operon), arabinose acts as both an inducer and a repressor. When arabinose is present, it allosterically binds to the regulatory protein AraC, which then helps to recruit RNA polymerase for transcription.

Potency [ edit ] Index inducer or just inducer predictably induce metabolism via a given pathway and are commonly used in prospective clinical drug-drug interaction studies.

[ 4 ] Strong, moderate, and weak inducers are drugs that decreases the AUC of sensitive index substrates of a given metabolic pathway by ≥80%, ≥50% to <80%, and ≥20% to <50%, respectively.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Baraniak, P. R.; Nelson, D. M.; Leeson, C. E.; Katakam, A. K.; Friz, J. L.; Cress, D. E.; Hong, Y; Guan, J; Wagner, W. R. (2011).

"Spatial control of gene expression by localized inducer release" .

Biomaterials .

32 (11): 3062– 71.

doi : 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.12.037 .

PMC 3178343 .

PMID 21269687 .

^ a b c d e f Slonczewski, Joan, and John Watkins. Foster.

Microbiology: An Evolving Science . New York: W.W. Norton &, 2009. Print.

[ page needed ] ^ a b Biology Part 2 . Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Review, 1995. Print.

[ page needed ] ^ a b "Drug Development and Drug Interactions: Table of Substrates, Inhibitors and Inducers" .

U S Food and Drug Administration Home Page . 2009-06-25. Archived from the original on July 9, 2009 . Retrieved 2019-01-31 .

External links [ edit ] Look up inducer in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Transcription ( bacterial , eukaryotic ) Transcriptional regulation prokaryotic Operon lac operon trp operon gab operon Gua Operon ara operon gal operon Repressor lac repressor trp repressor eukaryotic Histone-modifying enzymes ( histone / nucleosome ): Histone methylation / Histone methyltransferase EZH2 Histone demethylase Histone acetylation and deacetylation Histone deacetylase HDAC1 Histone acetyltransferase DNA methylation : DNA methyltransferase Chromatin remodeling : CHD7 both Transcription coregulator Activator Coactivator Corepressor Inducer Promotion Promoter Pribnow box TATA box BRE CAAT box Response element Enhancer E-box Response element Insulator Silencer Internal control region Initiation Bacterial Eukaryotic Archaeal transcription factor B Elongation bacterial RNA polymerase : rpoB eukaryotic RNA polymerase : RNA polymerase II Termination ( bacterial , eukaryotic ) Terminator Intrinsic termination Rho factor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inducer&oldid=1292962169 " Categories : Gene expression Organic compounds Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2015 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 21:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inducer 10 languages Add topic

