Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Orphism 2 Pre-Socratic philosophy 3 Platonic philosophy 4 Modern 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Metempsychosis 24 languages العربية Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių 日本語 Occitan Português Română Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transmigration of the soul This article is about the Greek conception of the transmigration of the soul. For the general concept, see Reincarnation .

This article's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In philosophy and theology , metempsychosis ( Ancient Greek : μετεμψύχωσις ) is the transmigration of the soul , especially its reincarnation after death. The term is derived from ancient Greek philosophy , and has been recontextualized by modern philosophers such as Arthur Schopenhauer , [ 1 ] Kurt Gödel , [ 2 ] Mircea Eliade , [ 3 ] and Magdalena Villaba ; [ 4 ] otherwise, the word "transmigration" is more appropriate. The word plays a prominent role in James Joyce 's Ulysses and is also associated with Nietzsche .

[ 5 ] Another term sometimes used synonymously is palingenesis .

A section of Metempsychosis (1923) by Yokoyama Taikan ; a drop of water from the vapours in the sky transforms into a mountain stream, which flows into a great river and on into the sea, whence rises a dragon (pictured) that turns back to vapour; National Museum of Modern Art, Tokyo ( Important Cultural Property ) [ 6 ] Orphism [ edit ] A belief in metempsychosis has been associated with Orphism , the name given to a religious movement said in antiquity to have been founded by the legendary poet Orpheus . Orphism is said to hold that soul and body are united by a contract unequally binding on either. The soul is divine but immortal and aspires to freedom, while the body holds it in fetters as a prisoner. Death dissolves that contract but only to reimprison the liberated soul after a short time, for the wheel of birth revolves inexorably. Thus, the soul continues its journey and alternates between a separate unrestrained existence and a fresh reincarnation around the wide circle of necessity, as the companion of many bodies of men and animals. To those unfortunate prisoners, Orpheus proclaims the message of liberation, that they stand in need of the grace of redeeming gods, Dionysus in particular, and calls them to turn to the gods by ascetic piety and self-purification: the purer their lives, the higher their next reincarnation will be, until the soul has completed the spiral ascent of destiny to live forever as a God from whom it comes.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Pre-Socratic philosophy [ edit ] The earliest Greek thinker with whom metempsychosis is connected is Pherecydes of Syros , [ 10 ] but Pythagoras , who is said to have been his pupil, is its first famous philosophic exponent.

Walter Burkert has argued that Pythagoras may have introduced metempsychosis to Orphism.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] He suggests that modern scholarship's tendency to separate Orphism from early Pythagoreanism is a retrojection, possibly of Nietzschean ideas about the opposition of the Apollonian (associated with Pythagoreanism) and the Dionysian (associated with Orphism), whereas for the Greeks, Apollo and Dionysus were brothers and not so clearly differentiated. Pythagoras offered as evidence for metempsychosis his own recollection of past lives, a superhuman form of wisdom that contributed to his reputation as a prophet.

[ 13 ] Platonic philosophy [ edit ] The weight and importance of metempsychosis in the Western tradition are from its adoption by Plato .

[ 14 ] In the eschatological myth that closes the Republic , he tells how Er, the son of Armenius, miraculously returned to life on the twelfth day after death and recounted the secrets of the other world. After death, he said, he went with others to the place of Judgment and saw the souls returning from heaven, and proceeded with them to a place where they chose new lives, human and animal. He saw the soul of Orpheus changing into a swan, Thamyras becoming a nightingale, musical birds choosing to be men, and Atalanta choosing the honours of an athlete. Men were seen passing into animals and wild and tame animals changing into each other. After their choice, the souls drank of Lethe and then shot away like stars to their birth. There are myths and theories to the same effect in other dialogues, including the Phaedrus , Meno , Phaedo , Timaeus , and Laws .

[ citation needed ] In Plato's view the number of souls was fixed; souls are never created or destroyed but only transmigrate from one body to another.

[ 15 ] Origen's doctrine of the preexistence of souls was close to Plato's idea of metempsychosis and was frequently attacked, including by Augustine of Hippo and Aeneas of Gaza .

[ 12 ] Modern [ edit ] Scholars have debated the extent of Plato's belief in metempsychosis since at least the Renaissance .

Marsilio Ficino argued that Plato's references to metempsychosis were intended to be allegorical.

[ 16 ] Modern scholars, including Chad Jorgensen and Gerard Naddaf, have tended to agree with Ficino.

[ 17 ] "Metempsychosis" is the title of a longer work by the metaphysical poet John Donne , written in 1601.

[ 18 ] The poem, also known as the Infinitati Sacrum , [ 19 ] consists of two parts, the "Epistle" and "The Progress of the Soule".  In the first line of the latter part, Donne writes that he "sing[s] of the progresse of a deathlesse soule".

[ 19 ] Metempsychosis is a recurring theme in James Joyce 's modernist novel Ulysses (1922).

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Druze Gilgul Saṃsāra Yazidis Yaʽfuriyya Shia Zalmoxis References [ edit ] ^ Schopenhauer, A: "Parerga und Paralipomena" (Eduard Grisebach edition), On Religion, Section 177 ^ Englert, Alexander.

"We'll meet again" .

^ Mircea Eliade (1957).

The Sacred And The Profane . p. 109.

^ Villaba, Magdalena (1976). "An Interpretation on the Doctrine of Transmigration".

Philippiniana Sacra .

^ Nietzsche and the Doctrine of Metempsychosis, in J. Urpeth & J. Lippitt, Nietzsche and the Divine , Manchester: Clinamen, 2000 ^ "Masterpieces" .

National Museum of Modern Art, Tokyo . Retrieved 13 February 2016 .

^ Linforth, Ivan M. (1941) The Arts of Orpheus Arno Press, New York, OCLC 514515 ^ Long, Herbert S. (1948) A Study of the doctrine of metempsychosis in Greece, from Pythagoras to Plato (Long's 1942 PhD dissertation) Princeton, New Jersey, OCLC 1472399 ^ Long, Herbert S. (16 February 1948) "Plato's Doctrine of Metempsychosis and Its Source" The Classical Weekly 41(10): pp. 149–155 ^ Schibli, S., Hermann, Pherekydes of Syros, p. 104, Oxford Univ. Press 2001 ^ Burkert, Walter (1972).

Lore and science in ancient Pythagoreanism . Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. pp.

132– 133.

ISBN 978-0-674-53918-1 .

^ a b Louth, Andrew (17 February 2022). "metempsychosis".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-263815-1 . Retrieved 2 June 2025 .

^ Burkert, Walter (1972).

Lore and science in ancient Pythagoreanism . Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. p. 137.

ISBN 978-0-674-53918-1 .

^ Plato.

Republic, Book 10, section 620 .

^ "That is the conclusion, I said; and if a true conclusion, then the souls must always be the same, for if none be destroyed they will not diminish in number." Republic X, 611. The Republic of Plato By Plato, Benjamin Jowett Edition: 3 Published by Clarendon Press, 1888.

^ See Platonic Theology 17.3–4.

^ Jorgensen 2018: 199 says that Plato's eschatological accounts are "much better suited to a creative discourse aimed at capturing the imagination of a particular audience than to an attempt to describe an independently existing reality." See Jorgensen, Chad.

The Embodied Soul in Plato's Later Thought . Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press, 2018.

Naddaf 2016: 113 says that this part of Plato's thinking can be represented "only by eschatological or cosmological myths. It is inaccessible to explanation." See Naddaf, Gerard. "Poetic Myths of the Afterlife: Plato's Last Song," Reflections on Plato's  Poetics: Essays from Beijing . Academic Printing and Publishing: Berrima, NSW, 2016, 111–136.

^ Collins, Siobhán (2005) "Bodily Formations and Reading Strategies in John Donne's Metempsychosis " Critical Studies 26: pp. 191–208, page 191 ^ a b full text of Metempsychosis or Infinitati Sacrum from Luminarium Editions ^ "List of occurrences of Metempsychosis in Ulysses" . Archived from the original on 16 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2008 .

External links [ edit ] The Columbia Encyclopedia: Transmigration of souls or Metempsychosis Did Plato Believe in Reincarnation?

Sturt, Henry (1911).

"Metempsychosis" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). pp.

259– 260.

v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metempsychosis&oldid=1298270251 " Categories : Concepts in ancient Greek metaphysics Concepts in ancient Greek philosophy of mind Plato's theory of soul Presocratic philosophy Reincarnation Religious philosophical concepts Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Souls Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Accuracy disputes from August 2022 All accuracy disputes Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2009 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Use dmy dates from January 2016 This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 13:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metempsychosis 24 languages Add topic

