Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and background Toggle Early life and background subsection 1.1 Parents 1.2 Childhood 1.3 Marriage 2 Three years in London Toggle Three years in London subsection 2.1 Student of law 2.2 Vegetarianism and committee work 2.3 Called to the bar 3 Civil rights activist in South Africa (1893–1914) Toggle Civil rights activist in South Africa (1893–1914) subsection 3.1 Europeans, Indians and Africans 4 Struggle for Indian independence (1915–1947) Toggle Struggle for Indian independence (1915–1947) subsection 4.1 Role in World War I 4.2 Champaran agitations 4.3 Kheda agitations 4.4 Khilafat Movement 4.5 Non-co-operation 4.6 Salt Satyagraha (Salt March/Civil Disobedience Movement) 4.7 Gandhi as folk hero 4.8 Negotiations 4.9 Round Table Conferences 4.10 Congress politics 4.11 World War II and Quit India movement 4.12 Partition and independence 5 Death Toggle Death subsection 5.1 Funeral and memorials 6 Principles, practices, and beliefs Toggle Principles, practices, and beliefs subsection 6.1 Truth and Satyagraha 6.2 Nonviolence 6.3 Brahmacharya: abstinence from sex and food 7 Literary works 8 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 8.1 Followers and international influence 8.2 Global days that celebrate Gandhi 8.3 Awards 8.3.1 Father of the Nation 8.4 Film, theatre, and literature 8.5 21st-century impact within India 8.6 Descendants 9 See also 10 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 10.1 Explanatory notes 11 References 12 General and cited references Toggle General and cited references subsection 12.1 Books 12.2 Scholarly articles 12.3 Primary sources 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Mahatma Gandhi 202 languages Адыгэбзэ Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Dolnoserbski डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Romani čhib Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Тыва дыл Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Kadazandusun Yerwa Kanuri Nupe Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Multilingual Wikisource Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian independence activist (1869–1948) "Gandhi" redirects here. For other uses, see Gandhi (disambiguation) .

Mahātmā Gandhi Gandhi in 1931 Born Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi ( 1869-10-02 ) 2 October 1869 Porbandar , Kathiawar Agency , India Died 30 January 1948 (1948-01-30) (aged 78) New Delhi, India Cause of death Assassination Monuments Raj Ghat , Delhi Gandhi Smriti , New Delhi Other names Bāpū (father), Rāṣṭrapitā (the Father of the Nation ) Alma mater Samaldas Arts College [ a ] University College London [ b ] Inns of Court School of Law Occupations Lawyer anti-colonialist political ethicist Years active 1893–1948 Known for Leadership of the campaign for India's independence from British rule Nonviolent resistance Political party Indian National Congress (1920–1934) Spouse Kasturba Gandhi ​ ​ ( m.

1883; died 1944) ​ Children Harilal Manilal Ramdas Devdas Parents Karamchand Gandhi Putlibai Gandhi Relatives Gandhi family President of the Indian National Congress In office December 1924 – April 1925 Preceded by Maulana Azad Succeeded by Sarojini Naidu Mahatma Gandhi's voice Gandhi's spiritual message to the world Recorded 17 October 1931 Signature Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi [ c ] (2 October 1869 – 30 January 1948) [ 2 ] was an Indian lawyer, anti-colonial nationalist , and political ethicist who employed nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for India's independence from British rule . He inspired movements for civil rights and freedom across the world. The honorific Mahātmā (from Sanskrit , meaning great-souled, or venerable), first applied to him in South Africa in 1914, is now used throughout the world.

[ 3 ] Born and raised in a Hindu family in coastal Gujarat , Gandhi trained in the law at the Inner Temple in London and was called to the bar at the age of 22. After two uncertain years in India, where he was unable to start a successful law practice, Gandhi moved to South Africa in 1893 to represent an Indian merchant in a lawsuit. He went on to live in South Africa for 21 years. Here, Gandhi raised a family and first employed nonviolent resistance in a campaign for civil rights. In 1915, aged 45, he returned to India and soon set about organising peasants, farmers, and urban labourers to protest against discrimination and excessive land tax.

Assuming leadership of the Indian National Congress in 1921, Gandhi led nationwide campaigns for easing poverty, expanding women's rights, building religious and ethnic amity, ending untouchability , and, above all, achieving swaraj or self-rule. Gandhi adopted the short dhoti woven with hand-spun yarn as a mark of identification with India's rural poor. He began to live in a self-sufficient residential community , to eat simple food, and undertake long fasts as a means of both introspection and political protest. Bringing anti-colonial nationalism to the common Indians, Gandhi led them in challenging the British-imposed salt tax with the 400 km (250 mi) Dandi Salt March in 1930 and in calling for the British to quit India in 1942. He was imprisoned many times and for many years in both South Africa and India.

Gandhi's vision of an independent India based on religious pluralism was challenged in the early 1940s by a Muslim nationalism which demanded a separate homeland for Muslims within British India . In August 1947, Britain granted independence, but the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two dominions , a Hindu-majority India and a Muslim-majority Pakistan . As many displaced Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs made their way to their new lands, religious violence broke out, especially in the Punjab and Bengal . Abstaining from the official celebration of independence , Gandhi visited the affected areas, attempting to alleviate distress. In the months following, he undertook several hunger strikes to stop the religious violence. The last of these was begun in Delhi on 12 January 1948, when Gandhi was 78. The belief that Gandhi had been too resolute in his defence of both Pakistan and Indian Muslims spread among some Hindus in India. Among these was Nathuram Godse , a militant Hindu nationalist from Pune , western India, who assassinated Gandhi by firing three bullets into his chest at an interfaith prayer meeting in Delhi on 30 January 1948.

Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is commemorated in India as Gandhi Jayanti , a national holiday , and worldwide as the International Day of Nonviolence . Gandhi is considered to be the Father of the Nation in post-colonial India. During India's nationalist movement and in several decades immediately after, he was also commonly called Bapu , an endearment roughly meaning "father".

Early life and background Parents Gandhi's father, Karamchand Uttamchand Gandhi (1822–1885), served as the dewan (chief minister) of Porbandar state.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] His family originated from the then village of Kutiana in what was then Junagadh State .

[ 6 ] Although Karamchand only had been a clerk in the state administration and had an elementary education, he proved a capable chief minister.

[ 6 ] During his tenure, Karamchand married four times. His first two wives died young, after each had given birth to a daughter, and his third marriage was childless. In 1857, Karamchand sought his third wife's permission to remarry; that year, he married Putlibai (1844–1891), who also came from Junagadh, [ 6 ] and was from a Pranami Vaishnava family.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Karamchand and Putlibai had four children: a son, Laxmidas ( c.

1860 –1914); a daughter, Raliatbehn (1862–1960); a second son, Karsandas ( c.

1866 –1913).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] and a third son, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi [ 12 ] who was born on 2 October 1869 in Porbandar (also known as Sudamapuri ), a coastal town on the Kathiawar Peninsula and then part of the small princely state of Porbandar in the Kathiawar Agency of the British Raj .

[ 13 ] In 1874, Gandhi's father, Karamchand, left Porbandar for the smaller state of Rajkot , where he became a counsellor to its ruler, the Thakur Sahib; though Rajkot was a less prestigious state than Porbandar, the British regional political agency was located there, which gave the state's diwan a measure of security.

[ 14 ] In 1876, Karamchand became diwan of Rajkot and was succeeded as diwan of Porbandar by his brother Tulsidas. Karamchand's family then rejoined him in Rajkot.

[ 14 ] They moved to their family home Kaba Gandhi No Delo in 1881.

[ 15 ] Childhood Gandhi in 1876 at the age of 7.

As a child, Gandhi was described by his sister Raliat as "restless as mercury, either playing or roaming about. One of his favourite pastimes was twisting dogs' ears." [ 16 ] The Indian classics, especially the stories of Shravana and king Harishchandra , had a great impact on Gandhi in his childhood. In his autobiography, Gandhi states that they left an indelible impression on his mind. Gandhi writes: "It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without number." Gandhi's early self-identification with truth and love as supreme values is traceable to these epic characters.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The family's religious background was eclectic. Mohandas was born into a Gujarati Hindu Modh Bania family.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Gandhi's father, Karamchand, was Hindu and his mother Putlibai was from a Pranami Vaishnava Hindu family.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Gandhi's father was of Modh Baniya caste in the varna of Vaishya .

[ 23 ] His mother came from the medieval Krishna bhakti-based Pranami tradition, whose religious texts include the Bhagavad Gita , the Bhagavata Purana , and a collection of 14 texts with teachings that the tradition believes to include the essence of the Vedas , the Quran and the Bible .

[ 22 ] [ 24 ] Gandhi was deeply influenced by his mother, an extremely pious lady who "would not think of taking her meals without her daily prayers... she would take the hardest vows and keep them without flinching. To keep two or three consecutive fasts was nothing to her." [ 25 ] At the age of nine, Gandhi entered the local school in Rajkot , near his home. There, he studied the rudiments of arithmetic, history, the Gujarati language and geography.

[ 14 ] At the age of 11, Gandhi joined the High School in Rajkot, Alfred High School .

[ 26 ] He was an average student, won some prizes, but was a shy and tongue-tied student, with no interest in games; Gandhi's only companions were books and school lessons.

[ 27 ] Marriage In May 1883, the 13-year-old Gandhi was married to 14-year-old Kasturbai Gokuldas Kapadia (her first name was usually shortened to "Kasturba", and affectionately to "Ba") in an arranged marriage , according to the custom of the region at that time.

[ 28 ] In the process, he lost a year at school but was later allowed to make up by accelerating his studies.

[ 29 ] Gandhi's wedding was a joint event, where his brother and cousin were also married. Recalling the day of their marriage, Gandhi once said, "As we didn't know much about marriage, for us it meant only wearing new clothes, eating sweets and playing with relatives." As was the prevailing tradition, the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents' house, and away from her husband.

[ 30 ] Writing many years later, Gandhi described with regret the lustful feelings he felt for his young bride: "Even at school I used to think of her, and the thought of nightfall and our subsequent meeting was ever haunting me." Gandhi later recalled feeling jealous and possessive of her, such as when Kasturba would visit a temple with her girlfriends, and being sexually lustful in his feelings for her.

[ 31 ] Gandhi (right) with his eldest brother Laxmidas in 1886 [ 32 ] In late 1885, Gandhi's father, Karamchand, died.

[ 33 ] Gandhi had left his father's bedside to be with his wife mere minutes before his passing. Many decades later, Gandhi wrote "if animal passion had not blinded me, I should have been spared the torture of separation from my father during his last moments." [ 34 ] Later, Gandhi, then 16 years old, and his wife, age 17, had their first child, who survived only a few days. The two deaths anguished Gandhi.

[ 33 ] The Gandhis had four more children, all sons: Harilal , born in 1888; Manilal , born in 1892; Ramdas , born in 1897; and Devdas , born in 1900.

[ 28 ] In November 1887, the 18-year-old Gandhi graduated from high school in Ahmedabad .

[ 35 ] In January 1888, he enrolled at Samaldas College in Bhavnagar State , then the sole degree-granting institution of higher education in the region. However, Gandhi dropped out and returned to his family in Porbandar.

[ 36 ] Outside school, Gandhi's education was enriched by exposure to Gujarati literature, especially reformers like Narmad and Govardhanram Tripathi , whose works alerted the Gujaratis to their own faults and weaknesses such as belief in religious dogmatism.

[ 37 ] Three years in London Student of law Commemorative plaque at 20 Baron's Court Road, Barons Court, London Gandhi had dropped out of the cheapest college he could afford in Bombay.

[ 38 ] Mavji Dave Joshiji, a Brahmin priest and family friend, advised Gandhi and his family that he should consider law studies in London.

[ 36 ] [ 39 ] In July 1888, Gandhi's wife Kasturba gave birth to their first surviving child, Harilal.

[ 40 ] Gandhi's mother was not comfortable about Gandhi leaving his wife and family and going so far from home. Gandhi's uncle Tulsidas also tried to dissuade his nephew, but Gandhi wanted to go. To persuade his wife and mother, Gandhi made a vow in front of his mother that he would abstain from meat, alcohol, and women. Gandhi's brother, Laxmidas, who was already a lawyer, cheered Gandhi's London studies plan and offered to support him. Putlibai gave Gandhi her permission and blessing.

[ 36 ] [ 41 ] On 10 August 1888, Gandhi, aged 18, left Porbandar for Mumbai, then known as Bombay. A local newspaper covering the farewell function by his old high school in Rajkot noted that Gandhi was the first Bania from Kathiawar to proceed to England for his Barrister Examination.

[ 37 ] As Mohandas Gandhi waited for a berth on a ship to London he found that he had attracted the ire of the Modh Banias of Bombay.

[ 37 ] Upon arrival in Bombay, he stayed with the local Modh Bania community whose elders warned Gandhi that England would tempt him to compromise his religion, and eat and drink in Western ways. Despite Gandhi informing them of his promise to his mother and her blessings, Gandhi was excommunicated from his caste. Gandhi ignored this, and on 4 September, he sailed from Bombay to London, with his brother seeing him off.

[ 38 ] [ 40 ] Gandhi attended University College, London , where he took classes in English literature with Henry Morley in 1888–1889.

[ 42 ] Gandhi in London as a law student Gandhi also enrolled at the Inns of Court School of Law in Inner Temple with the intention of becoming a barrister .

[ 39 ] His childhood shyness and self-withdrawal had continued through his teens. Gandhi retained these traits when he arrived in London, but joined a public speaking practice group and overcame his shyness sufficiently to practise law.

[ 43 ] Gandhi demonstrated a keen interest in the welfare of London's impoverished dockland communities. In 1889, a bitter trade dispute broke out in London, with dockers striking for better pay and conditions, and seamen, shipbuilders, factory girls and other joining the strike in solidarity. The strikers were successful, in part due to the mediation of Cardinal Manning , leading Gandhi and an Indian friend to make a point of visiting the cardinal and thanking him for his work.

[ 44 ] Vegetarianism and committee work Gandhi with the Vegetarian Society on the Isle of Wight, 1890 His vow to his mother influenced Gandhi's time in London. Gandhi tried to adopt "English" customs, including taking dancing lessons.

[ 45 ] However, he didn't appreciate the bland vegetarian food offered by his landlady and was frequently hungry until he found one of London's few vegetarian restaurants. Influenced by Henry Salt's writing, Gandhi joined the London Vegetarian Society (LVS) and was elected to its executive committee under the aegis of its president and benefactor Arnold Hills .

[ 46 ] An achievement while on the committee was the establishment of a Bayswater chapter.

[ 47 ] Some of the vegetarians Gandhi met were members of the Theosophical Society , which had been founded in 1875 to further universal brotherhood, and which was devoted to the study of Buddhist and Hindu literature. They encouraged Gandhi to join them in reading the Bhagavad Gita both in translation as well as in the original.

[ 46 ] Gandhi had a friendly and productive relationship with Hills, but the two men took a different view on the continued LVS membership of fellow committee member Thomas Allinson . Their disagreement is the first known example of Gandhi challenging authority, despite his shyness and temperamental disinclination towards confrontation.

[ citation needed ] Allinson had been promoting newly available birth control methods , but Hills disapproved of these, believing they undermined public morality. He believed vegetarianism to be a moral movement and that Allinson should therefore no longer remain a member of the LVS. Gandhi shared Hills' views on the dangers of birth control, but defended Allinson's right to differ.

[ 48 ] It would have been hard for Gandhi to challenge Hills; Hills was 12 years his senior and unlike Gandhi, highly eloquent. Hills bankrolled the LVS and was a captain of industry with his Thames Ironworks company employing more than 6,000 people in the East End of London . Hills was also a highly accomplished sportsman who later founded the football club West Ham United . In his 1927 An Autobiography, Vol. I , Gandhi wrote: The question deeply interested me...I had a high regard for Mr. Hills and his generosity. But I thought it was quite improper to exclude a man from a vegetarian society simply because he refused to regard puritan morals as one of the objects of the society [ 48 ] A motion to remove Allinson was raised, and was debated and voted on by the committee. Gandhi's shyness was an obstacle to his defence of Allinson at the committee meeting. Gandhi wrote his views down on paper, but shyness prevented Gandhi from reading out his arguments, so Hills, the President, asked another committee member to read them out for him. Although some other members of the committee agreed with Gandhi, the vote was lost and Allinson was excluded. There were no hard feelings, with Hills proposing the toast at the LVS farewell dinner in honour of Gandhi's return to India.

[ 49 ] Called to the bar Gandhi, at age 22, was called to the bar in June 1891 and then left London for India, where he learned that his mother had died while he was in London and that his family had kept the news from Gandhi.

[ 46 ] His attempts at establishing a law practice in Bombay failed because Gandhi was psychologically unable to cross-examine witnesses. He returned to Rajkot to make a modest living drafting petitions for litigants, but Gandhi was forced to stop after running afoul of British officer Sam Sunny.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] In 1893, a Muslim merchant in Kathiawar named Dada Abdullah contacted Gandhi. Abdullah owned a large successful shipping business in South Africa. His distant cousin in Johannesburg needed a lawyer, and they preferred someone with Kathiawari heritage. Gandhi inquired about his pay for the work. They offered a total salary of £105 (~$4,143 in 2023 money) plus travel expenses. He accepted it, knowing that it would be at least a one-year commitment in the Colony of Natal , South Africa, also a part of the British Empire.

[ 47 ] [ 50 ] Civil rights activist in South Africa (1893–1914) Gandhi and the founders of the Natal Indian Congress, 1895 In April 1893, Gandhi, aged 23, set sail for South Africa to be the lawyer for Abdullah's cousin.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Gandhi spent 21 years in South Africa where he developed his political views, ethics, and politics.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] During this time Gandhi briefly returned to India in 1902 to mobilise support for the welfare of Indians in South Africa.

[ 54 ] Immediately upon arriving in South Africa, Gandhi faced discrimination due to his skin colour and heritage.

[ 55 ] Gandhi was not allowed to sit with European passengers in the stagecoach and was told to sit on the floor near the driver, then beaten when he refused; elsewhere, Gandhi was kicked into a gutter for daring to walk near a house, in another instance thrown off a train at Pietermaritzburg after refusing to leave the first-class.

[ 38 ] [ 56 ] Gandhi sat in the train station, shivering all night and pondering if he should return to India or protest for his rights.

[ 56 ] Gandhi chose to protest and was allowed to board the train the next day.

[ 57 ] In another incident, the magistrate of a Durban court ordered Gandhi to remove his turban, which he refused to do.

[ 38 ] Indians were not allowed to walk on public footpaths in South Africa. Gandhi was kicked by a police officer out of the footpath onto the street without warning.

[ 38 ] When Gandhi arrived in South Africa, according to Arthur Herman, he thought of himself as "a Briton first, and an Indian second." [ 58 ] However, the prejudice against Gandhi and his fellow Indians from British people that Gandhi experienced and observed deeply bothered him. Gandhi found it humiliating, struggling to understand how some people can feel honour or superiority or pleasure in such inhumane practices.

[ 56 ] Gandhi began to question his people's standing in the British Empire .

[ 59 ] The Abdullah case that had brought him to South Africa concluded in May 1894, and the Indian community organised a farewell party for Gandhi as he prepared to return to India.

[ 60 ] The farewell party was turned into a working committee to plan the resistance to a new Natal government discriminatory proposal. This led to Gandhi extending his original period of stay in South Africa. Gandhi planned to assist Indians in opposing a bill to deny them the right to vote , a right then proposed to be an exclusive European right. He asked Joseph Chamberlain , the British Colonial Secretary, to reconsider his position on this bill.

[ 52 ] Though unable to halt the bill's passage, Gandhi's campaign was successful in drawing attention to the grievances of Indians in South Africa. He helped found the Natal Indian Congress in 1894, [ 47 ] [ 57 ] and through this organisation, Gandhi moulded the Indian community of South Africa into a unified political force. In January 1897, when Gandhi landed in Durban, a mob of white settlers attacked him, [ 61 ] and Gandhi escaped only through the efforts of the wife of the police superintendent.

[ citation needed ] However, Gandhi refused to press charges against any member of the mob.

[ 47 ] Gandhi (middle, third from right) with the stretcher-bearers of the Indian Ambulance Corps during the Boer War During the Boer War , Gandhi volunteered in 1900 to form a group of stretcher-bearers as the Natal Indian Ambulance Corps . According to Arthur Herman, Gandhi wanted to disprove the British colonial stereotype that Hindus were not fit for "manly" activities involving danger and exertion, unlike the Muslim " martial races ." [ 62 ] Gandhi raised 1,100 Indian volunteers to support British combat troops against the Boers. They were trained and medically certified to serve on the front lines. They were auxiliaries at the Battle of Colenso to a White volunteer ambulance corps. At the Battle of Spion Kop , Gandhi and his bearers moved to the front line and had to carry wounded soldiers for miles to a field hospital since the terrain was too rough for the ambulances. Gandhi and 37 other Indians received the Queen's South Africa Medal .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Gandhi and his wife Kasturba (1902) In 1906, the Transvaal government promulgated a new Act compelling registration of the colony's Indian and Chinese populations. At a mass protest meeting held in Johannesburg on 11 September that year, Gandhi adopted his still evolving methodology of Satyagraha (devotion to the truth), or nonviolent protest, for the first time.

[ 65 ] According to Anthony Parel, Gandhi was also influenced by the Tamil moral text Tirukkuṛaḷ after Leo Tolstoy mentioned it in their correspondence that began with " A Letter to a Hindu ".

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Gandhi urged Indians to defy the new law and to suffer the punishments for doing so. His ideas of protests, persuasion skills, and public relations had emerged. Gandhi took these back to India in 1915.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Europeans, Indians and Africans Gandhi focused his attention on Indians and Africans while he was in South Africa. Initially, Gandhi was not interested in politics, but this changed after he was discriminated against and bullied, such as by being thrown out of a train coach due to his skin colour by a white train official. After several such incidents with Whites in South Africa , Gandhi's thinking and focus changed, and he felt he must resist this and fight for rights. Gandhi entered politics by forming the Natal Indian Congress.

[ 70 ] According to Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed, Gandhi's views on racism are contentious in some cases. He suffered persecution from the beginning in South Africa. Like with other coloured people, white officials denied Gandhi his rights, and the press and those in the streets bullied and called Gandhi a "parasite", "semi-barbarous", "canker", "squalid coolie", "yellow man", and other epithets. People would even spit on him as an expression of racial hate.

[ 71 ] Advertisement of the Indian Opinion , a newspaper founded by Gandhi While in South Africa, Gandhi focused on the racial persecution of Indians before he started to focus on racism against Africans. In some cases, state Desai and Vahed, Gandhi's behaviour was one of being a willing part of racial stereotyping and African exploitation.

[ 71 ] During a speech in September 1896, Gandhi complained that the whites in the British colony of South Africa were "degrading the Indian to the level of a raw Kaffir ." [ 72 ] Scholars cite it as an example of evidence that Gandhi at that time thought of Indians and black South Africans differently.

[ 71 ] As another example given by Herman, Gandhi, at the age of 24, prepared a legal brief for the Natal Assembly in 1895, seeking voting rights for Indians. Gandhi cited race history and European Orientalists' opinions that "Anglo-Saxons and Indians are sprung from the same Aryan stock or rather the Indo-European peoples" and argued that Indians should not be grouped with the Africans.

[ 60 ] Years later, Gandhi and his colleagues served and helped Africans as nurses and by opposing racism. The Nobel Peace Prize winner Nelson Mandela is among admirers of Gandhi's efforts to fight against racism in Africa.

[ 73 ] The general image of Gandhi, state Desai and Vahed, has been reinvented since his assassination as though Gandhi was always a saint, when in reality, his life was more complex, contained inconvenient truths, and was one that changed over time.

[ 71 ] Scholars have also pointed the evidence to a rich history of co-operation and efforts by Gandhi and Indian people with nonwhite South Africans against persecution of Africans and the Apartheid .

[ 74 ] In 1903, Gandhi started the Indian Opinion , a journal that carried news of Indians in South Africa, Indians in India with articles on all subjects -social, moral and intellectual. Each issue was multi-lingual and carried material in English, Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil. It carried ads, depended heavily on Gandhi's contributions (often printed without a byline) and was an 'advocate' for the Indian cause.

[ 75 ] In 1906, when the Bambatha Rebellion broke out in the colony of Natal , the then 36-year-old Gandhi, despite sympathising with the Zulu rebels, encouraged Indian South Africans to form a volunteer stretcher-bearer unit.

[ 76 ] Writing in the Indian Opinion , Gandhi argued that military service would be beneficial to the Indian community and claimed it would give them "health and happiness." [ 77 ] Gandhi eventually led a volunteer mixed unit of Indian and African stretcher-bearers to treat wounded combatants during the suppression of the rebellion.

[ 76 ] Gandhi photographed in South Africa (1909) The medical unit commanded by Gandhi operated for less than two months before being disbanded.

[ 76 ] After the suppression of the rebellion, the colonial establishment showed no interest in extending to the Indian community the civil rights granted to white South Africans .

By 1910, Gandhi's newspaper, Indian Opinion , was covering reports on discrimination against Africans by the colonial regime. Gandhi remarked that the Africans "alone are the original inhabitants of the land. … The whites, on the other hand, have occupied the land forcibly and appropriated it for themselves." [ 78 ] In 1910, Gandhi established, with the help of his friend Hermann Kallenbach , an idealistic community they named Tolstoy Farm near Johannesburg.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] There, Gandhi nurtured his policy of peaceful resistance.

[ 81 ] In the years after black South Africans gained the right to vote in South Africa (1994), Gandhi was proclaimed a national hero with numerous monuments.

[ 82 ] Struggle for Indian independence (1915–1947) See also: Indian independence movement At the request of Gopal Krishna Gokhale , conveyed to Gandhi by C. F. Andrews , Gandhi returned to India in 1915. He brought an international reputation as a leading Indian nationalist, theorist and community organiser.

Gandhi joined the Indian National Congress and was introduced to Indian issues, politics and the Indian people primarily by Gokhale. Gokhale was a key leader of the Congress Party best known for his restraint and moderation, and his insistence on working inside the system. Gandhi took Gokhale's liberal approach based on British Whiggish traditions and transformed it to make it look Indian.

[ 83 ] Gandhi took leadership of the Congress in 1920 and began escalating demands until on 26 January 1930 the Indian National Congress declared the independence of India. The British did not recognise the declaration, but negotiations ensued, with the Congress taking a role in provincial government in the late 1930s. Gandhi and the Congress withdrew their support of the Raj when the Viceroy declared war on Germany in September 1939 without consultation. Tensions escalated until Gandhi demanded immediate independence in 1942, and the British responded by imprisoning him and tens of thousands of Congress leaders. Meanwhile, the Muslim League did co-operate with Britain and moved, against Gandhi's strong opposition, to demands for a totally separate Muslim state of Pakistan. In August 1947, the British partitioned the land with India and Pakistan each achieving independence on terms that Gandhi disapproved.

[ 84 ] Role in World War I See also: The role of India in World War I In April 1918, during the latter part of World War I , the Viceroy invited Gandhi to a War Conference in Delhi.

[ 85 ] Gandhi agreed to support the war effort.

[ 38 ] [ 86 ] In contrast to the Zulu War of 1906 and the outbreak of World War I in 1914, when he recruited volunteers for the Ambulance Corps, this time Gandhi attempted to recruit combatants. In a June 1918 leaflet entitled "Appeal for Enlistment", Gandhi wrote: "To bring about such a state of things we should have the ability to defend ourselves, that is, the ability to bear arms and to use them... If we want to learn the use of arms with the greatest possible despatch, it is our duty to enlist ourselves in the army." [ 87 ] However, Gandhi stipulated in a letter to the Viceroy's private secretary that he "personally will not kill or injure anybody, friend or foe." [ 88 ] Gandhi's support for the war campaign brought into question his consistency on nonviolence.

Gandhi's private secretary noted that "The question of the consistency between his creed of ' Ahimsa ' (nonviolence) and his recruiting campaign was raised not only then but has been discussed ever since." [ 86 ] According to political and educational scientist Christian Bartolf, Gandhi's support for the war stemmed from his belief that true ahimsa could not exist simultaneously with cowardice. Therefore, Gandhi felt that Indians needed to be willing and capable of using arms before they voluntarily chose non-violence.

[ 89 ] In July 1918, Gandhi said that he could not persuade even one individual to enlist for the world war. "So far I have not a single recruit to my credit apart," Gandhi wrote. He added: "They object because they fear to die." [ 90 ] Champaran agitations Main article: Champaran Satyagraha Gandhi in 1918, at the time of the Kheda and Champaran Satyagrahas Gandhi's first major achievement came in 1917 with the Champaran agitation in Bihar . The Champaran agitation pitted the local peasantry against largely Anglo-Indian plantation owners who were backed by the local administration. The peasants were forced to grow indigo ( Indigofera sp.), a cash crop for Indigo dye whose demand had been declining over two decades and were forced to sell their crops to the planters at a fixed price. Unhappy with this, the peasantry appealed to Gandhi at his ashram in Ahmedabad. Pursuing a strategy of nonviolent protest, Gandhi took the administration by surprise and won concessions from the authorities.

[ 91 ] Kheda agitations Main article: Kheda Satyagraha In 1918, Kheda was hit by floods and famine and the peasantry was demanding relief from taxes. Gandhi moved his headquarters to Nadiad , [ 92 ] organising scores of supporters and fresh volunteers from the region, the most notable being Vallabhbhai Patel .

[ 93 ] Using non-co-operation as a technique, Gandhi initiated a signature campaign where peasants pledged non-payment of revenue even under the threat of confiscation of land. A social boycott of mamlatdars and talatdars (revenue officials within the district) accompanied the agitation. Gandhi worked hard to win public support for the agitation across the country. For five months, the administration refused, but by the end of May 1918, the government gave way on important provisions and relaxed the conditions of payment of revenue tax until the famine ended. In Kheda, Vallabhbhai Patel represented the farmers in negotiations with the British, who suspended revenue collection and released all the prisoners.

[ 94 ] Khilafat Movement Main article: Khilafat Movement Gandhi (wearing a Gandhi cap ) with Rabindranath Tagore and Sharda Mehta , 1920 In 1919, following World War I, Gandhi (aged 49) sought political co-operation from Muslims in his fight against British imperialism by supporting the Ottoman Empire that had been defeated in the World War. Before this initiative of Gandhi, communal disputes and religious riots between Hindus and Muslims were common in British India, such as the riots of 1917–18. Gandhi had already vocally supported the British crown in the first world war.

[ 95 ] This decision of Gandhi was in part motivated by the British promise to reciprocate the help with swaraj (self-government) to Indians after the end of World War I.

[ 96 ] The British government had offered, instead of self-government, minor reforms instead, disappointing Gandhi.

[ 97 ] He announced his satyagraha (civil disobedience) intentions. The British colonial officials made their counter move by passing the Rowlatt Act , to block Gandhi's movement. The Act allowed the British government to treat civil disobedience participants as criminals and gave it the legal basis to arrest anyone for "preventive indefinite detention, incarceration without judicial review or any need for a trial." [ 98 ] Gandhi felt that Hindu-Muslim co-operation was necessary for political progress against the British. He leveraged the Khilafat Movement , wherein Sunni Muslims in India, their leaders such as the sultans of princely states in India and the Ali brothers ( Shaukat Ali and Mohammad Ali Jauhar ) championed the Turkish Caliph as a solidarity symbol of Sunni Islamic community ( ummah ). They saw the Caliph as their means to support Islam and the Islamic law after the defeat of Ottoman Empire in World War I.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] Gandhi's support to the Khilafat Movement led to mixed results. It initially led to a strong Muslim support for Gandhi. However, the Hindu leaders including Rabindranath Tagore questioned Gandhi's leadership because they were largely against recognising or supporting the Sunni Islamic Caliph in Turkey.

[ d ] The increasing Muslim support for Gandhi, after he championed the Caliph's cause, temporarily stopped the Hindu-Muslim communal violence. It offered evidence of inter-communal harmony in joint Rowlatt satyagraha demonstration rallies, raising Gandhi's stature as the political leader to the British.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] His support for the Khilafat Movement also helped Gandhi sideline Muhammad Ali Jinnah , who had announced his opposition to the satyagraha non-co-operation movement approach of Gandhi. Jinnah began creating his independent support, and later went on to lead the demand for West and East Pakistan. Though they agreed in general terms on Indian independence, they disagreed on the means of achieving this. Jinnah was mainly interested in dealing with the British via constitutional negotiation, rather than attempting to agitate the masses.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] In 1922, the Khilafat Movement gradually collapsed following the end of the non-cooperation movement with the arrest of Gandhi.

[ 110 ] A number of Muslim leaders and delegates abandoned Gandhi and Congress.

[ 111 ] Hindu-Muslim communal conflicts reignited, and deadly religious riots re-appeared in numerous cities, with 91 in United Provinces of Agra and Oudh alone.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Non-co-operation Main article: Non-co-operation movement With his book Hind Swaraj (1909) Gandhi, aged 40, declared that British rule was established in India with the co-operation of Indians and had survived only because of this co-operation. If Indians refused to co-operate, British rule would collapse and swaraj (Indian independence) would come.

[ 5 ] [ 114 ] Gandhi with Annie Besant en route to a meeting in Madras in September 1921. Earlier, in Madurai , on 21 September 1921, Gandhi had adopted the loin-cloth for the first time as a symbol of his identification with India's poor.

In February 1919, Gandhi cautioned the Viceroy of India with a cable communication that if the British were to pass the Rowlatt Act , he would appeal to Indians to start civil disobedience.

[ 115 ] The British government ignored him and passed the law, stating it would not yield to threats. The satyagraha civil disobedience followed, with people assembling to protest the Rowlatt Act. On 30 March 1919, British law officers opened fire on an assembly of unarmed people, peacefully gathered, participating in satyagraha in Delhi.

[ 115 ] People rioted in retaliation. On 6 April 1919, a Hindu festival day, Gandhi asked a crowd to remember not to injure or kill British people, but to express their frustration with peace, to boycott British goods and burn any British clothing they owned. He emphasised the use of non-violence to the British and towards each other, even if the other side used violence. Communities across India announced plans to gather in greater numbers to protest. Government warned him not to enter Delhi, but Gandhi defied the order and was arrested on 9 April.

[ 115 ] On 13 April 1919, people including women with children gathered in an Amritsar park, and British Indian Army officer Reginald Dyer surrounded them and ordered troops under his command to fire on them. The resulting Jallianwala Bagh massacre (or Amritsar massacre) of hundreds of Sikh and Hindu civilians enraged the subcontinent but was supported by some Britons and parts of the British media as a necessary response. Gandhi in Ahmedabad, on the day after the massacre in Amritsar, did not criticise the British and instead criticised his fellow countrymen for not exclusively using 'love' to deal with the 'hate' of the British government.

[ 115 ] Gandhi demanded that the Indian people stop all violence, stop all property destruction, and went on fast-to-death to pressure Indians to stop their rioting.

[ 116 ] The massacre and Gandhi's non-violent response to it moved many, but also made some Sikhs and Hindus upset that Dyer was getting away with murder. Investigation committees were formed by the British, which Gandhi asked Indians to boycott.

[ 115 ] The unfolding events, the massacre and the British response, led Gandhi to the belief that Indians will never get a fair equal treatment under British rulers, and he shifted his attention to swaraj and political independence for India.

[ 117 ] In 1921, Gandhi was the leader of the Indian National Congress.

[ 101 ] He reorganised the Congress. With Congress now behind Gandhi, and Muslim support triggered by his backing the Khilafat Movement to restore the Caliph in Turkey, [ 101 ] Gandhi had the political support and the attention of the British Raj .

[ 104 ] [ 98 ] [ 100 ] Gandhi spinning yarn Gandhi expanded his nonviolent non-co-operation platform to include the swadeshi policy – the boycott of foreign-made goods, especially British goods. Linked to this was his advocacy that khadi (homespun cloth) be worn by all Indians instead of British-made textiles. Gandhi exhorted Indian men and women, rich or poor, to spend time each day spinning khadi in support of the independence movement.

[ 118 ] In addition to boycotting British products, Gandhi urged the people to boycott British institutions and law courts, to resign from government employment, and to forsake British titles and honours . Gandhi thus began his journey aimed at crippling the British India government economically, politically and administratively.

[ 119 ] The appeal of "Non-cooperation" grew, its social popularity drew participation from all strata of Indian society. Gandhi was arrested on 10 March 1922, tried for sedition, and sentenced to six years' imprisonment. He began his sentence on 18 March 1922. With Gandhi isolated in prison, the Indian National Congress split into two factions, one led by Chitta Ranjan Das and Motilal Nehru favouring party participation in the legislatures, and the other led by Chakravarti Rajagopalachari and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel , opposing this move.

[ 120 ] Furthermore, co-operation among Hindus and Muslims ended as Khilafat movement collapsed with the rise of Atatürk in Turkey. Muslim leaders left the Congress and began forming Muslim organisations. The political base behind Gandhi had broken into factions. He was released in February 1924 for an appendicitis operation, having served only two years.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Salt Satyagraha (Salt March/Civil Disobedience Movement) Main article: Salt Satyagraha Original footage of Gandhi and his followers marching to Dandi in the Salt Satyagraha After his early release from prison for political crimes in 1924, Gandhi continued to pursue swaraj over the second half of the 1920s. He pushed through a resolution at the Calcutta Congress in December 1928 calling on the British government to grant India dominion status or face a new campaign of non-cooperation with complete independence for the country as its goal.

[ 123 ] After Gandhi's support for World War I with Indian combat troops, and the failure of Khilafat Movement in preserving the rule of Caliph in Turkey, followed by a collapse in Muslim support for his leadership, some such as Subhas Chandra Bose and Bhagat Singh questioned his values and non-violent approach.

[ 100 ] [ 124 ] While many Hindu leaders championed a demand for immediate independence, Gandhi revised his own call to a one-year wait, instead of two.

[ 123 ] The British did not respond favourably to Gandhi's proposal. British political leaders such as Lord Birkenhead and Winston Churchill announced opposition to "the appeasers of Gandhi" in their discussions with European diplomats who sympathised with Indian demands.

[ 125 ] On 31 December 1929, an Indian flag was unfurled in Lahore . Gandhi led Congress in a celebration on 26 January 1930 of India's Independence Day in Lahore. This day was commemorated by almost every other Indian organisation. Gandhi then launched a new Satyagraha against the British salt tax in March 1930. He sent an ultimatum in the form of a letter personally addressed to Lord Irwin, the viceroy of India, on 2 March. Gandhi condemned British rule in the letter, describing it as "a curse" that "has impoverished the dumb millions by a system of progressive exploitation and by a ruinously expensive military and civil administration... It has reduced us politically to serfdom." Gandhi also mentioned in the letter that the viceroy received a salary "over five thousand times India's average income." In the letter, Gandhi also stressed his continued adherence to non-violent forms of protest.

[ 126 ] This was highlighted by the Salt March to Dandi from 12 March to 6 April, where, together with 78 volunteers, Gandhi marched 388 kilometres (241 mi) from Ahmedabad to Dandi, Gujarat to make salt himself, with the declared intention of breaking the salt laws. The march took 25 days to cover 240 miles with Gandhi speaking to often huge crowds along the way. Thousands of Indians joined him in Dandi.

According to Sarma, Gandhi recruited women to participate in the salt tax campaigns and the boycott of foreign products, which gave many women a new self-confidence and dignity in the mainstream of Indian public life.

[ 127 ] However, other scholars such as Marilyn French state that Gandhi barred women from joining his civil disobedience movement because Gandhi feared he would be accused of using women as a political shield.

[ 128 ] When women insisted on joining the movement and participating in public demonstrations, Gandhi asked the volunteers to get permissions of their guardians and only those women who can arrange child-care should join him.

[ 129 ] Regardless of Gandhi's apprehensions and views, Indian women joined the Salt March by the thousands to defy the British salt taxes and monopoly on salt mining. On 5 May, Gandhi was interned under a regulation dating from 1827 in anticipation of a protest that he had planned. The protest at Dharasana salt works on 21 May went ahead without Gandhi. A horrified American journalist, Webb Miller , described the British response thus: In complete silence the Gandhi men drew up and halted a hundred yards from the stockade. A picked column advanced from the crowd, waded the ditches and approached the barbed wire stockade... at a word of command, scores of native policemen rushed upon the advancing marchers and rained blows on their heads with their steel-shot lathis [long bamboo sticks]. Not one of the marchers even raised an arm to fend off blows. They went down like ninepins. From where I stood I heard the sickening whack of the clubs on unprotected skulls... Those struck down fell sprawling, unconscious or writhing with fractured skulls or broken shoulders.

[ 130 ] This went on for hours until some 300 or more protesters had been beaten, many seriously injured and two killed. At no time did they offer any resistance. After Gandhi's arrest, the women marched and picketed shops on their own, accepting violence and verbal abuse from British authorities for the cause in the manner Gandhi inspired.

[ 128 ] This campaign was one of Gandhi's most successful at upsetting British hold on India; Britain responded by imprisoning over 60,000 people.

[ 131 ] However, Congress estimates put the figure at 90,000. Among them was one of Gandhi's lieutenants, Jawaharlal Nehru .

Gandhi as folk hero Indian workers on strike in support of Gandhi in 1930 Indian Congress in the 1920s appealed to Andhra Pradesh peasants by creating Telugu language plays that combined Indian mythology and legends, linked them to Gandhi's ideas, and portrayed Gandhi as a messiah , a reincarnation of ancient and medieval Indian nationalist leaders and saints. The plays built support among peasants steeped in traditional Hindu culture, according to Murali, and this effort made Gandhi a folk hero in Telugu speaking villages, a sacred messiah-like figure.

[ 132 ] According to Dennis Dalton, it was Gandhi's ideas that were responsible for his wide following. Gandhi criticised Western civilisation as one driven by "brute force and immorality", contrasting it with his categorisation of Indian civilisation as one driven by "soul force and morality".

[ 133 ] Gandhi captured the imagination of the people of his heritage with his ideas about winning "hate with love". These ideas are evidenced in his pamphlets from the 1890s, in South Africa, where too Gandhi was popular among the Indian indentured workers . After he returned to India, people flocked to Gandhi because he reflected their values.

[ 133 ] Gandhi's first visit to Odisha in 1921, a general meeting held at the riverbed of Kathajodi Gandhi also campaigned hard going from one rural corner of the Indian subcontinent to another. He used terminology and phrases such as Rama -rajya from Ramayana , Prahlada as a paradigmatic icon, and such cultural symbols as another facet of swaraj and satyagraha .

[ 134 ] During Gandhi's lifetime, these ideas sounded strange outside India, but they readily and deeply resonated with the culture and historic values of his people.

[ 133 ] [ 135 ] Negotiations The government, represented by Lord Irwin , the Viceroy of India , decided to negotiate with Gandhi. The Gandhi–Irwin Pact was signed in March 1931. The British Government agreed to free all political prisoners , in return for the suspension of the civil disobedience movement. According to the pact, Gandhi was invited to attend the Round Table Conference in London for discussions and as the sole representative of the Indian National Congress. The conference was a disappointment to Gandhi and the nationalists. Gandhi expected to discuss India's independence, while the British side focused on the Indian princes and Indian minorities rather than on a transfer of power. Lord Irwin's successor, Lord Willingdon , took a hard line against India as an independent nation, began a new campaign of controlling and subduing the nationalist movement. Gandhi was again arrested, and the government tried and failed to negate his influence by completely isolating him from his followers.

[ 136 ] In Britain, Winston Churchill , a prominent Conservative politician who was then out of office but later became its prime minister, became a vigorous and articulate critic of Gandhi and opponent of his long-term plans. Churchill often ridiculed Gandhi, saying in a widely reported 1931 speech: It is alarming and also nauseating to see Mr Gandhi, a seditious Middle Temple lawyer, now posing as a fakir of a type well known in the East, striding half-naked up the steps of the Vice-regal palace....to parley on equal terms with the representative of the King-Emperor.

[ 137 ] Churchill's bitterness against Gandhi grew in the 1930s. He called Gandhi as the one who was "seditious in aim" whose evil genius and multiform menace was attacking the British empire. Churchill called him a dictator, a "Hindu Mussolini ", fomenting a race war, trying to replace the Raj with Brahmin cronies, playing on the ignorance of Indian masses, all for selfish gain.

[ 138 ] Churchill attempted to isolate Gandhi, and his criticism of Gandhi was widely covered by European and American press. It gained Churchill sympathetic support, but it also increased support for Gandhi among Europeans. The developments heightened Churchill's anxiety that the "British themselves would give up out of pacifism and misplaced conscience." [ 138 ] Round Table Conferences Gandhi and his personal assistant Mahadev Desai at Birla House, 1939 During the discussions between Gandhi and the British government over 1931–32 at the Round Table Conferences , Gandhi, now aged about 62, sought constitutional reforms as a preparation to the end of colonial British rule, and begin the self-rule by Indians.

[ 139 ] The British side sought reforms that would keep the Indian subcontinent as a colony. The British negotiators proposed constitutional reforms on a British Dominion model that established separate electorates based on religious and social divisions. The British questioned the Congress party and Gandhi's authority to speak for all of India.

[ 140 ] They invited Indian religious leaders, such as Muslims and Sikhs, to press their demands along religious lines, as well as B. R. Ambedkar as the representative leader of the untouchables.

[ 139 ] Gandhi vehemently opposed a constitution that enshrined rights or representations based on communal divisions, because he feared that it would not bring people together but divide them, perpetuate their status, and divert the attention from India's struggle to end the colonial rule.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] The Second Round Table conference was the only time Gandhi left India between 1914 and his death in 1948. He was accompanied by his secretary Mahadev Desai , son Devdas Gandhi and British supporter Mirabehn .

[ 143 ] Gandhi declined the government's offer of accommodation in an expensive West End hotel, preferring to stay in the East End , to live among working-class people, as he did in India.

[ 144 ] Gandhi based himself in a small cell-bedroom at his friend Muriel Lester 's "People's House" at Kingsley Hall for the three-month duration of his stay.

[ 145 ] He was enthusiastically received by East Enders.

[ 146 ] Local children gave him toys for his birthday and Lester noted that he would gently place them on window sills and in carriages during his stay and took them back to India.

[ 143 ] During this time, Gandhi also renewed his links with the British vegetarian movement .

An admiring East End crowd gathers to witness the arrival of Mahatma Gandhi, 1931 After Gandhi returned from the Second Round Table conference, he started a new satyagraha . Gandhi was arrested and imprisoned at the Yerwada Jail , Pune. While he was in prison, the British government enacted a new law that granted untouchables a separate electorate. It came to be known as the Communal Award .

[ 147 ] In protest, Gandhi started a fast-unto-death, while he was held in prison.

[ 148 ] The resulting public outcry forced the government, in consultations with Ambedkar, to replace the Communal Award with a compromise Poona Pact .

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] Congress politics In 1934, Gandhi resigned from Congress party membership. He did not disagree with the party's position, but felt that if he resigned, Gandhi's popularity with Indians would cease to stifle the party's membership, which actually varied, including communists, socialists, trade unionists, students, religious conservatives, and those with pro-business convictions, and that these various voices would get a chance to make themselves heard. Gandhi also wanted to avoid being a target for Raj propaganda by leading a party that had temporarily accepted political accommodation with the Raj.

[ 151 ] In 1936, Gandhi returned to active politics again with the Nehru presidency and the Lucknow session of the Congress. Although Gandhi wanted a total focus on the task of winning independence and not speculation about India's future, he did not restrain the Congress from adopting socialism as its goal. Gandhi had a clash with Subhas Chandra Bose, who had been elected president in 1938, and who had previously expressed a lack of faith in nonviolence as a means of protest.

[ 152 ] Despite Gandhi's opposition, Bose won a second term as Congress President, against Gandhi's nominee, Bhogaraju Pattabhi Sitaramayya . Gandhi declared that Sitaramayya's defeat was his defeat.

[ 153 ] Bose later left the Congress when the All-India leaders resigned en masse in protest of his abandonment of the principles introduced by Gandhi.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] World War II and Quit India movement Main article: Quit India Movement Gandhi talking with Jawaharlal Nehru , his designated political heir, during the drafting of the Quit India Resolution in Bombay, August 1942 Gandhi opposed providing any help to the British war effort and he campaigned against any Indian participation in World War II .

[ 156 ] The British government responded with the arrests of Gandhi and many other Congress leaders and killed over 1,000 Indians who participated in this movement.

[ 157 ] A number of violent attacks were also carried out by the nationalists against the British government.

[ 158 ] While Gandhi's campaign did not enjoy the support of a number of Indian leaders, and over 2.5 million Indians volunteered and joined the British military to fight on various fronts of the Allied Forces , the movement played a role in weakening the control over the South Asian region by the British regime and it ultimately paved the way for Indian independence.

[ 156 ] [ 158 ] Gandhi's opposition to the Indian participation in World War II was motivated by his belief that India could not be party to a war ostensibly being fought for democratic freedom while that freedom was denied to India itself.

[ 159 ] Gandhi also condemned Nazism and Fascism, a view which won endorsement of other Indian leaders. As the war progressed, Gandhi intensified his demand for independence, calling for the British to Quit India in a 1942 speech in Mumbai.

[ 160 ] This was Gandhi's and the Congress Party's most definitive revolt aimed at securing the British exit from India.

[ 161 ] The British government responded quickly to the Quit India speech, and within hours after Gandhi's speech arrested Gandhi and all the members of the Congress Working Committee.

[ 162 ] His countrymen retaliated the arrests by damaging or burning down hundreds of government owned railway stations, police stations, and cutting down telegraph wires.

[ 163 ] In 1942, Gandhi now nearing age 73, urged his people to completely stop co-operating with the imperial government. In this effort, Gandhi urged that they neither kill nor injure British people but be willing to suffer and die if violence is initiated by the British officials.

[ 160 ] He clarified that the movement would not be stopped because of any individual acts of violence, saying that the "ordered anarchy" of "the present system of administration" was "worse than real anarchy." [ 164 ] [ 165 ] Gandhi urged Indians to karo ya maro ("do or die") in the cause of their rights and freedoms.

[ 160 ] [ 166 ] Gandhi in 1942, the year he launched the Quit India Movement Gandhi's arrest lasted two years, as he was held in the Aga Khan Palace in Pune . During this period, Gandhi's longtime secretary Mahadev Desai died of a heart attack, his wife Kasturba died after 18 months' imprisonment on 22 February 1944, and Gandhi suffered a severe malaria attack.

[ 163 ] While in jail, he agreed to an interview with Stuart Gelder, a British journalist. Gelder then composed and released an interview summary, cabled it to the mainstream press, that announced sudden concessions Gandhi was willing to make, comments that shocked his countrymen, the Congress workers and even Gandhi. The latter two claimed that it distorted what Gandhi actually said on a range of topics and falsely repudiated the Quit India movement.

[ 163 ] Gandhi was released before the end of the war on 6 May 1944 because of his failing health and necessary surgery; the Raj did not want him to die in prison and enrage the nation. Gandhi came out of detention to an altered political scene – the Muslim League for example, which a few years earlier had appeared marginal, "now occupied the centre of the political stage" [ 167 ] and the topic of Jinnah's campaign for Pakistan was a major talking point. Gandhi and Jinnah had extensive correspondence and the two men met several times over a period of two weeks in September 1944 at Jinnah's house in Bombay, where Gandhi insisted on a united religiously plural and independent India which included Muslims and non-Muslims of the Indian subcontinent coexisting. Jinnah rejected this proposal and insisted instead for partitioning the subcontinent on religious lines to create a separate Muslim homeland (later Pakistan).

[ 168 ] These discussions continued through 1947.

[ 169 ] While the leaders of Congress languished in jail, the other parties supported the war and gained organisational strength. Underground publications flailed at the ruthless suppression of Congress, but it had little control over events.

[ 170 ] At the end of the war, the British gave clear indications that power would be transferred to Indian hands. At this point, Gandhi called off the struggle, and around 100,000 political prisoners were released, including the Congress's leadership.

[ 171 ] Partition and independence See also: Indian independence movement and Partition of India Gandhi with Muhammad Ali Jinnah in September 1944 Gandhi with Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy (left) and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (far right) during Noakhali riots in October 1946 Gandhi opposed the partition of the Indian subcontinent along religious lines.

[ 168 ] [ 172 ] [ 173 ] The Indian National Congress and Gandhi called for the British to Quit India . However, the All-India Muslim League demanded "Divide and Quit India." [ 174 ] [ 175 ] Gandhi suggested an agreement which required the Congress and the Muslim League to co-operate and attain independence under a provisional government, thereafter, the question of partition could be resolved by a plebiscite in the districts with a Muslim majority.

[ 176 ] Jinnah rejected Gandhi's proposal and called for Direct Action Day , on 16 August 1946, to press Muslims to publicly gather in cities and support his proposal for the partition of the Indian subcontinent into a Muslim state and non-Muslim state.

Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy , the Muslim League Chief Minister of Bengal – now Bangladesh and West Bengal (excluding Cooch Behar ), gave Calcutta's police special holiday to celebrate the Direct Action Day.

[ 177 ] The Direct Action Day triggered a mass murder of Calcutta Hindus and the torching of their property, and holidaying police were missing to contain or stop the conflict.

[ 178 ] The British government did not order its army to move in to contain the violence.

[ 177 ] The violence on Direct Action Day led to retaliatory violence against Muslims across India. Thousands of Hindus and Muslims were murdered, and tens of thousands were injured in the cycle of violence in the days that followed.

[ 179 ] Gandhi visited the most riot-prone areas to appeal a stop to the massacres.

[ 178 ] Gandhi (center) in 1947, with Louis Mountbatten , Britain's last Viceroy of India, and his wife Edwina Mountbatten Archibald Wavell , the Viceroy and Governor-General of British India for three years through February 1947, had worked with Gandhi and Jinnah to find a common ground, before and after accepting Indian independence in principle. Wavell condemned Gandhi's character and motives as well as his ideas. Wavell accused Gandhi of harbouring the single-minded idea to "overthrow British rule and influence and to establish a Hindu raj", and called Gandhi a "malignant, malevolent, exceedingly shrewd" politician.

[ 180 ] Wavell feared a civil war on the Indian subcontinent, and doubted Gandhi would be able to stop it.

[ 180 ] The British reluctantly agreed to grant independence to the people of the Indian subcontinent, but accepted Jinnah's proposal of partitioning the land into Pakistan and India. Gandhi was involved in the final negotiations, but Stanley Wolpert states the "plan to carve up British India was never approved of or accepted by Gandhi".

[ 181 ] The partition was controversial and violently disputed. More than half a million were killed in religious riots as 10 million to 12 million non-Muslims (Hindus and Sikhs mostly) migrated from Pakistan into India, and Muslims migrated from India into Pakistan, across the newly created borders of India, West Pakistan and East Pakistan.

[ 182 ] Gandhi spent the day of independence not celebrating the end of the British rule, but appealing for peace among his countrymen by fasting and spinning in Calcutta on 15 August 1947. The partition had gripped the Indian subcontinent with religious violence and the streets were filled with corpses.

[ 183 ] Gandhi's fasting and protests are credited for stopping the religious riots and communal violence. His final fast took place from 13–18 January 1948, just days before his assassination.

[ 180 ] [ 184 ] [ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] Death Main article: Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi At 5:17 p.m. on 30 January 1948, Gandhi was with his grandnieces in the garden of Birla House (now Gandhi Smriti ), on his way to address a prayer meeting, when Nathuram Godse , a Hindu nationalist, fired three bullets into Gandhi's chest from a pistol at close range.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] According to some accounts, Gandhi died instantly.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] In other accounts, such as one prepared by an eyewitness journalist, Gandhi was carried into the Birla House, into a bedroom. There, he died about 30 minutes later as one of Gandhi's family members read verses from Hindu scriptures.

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 184 ] Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru addressed his countrymen over the All-India Radio saying: [ 200 ] Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere, and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it. Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless, we will not see him again, as we have seen him for these many years, we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow, not only for me, but for millions and millions in this country.

[ 201 ] Memorial at the location of Gandhi's assassination in 1948. His stylised footsteps lead to the memorial.

Godse, a Hindu nationalist, [ 202 ] [ 193 ] [ 203 ] with links to the Hindu Mahasabha and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh , [ 204 ] [ 205 ] [ 206 ] [ 207 ] [ 184 ] made no attempt to escape; several other conspirators were soon arrested as well. The accused were Nathuram Vinayak Godse , Narayan Apte , Vinayak Damodar Savarkar , Shankar Kistayya, Dattatraya Parchure, Vishnu Karkare, Madanlal Pahwa, and Gopal Godse .

[ 184 ] [ 207 ] [ 208 ] [ 209 ] [ 210 ] [ 211 ] The trial began on 27 May 1948 and ran for eight months before Justice Atma Charan passed his final order on 10 February 1949. The prosecution called 149 witnesses, the defence none.

[ 212 ] The court found all of the defendants except one guilty as charged. Eight men were convicted for the murder conspiracy, and others were convicted for violation of the Explosive Substances Act. Savarkar was acquitted and set free. Nathuram Godse and Narayan Apte were sentenced to death by hanging [ 213 ] while the remaining six (including Godse's brother, Gopal) were sentenced to life imprisonment .

[ 214 ] Funeral and memorials Gandhi's funeral was marked by millions of Indians.

[ 215 ] Gandhi's death was mourned nationwide.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 184 ] Over a million people joined the five-mile-long funeral procession that took over five hours to reach Raj Ghat from Birla house, where Gandhi was assassinated, and another million watched the procession pass by.

[ 215 ] His body was transported on a weapons carrier, whose chassis was dismantled overnight to allow a high-floor to be installed so that people could catch a glimpse of Gandhi's body. The engine of the vehicle was not used; instead, four drag-ropes held by 50 people each pulled the vehicle.

[ 216 ] All Indian-owned establishments in London remained closed in mourning as thousands of people from all faiths and denominations and Indians from all over Britain converged at India House in London.

[ 217 ] Cremation of Mahatma Gandhi at Rajghat , 31 January 1948. It was attended by Jawaharlal Nehru , Louis and Edwina Mountbatten , Maulana Azad , Rajkumari Amrit Kaur , Sarojini Naidu and other national leaders. His son Devdas Gandhi lit the pyre.

[ 218 ] Gandhi was cremated in accordance with Hindu tradition. His ashes were poured into urns which were sent across India for memorial services.

[ 219 ] Most of the ashes were immersed at the Sangam at Allahabad on 12 February 1948, but some were secretly taken away. In 1997, Tushar Gandhi immersed the contents of one urn, found in a bank vault and reclaimed through the courts, at the Sangam at Allahabad.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] Some of Gandhi's ashes were scattered at the source of the Nile River near Jinja, Uganda , and a memorial plaque marks the event. On 30 January 2008, the contents of another urn were immersed at Girgaum Chowpatty . Another urn is at the palace of the Aga Khan in Pune (where Gandhi was held as a political prisoner from 1942 to 1944 [ 222 ] [ 223 ] ) and another in the Self-Realization Fellowship Lake Shrine in Los Angeles.

[ 220 ] [ 224 ] [ 225 ] The Birla House site where Gandhi was assassinated is now a memorial called Gandhi Smriti. The place near Yamuna River where he was cremated is the Rāj Ghāt memorial in New Delhi.

[ 226 ] A black marble platform, it bears the epigraph "Hē Rāma" ( Devanagari : हे ! राम or, Hey Raam ). These are said to be Gandhi's last words after he was shot.

[ 227 ] Principles, practices, and beliefs Main article: Practices and beliefs of Mahatma Gandhi See also: Gandhism Gandhi's spirituality was greatly based on his embracement of the five great vows of Jainism and Hindu Yoga philosophy, viz.

Satya (truth), ahimsa (nonviolence), brahmacharya (celibacy), asteya (non-stealing), and aparigraha (non-attachment).

[ 228 ] He stated that "Unless you impose on yourselves the five vows you may not embark on the experiment at all." [ 228 ] Gandhi's statements, letters and life have attracted much political and scholarly analysis of his principles, practices and beliefs, including what influenced him. Some writers present Gandhi as a paragon of ethical living and pacifism, while others present him as a more complex, contradictory and evolving character influenced by his culture and circumstances.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] Truth and Satyagraha Plaque displaying one of Gandhi's quotes on rumour Gandhi dedicated his life to discovering and pursuing truth, or Satya , and called his movement satyagraha , which means "appeal to, insistence on, or reliance on the Truth." [ 231 ] The first formulation of the satyagraha as a political movement and principle occurred in 1920, which Gandhi tabled as "Resolution on Non-cooperation" in September that year before a session of the Indian Congress. It was the satyagraha formulation and step, states Dennis Dalton, that deeply resonated with beliefs and culture of his people, embedded him into the popular consciousness, transforming him quickly into Mahatma.

[ 232 ] "God is Тruth. The way to Тruth lies through ahimsa (nonviolence)" – Sabarmati , 13 March 1927 Gandhi based Satyagraha on the Vedantic ideal of self-realisation, ahimsa (nonviolence), vegetarianism, and universal love. William Borman states that the key to his satyagraha is rooted in the Hindu Upanishadic texts.

[ 233 ] According to Indira Carr, Gandhi's ideas on ahimsa and satyagraha were founded on the philosophical foundations of Advaita Vedanta.

[ 234 ] I. Bruce Watson states that some of these ideas are found not only in traditions within Hinduism, but also in Jainism or Buddhism, particularly those about non-violence, vegetarianism and universal love, but Gandhi's synthesis was to politicise these ideas.

[ 235 ] His concept of satya as a civil movement, states Glyn Richards, are best understood in the context of the Hindu terminology of Dharma and Ṛta .

[ 236 ] Gandhi stated that the most important battle to fight was overcoming his own demons, fears, and insecurities. Gandhi summarised his beliefs first when he said, "God is Truth." Gandhi would later change this statement to "Truth is God." Thus, satya (truth) in Gandhi's philosophy is "God".

[ 237 ] Gandhi, states Richards, described the term "God" not as a separate power, but as the Being (Brahman, Atman) of the Advaita Vedanta tradition, a nondual universal that pervades in all things, in each person and all life.

[ 236 ] According to Nicholas Gier, this to Gandhi meant the unity of God and humans, that all beings have the same one soul and therefore equality, that atman exists and is same as everything in the universe, ahimsa (non-violence) is the very nature of this atman .

[ 238 ] Gandhi picking salt during Salt Satyagraha to defy colonial law giving salt collection monopoly to the British.

[ 239 ] His satyagraha attracted vast numbers of Indian men and women.

[ 240 ] The essence of Satyagraha is "soul force" as a political means, refusing to use brute force against the oppressor, seeking to eliminate antagonisms between the oppressor and the oppressed, aiming to transform or "purify" the oppressor. It is not inaction but determined passive resistance and non-co-operation where, states Arthur Herman, "love conquers hate".

[ 241 ] A euphemism sometimes used for Satyagraha is that it is a "silent force" or a "soul force" (a term also used by Martin Luther King Jr. during his " I Have a Dream " speech). It arms the individual with moral power rather than physical power. Satyagraha is also termed a "universal force", as it essentially "makes no distinction between kinsmen and strangers, young and old, man and woman, friend and foe." [ e ] Gandhi wrote: "There must be no impatience, no barbarity, no insolence, no undue pressure. If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in one's cause." [ 245 ] Civil disobedience and non-co-operation as practised under Satyagraha are based on the "law of suffering", [ 246 ] a doctrine that the endurance of suffering is a means to an end . This end usually implies a moral upliftment or progress of an individual or society. Therefore, non-co-operation in Satyagraha is in fact a means to secure the co-operation of the opponent consistently with truth and justice .

[ 247 ] While Gandhi's idea of satyagraha as a political means attracted a widespread following among Indians, the support was not universal. For example, Muslim leaders such as Jinnah opposed the satyagraha idea, accused Gandhi to be reviving Hinduism through political activism, and began effort to counter Gandhi with Muslim nationalism and a demand for Muslim homeland.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] [ 250 ] The untouchability leader Ambedkar , in June 1945, after his decision to convert to Buddhism and the first Law and Justice minister of modern India, dismissed Gandhi's ideas as loved by "blind Hindu devotees", primitive, influenced by spurious brew of Tolstoy and Ruskin, and "there is always some simpleton to preach them".

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] [ 253 ] Winston Churchill caricatured Gandhi as a "cunning huckster" seeking selfish gain, an "aspiring dictator", and an "atavistic spokesman of a pagan Hinduism." Churchill stated that the civil disobedience movement spectacle of Gandhi only increased "the danger to which white people there [British India] are exposed." [ 254 ] Nonviolence Gandhi with textile workers at Darwen , Lancashire, 26 September 1931 Although Gandhi was not the originator of the principle of nonviolence, he was the first to apply it in the political field on a large scale.

[ 255 ] [ 256 ] The concept of nonviolence ( ahimsa ) has a long history in Indian religious thought, and is considered the highest dharma (ethical value/virtue), a precept to be observed towards all living beings ( sarvbhuta ), at all times ( sarvada ), in all respects ( sarvatha ), in action, words and thought.

[ 257 ] Gandhi explains his philosophy and ideas about ahimsa as a political means in his autobiography The Story of My Experiments with Truth .

[ 258 ] [ 259 ] [ 260 ] [ 261 ] Although Gandhi considered non-violence to be "infinitely superior to violence", he preferred violence to cowardice.

[ 262 ] [ 263 ] Gandhi added that he "would rather have India resort to arms in order to defend her honor than that she should in a cowardly manner become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonor." [ 263 ] Brahmacharya: abstinence from sex and food Along with many other texts, Gandhi studied the Bhagavad Gita while in South Africa.

[ 264 ] This Hindu scripture discusses jnana yoga , bhakti yoga and karma yoga along with virtues such as non-violence, patience, integrity, lack of hypocrisy, self restraint and abstinence.

[ 265 ] Gandhi began experiments with these, and in 1906 at age 37, although married and a father, he vowed to abstain from sexual relations.

[ 264 ] Gandhi's experiment with abstinence went beyond sex, and extended to food. He consulted the Jain scholar Rajchandra, whom he fondly called Raychandbhai.

[ 266 ] Rajchandra advised him that milk stimulated sexual passion. Gandhi began abstaining from cow's milk in 1912, and did so even when doctors advised him to consume milk.

[ 267 ] [ 268 ] According to Sankar Ghose, Tagore described Gandhi as someone who did not abhor sex or women, but considered sexual life as inconsistent with his moral goals.

[ 269 ] Gandhi tried to test and prove to himself his brahmacharya . The experiments began some time after the death of his wife in February 1944. At the start of his experiment, he had women sleep in the same room but in different beds. He later slept with women in the same bed, often naked. In April 1945, Gandhi referenced being sleeping with several "women or girls" in a letter to Birla as part of the experiments.

[ 270 ] According to the 1960s memoir of his grandniece Manu, Gandhi feared in early 1947 that he and she may be killed by Muslims in the run-up to India's independence in August 1947, and asked her when she was 18 years old if she wanted to help him with his experiments to test their "purity", for which she readily accepted.

[ 271 ] Gandhi also shared his bed with 18-year-old Abha, wife of his grandnephew Kanu. Gandhi would sleep with both Manu and Abha at the same time.

[ 271 ] [ 272 ] According to Vinay Lal, Gandhi slept naked with Manu and Abha several times, in order to test his celibacy and his will to abstain from committing sexual acts, in order to fulfill the conditions he felt were required in order to become a brahmacharya.

According to Sean Scalmer, Gandhi in his final year of life was an ascetic , and his sickly skeletal figure was caricatured in Western media.

[ 273 ] In February 1947, he asked his confidants such as Birla and Ramakrishna if it was wrong for him to experiment his brahmacharya oath.

[ clarification needed ] [ 269 ] Gandhi's public experiments, as they progressed, were widely discussed and criticised by his family members and leading politicians. However, Gandhi said that if he would not let Manu sleep with him, it would be a sign of weakness. Some of his staff resigned, including two of his newspaper's editors who had refused to print some of Gandhi's sermons dealing with his experiments.

[ 271 ] Nirmalkumar Bose, Gandhi's Bengali interpreter, for example, criticised Gandhi, not because Gandhi did anything wrong, but because Bose was concerned about the psychological effect on the women who participated in his experiments.

[ 272 ] Veena Howard states Gandhi's views on brahmacharya and religious renunciation experiments were a method to confront women issues in his times.

[ 274 ] Gandhi also supported alcohol abstinence , advocating Prohibition as the only effective way to deal with alcohol usage.

[ 275 ] Literary works Young India , a weekly journal published by Gandhi from 1919 to 1932 Gandhi was a prolific writer. His signature style was simple, precise, clear and as devoid of artificialities.

[ 276 ] One of Gandhi's earliest publications, Hind Swaraj , published in Gujarati in 1909, became "the intellectual blueprint" for India's independence movement. The book was translated into English the next year, with a copyright legend that read "No Rights Reserved".

[ 277 ] For decades, Gandhi edited several newspapers including Harijan in Gujarati, in Hindi and in the English language; Indian Opinion while in South Africa and, Young India , in English, and Navajivan , a Gujarati monthly, on his return to India. Later, Navajivan was also published in Hindi. Gandhi also wrote letters almost every day to individuals and newspapers.

[ 278 ] Gandhi also wrote several books, including his autobiography, The Story of My Experiments with Truth (Gujarātī "સત્યના પ્રયોગો અથવા આત્મકથા") , of which Gandhi bought the entire first edition to make sure it was reprinted.

[ 279 ] His other autobiographies included: Satyagraha in South Africa about his struggle there, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule , a political pamphlet, and a paraphrase in Gujarati of John Ruskin 's Unto This Last which was an early critique of political economy .

[ 280 ] This last essay can be considered his programme on economics. Gandhi also wrote extensively on vegetarianism, diet and health, religion, social reforms, etc. Gandhi usually wrote in Gujarati, though he also revised the Hindi and English translations of his books.

[ 281 ] In 1934, Gandhi wrote Songs from Prison while prisoned in Yerawada jail in Maharashtra.

[ 282 ] Gandhi's complete works were published by the Indian government under the name The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi in the 1960s. The writings comprise about 50,000 pages published in about 100 volumes. In 2000, a revised edition of the complete works sparked a controversy, as it contained a large number of errors and omissions.

[ 283 ] The Indian government later withdrew the revised edition.

[ 284 ] Legacy See also: List of artistic depictions of Mahatma Gandhi , List of things named after Mahatma Gandhi , and List of roads named after Mahatma Gandhi Gandhi is noted as the greatest figure of the successful Indian independence movement against the British rule. He is also hailed as the greatest figure of modern India.

[ f ] American historian Stanley Wolpert described Gandhi as "India's greatest revolutionary nationalist leader" and the greatest Indian since the Buddha .

[ 291 ] In 1999, Gandhi was named "Asian of the century" by Asiaweek .

[ 292 ] In a 2000 BBC poll, he was voted as the greatest man of the millennium.

[ 293 ] [ 294 ] The word Mahatma , while often mistaken for Gandhi's given name in the West, is taken from the Sanskrit words maha (meaning Great ) and atma (meaning Soul ).

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] He was publicly bestowed with the honorific title "Mahatma" in July 1914 at farewell meeting in Town Hall, Durban .

[ 297 ] [ 298 ] Rabindranath Tagore is said to have accorded the title to Gandhi by 1915.

[ 299 ] [ g ] In his autobiography, Gandhi nevertheless explains that he never valued the title, and was often pained by it.

[ 302 ] [ 303 ] [ 304 ] In 1961 the U.S. government issued two commemorative stamps in honour of Mahatma Gandhi.

[ 305 ] Innumerable streets, roads, and localities in India are named after Gandhi. These include M.G.Road (the main street of a number of Indian cities including Mumbai , Bangalore , Kolkata , Lucknow , Kanpur , Gangtok and Indore ), Gandhi Market (near Sion , Mumbai) and Gandhinagar (the capital of the state of Gujarat , Gandhi's birthplace).

[ 306 ] As of 2008, over 150 countries have released stamps on Gandhi.

[ 307 ] In October 2019, about 87 countries including Turkey , the United States , Russia , Iran , Uzbekistan , and Palestine released commemorative Gandhi stamps on the 150th anniversary of his birth.

[ 308 ] [ 309 ] [ 310 ] [ 311 ] Statue of Gandhi, in the Roma Street Parkland, Brisbane, Australia.

In 2014, Brisbane 's Indian community commissioned a statue of Gandhi, created by Ram V. Sutar and Anil Sutar in the Roma Street Parkland , [ 312 ] [ 313 ] It was unveiled by Narendra Modi , then Prime Minister of India.

Florian asteroid 120461 Gandhi was named in his honour in September 2020.

[ 314 ] In October 2022, a statue of Gandhi was installed in Astana on the embankment of the rowing canal, opposite the cult monument to the defenders of Kazakhstan.

[ 315 ] On 15 December 2022, the United Nations headquarters in New York unveiled the statue of Gandhi. UN Secretary-General António Guterres called Gandhi an "uncompromising advocate for peaceful co-existence." [ 316 ] On 11 April 2025, the Anglo-Boer War Museum in Bloemfontein , South Africa launched a documentary called Caught in the Crossfire: Indian Involvement in the South African War , and unveiled a bust of Gandhi. This was part of the museum's initiatives to acknowledge the role of Indian individuals — soldiers, stretcher-bearers and civilians — who were caught in the conflict between the British and the Boers during the Second Boer War .

[ 317 ] Followers and international influence Gandhi influenced important leaders and political movements.

[ 261 ] Leaders of the civil rights movement in the United States, including Martin Luther King Jr.

, James Lawson , and James Bevel , drew from the writings of Gandhi in the development of their own theories about nonviolence.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] [ 320 ] King said, "Christ gave us the goals and Mahatma Gandhi the tactics." [ 321 ] King sometimes referred to Gandhi as "the little brown saint." [ 322 ] Anti- apartheid activist and former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela , was inspired by Gandhi.

[ 323 ] Others include Steve Biko , Václav Havel , [ 324 ] and Aung San Suu Kyi .

[ 325 ] Bust of Gandhi at York University , Toronto , Canada Statue of Gandhi in Madrid , Spain Gandhi at Praça Túlio Fontoura, São Paulo , Brazil In his early years, the former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela was a follower of the nonviolent resistance philosophy of Gandhi.

[ 323 ] Bhana and Vahed commented on these events as "Gandhi inspired succeeding generations of South African activists seeking to end White rule. This legacy connects him to Nelson Mandela...in a sense, Mandela completed what Gandhi started." [ 326 ] Gandhi's life and teachings inspired many who specifically referred to Gandhi as their mentor or who dedicated their lives to spreading his ideas. In Europe, Romain Rolland was the first to discuss Gandhi in his 1924 book Mahatma Gandhi , and Brazilian anarchist and feminist Maria Lacerda de Moura wrote about Gandhi in her work on pacifism. In 1931, physicist Albert Einstein exchanged letters with Gandhi and called him "a role model for the generations to come" in a letter writing about him.

[ 327 ] Einstein said of Gandhi: Mahatma Gandhi's life achievement stands unique in political history. He has invented a completely new and humane means for the liberation war of an oppressed country, and practised it with greatest energy and devotion. The moral influence he had on the consciously thinking human being of the entire civilised world will probably be much more lasting than it seems in our time with its overestimation of brutal violent forces. Because lasting will only be the work of such statesmen who wake up and strengthen the moral power of their people through their example and educational works. We may all be happy and grateful that destiny gifted us with such an enlightened contemporary, a role model for the generations to come.
Generations to come will scarce believe that such a one as this walked the earth in flesh and blood.

Farah Omar , a political activist from Somaliland , visited India in 1930, where he met Gandhi and was influenced by Gandhi's non-violent philosophy, which he adopted in his campaign in British Somaliland .

[ 328 ] Lanza del Vasto went to India in 1936 intending to live with Gandhi; he later returned to Europe to spread Gandhi's philosophy and founded the Community of the Ark in 1948 (modelled after Gandhi's ashrams).

Madeleine Slade (known as "Mirabehn") was the daughter of a British admiral who spent much of her adult life in India as a devotee of Gandhi.

[ 329 ] [ 330 ] In addition, the British musician John Lennon referred to Gandhi when discussing his views on nonviolence.

[ 331 ] In 2007, former US Vice-President and environmentalist Al Gore drew upon Gandhi's idea of satyagraha in a speech on climate change.

[ 332 ] 44th President of the United States Barack Obama said in September 2009 that his biggest inspiration came from Gandhi. His reply was in response to the question: "Who was the one person, dead or live, that you would choose to dine with?" Obama added, "He's somebody I find a lot of inspiration in. He inspired Dr. King with his message of nonviolence. He ended up doing so much and changed the world just by the power of his ethics." [ 333 ] Time magazine named The 14th Dalai Lama , Lech Wałęsa , Martin Luther King Jr.

, Cesar Chavez , Aung San Suu Kyi , Benigno Aquino Jr.

, Desmond Tutu , and Nelson Mandela as Children of Gandhi and his spiritual heirs to nonviolence.

[ 334 ] The Mahatma Gandhi District in Houston , Texas, United States, an ethnic Indian enclave, is officially named after Gandhi.

[ 335 ] Gandhi's ideas had a significant influence on 20th-century philosophy . It began with his engagement with Romain Rolland and Martin Buber .

Jean-Luc Nancy said that the French philosopher Maurice Blanchot engaged critically with Gandhi from the point of view of "European spirituality." [ 336 ] Since then philosophers including Hannah Arendt , Etienne Balibar and Slavoj Žižek found that Gandhi was a necessary reference to discuss morality in politics. American political scientist Gene Sharp wrote an analytical text, Gandhi as a political strategist , on the significance of Gandhi's ideas, for creating nonviolent social change. Recently, in the light of climate change, Gandhi's views on technology are gaining importance in the fields of environmental philosophy and philosophy of technology .

[ 336 ] Global days that celebrate Gandhi In 2007, the United Nations General Assembly declared Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, as "the International Day of Nonviolence ".

[ 337 ] First proposed by UNESCO in 1948, as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace (DENIP in Spanish), [ 338 ] 30 January is observed as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace in schools of many countries.

[ 339 ] In countries with a Southern Hemisphere school calendar, it is observed on 30 March.

[ 339 ] Awards Time magazine named Gandhi the Man of the Year in 1930.

[ 294 ] In the same magazine's 1999 list of The Most Important People of the Century , Gandhi was second only to Albert Einstein , who had called Gandhi "the greatest man of our age." [ 340 ] The University of Nagpur awarded him an LL.D.

in 1937.

[ 341 ] The Government of India awarded the annual Gandhi Peace Prize to distinguished social workers, world leaders and citizens.

Nelson Mandela , the leader of South Africa's struggle to eradicate racial discrimination and segregation, was a prominent non-Indian recipient. In 2003, Gandhi was posthumously awarded with the World Peace Prize .

[ 342 ] Two years later, he was posthumously awarded with the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo .

[ 343 ] In 2011, Gandhi topped the Time ' s list of Top 25 Political Icons of All Time.

[ 344 ] Gandhi did not receive the Nobel Peace Prize , although he was nominated five times between 1937 and 1948, including the first-ever nomination by the American Friends Service Committee , [ 345 ] though Gandhi made the short list only twice, in 1937 and 1947.

[ 346 ] Decades later, the Nobel Committee publicly declared its regret for the omission and admitted to deeply divided nationalistic opinion denying the award.

[ 346 ] Gandhi was nominated in 1948 but was assassinated before nominations closed. That year, the committee chose not to award the peace prize stating that "there was no suitable living candidate", and later research shows that the possibility of awarding the prize posthumously to Gandhi was discussed and that the reference to no suitable living candidate was to Gandhi.

[ 346 ] Geir Lundestad, Secretary of Norwegian Nobel Committee in 2006 said, "The greatest omission in our 106-year history is undoubtedly that Mahatma Gandhi never received the Nobel Peace prize. Gandhi could do without the Nobel Peace prize, whether Nobel committee can do without Gandhi is the question." [ 347 ] When the 14th Dalai Lama was awarded the Prize in 1989, the chairman of the committee said that this was "in part a tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi." [ 346 ] In the summer of 1995, the North American Vegetarian Society inducted Gandhi posthumously into the Vegetarian Hall of Fame.

[ 348 ] Father of the Nation Indians widely describe Gandhi as the Father of the Nation .

[ 349 ] [ 350 ] [ 351 ] [ 352 ] [ 353 ] [ 354 ] Origin of this title is traced back to a radio address (on Singapore radio) on 6 July 1944 by Subhash Chandra Bose where Bose addressed Gandhi as "The Father of the Nation".

[ 355 ] On 28 April 1947, Sarojini Naidu during a conference also referred Gandhi as "Father of the Nation".

[ 356 ] [ 357 ] He is also conferred the title "Bapu" [ 352 ] ( Gujarati : endearment for father , [ 353 ] papa [ 353 ] [ 354 ] ).

Film, theatre, and literature A five-hour, nine-minute long biographical documentary film, [ 358 ] Mahatma: Life of Gandhi, 1869–1948 , made by Vithalbhai Jhaveri [ 359 ] in 1968, quoting Gandhi's words and using black and white archival footage and photographs, captures the history of those times.

Ben Kingsley portrayed him in Richard Attenborough 's 1982 film Gandhi , [ 360 ] which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. It was based on the biography by Louis Fischer .

[ 361 ] The 1996 film The Making of the Mahatma documented Gandhi's time in South Africa and his transformation from an inexperienced barrister to recognised political leader.

[ 362 ] Gandhi was a central figure in the 2006 comedy film Lage Raho Munna Bhai . Jahnu Barua's Maine Gandhi Ko Nahin Mara (I did not kill Gandhi) , places contemporary society as a backdrop with its vanishing memory of Gandhi's values as a metaphor for the senile forgetfulness of the protagonist of his 2005 film, [ 363 ] writes Vinay Lal .

[ 364 ] In the tale Le Jour du Jugement Dernier , in the collection Les Mémoires de Satan et autres contes loufoques , by Pierre Cormon , God tries to judge Gandhi at the Last Judgement but realises that the character is more complex than he appears.

In 1967, Gandhi was set to be featured on the album cover of one of the best selling albums of The Beatles , Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band , however this idea was later cancelled due to respect for Gandhi.

[ 365 ] The 1979 opera Satyagraha by American composer Philip Glass is loosely based on Gandhi's life.

[ 366 ] [ 367 ] The opera's libretto, taken from the Bhagavad Gita , is sung in the original Sanskrit .

[ 368 ] The 1995 Marathi play Gandhi Virudh Gandhi explored the relationship between Gandhi and his son Harilal. The 2007 film, Gandhi, My Father was inspired on the same theme. The 1989 Marathi play Me Nathuram Godse Boltoy and the 1997 Hindi play Gandhi Ambedkar criticised Gandhi and his principles.

[ 369 ] [ 370 ] Several biographers have undertaken the task of describing Gandhi's life. Among them are D. G. Tendulkar with his Mahatma. Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in eight volumes, Chaman Nahal 's Gandhi Quartet, and Pyarelal and Sushila Nayyar with their Mahatma Gandhi in 10 volumes. The 2010 biography, Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld contained controversial material speculating about Gandhi's sexual life.

[ 371 ] Lelyveld, however, stated that the press coverage "grossly distort[s]" the overall message of the book.

[ 372 ] The 2014 film Welcome Back Gandhi takes a fictionalised look at how Gandhi might react to modern day India.

[ 373 ] The 2019 play Bharat Bhagya Vidhata , inspired by Pujya Gurudevshri Rakeshbhai and produced by Sangeet Natak Akademi and Shrimad Rajchandra Mission Dharampur takes a look at how Gandhi cultivated the values of truth and non-violence.

[ 374 ] "Mahatma Gandhi" is used by Cole Porter in his lyrics for the song " You're the Top " which is included in the 1934 musical Anything Goes . In the song, Porter rhymes 'Mahatma Gandhi' with 'Napoleon Brandy.' [ 375 ] Gandhi is mentioned in the Kris Kristofferson song " They Killed Him ".

Gandhi on the front of the current 500 Rupee note 21st-century impact within India The Gandhi Mandapam , a temple in Kanyakumari , was erected in honour of Gandhi.

India, with its rapid economic modernisation and urbanisation, has rejected Gandhi's economics [ 376 ] but accepted much of his politics and continues to revere his memory. Reporter Jim Yardley notes that "modern India is hardly a Gandhian nation, if it ever was one. His vision of a village-dominated economy was shunted aside during his lifetime as rural romanticism, and his call for a national ethos of personal austerity and nonviolence has proved antithetical to the goals of an aspiring economic and military power." By contrast, Gandhi is "given full credit for India's political identity as a tolerant, secular democracy." [ 377 ] Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is a national holiday in India , Gandhi Jayanti . His image also appears on paper currency of all denominations issued by Reserve Bank of India , except for the one rupee note .

[ 378 ] Gandhi's date of death, 30 January, is commemorated as a Martyrs' Day in India.

[ 379 ] There are three temples in India dedicated to Gandhi.

[ 380 ] One is located at Sambalpur in Odisha, the second at Nidaghatta village near Kadur in Chikmagalur district of Karnataka , and the third at Chityal in the district of Nalgonda , Telangana .

[ 380 ] [ 381 ] The Gandhi Memorial in Kanyakumari resembles central Indian Hindu temples and the Tamukkam or Summer Palace in Madurai now houses the Mahatma Gandhi Museum.

[ 382 ] Descendants Not to be confused with the Indian political family Nehru–Gandhi family .

Family tree of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi and Kasturba Gandhi Gandhi's children and grandchildren live in India and other countries. Grandson Rajmohan Gandhi is a professor in Illinois and an author of Gandhi's biography titled Mohandas , [ 383 ] while another, Tarun Gandhi, has authored several authoritative books on his grandfather. Another grandson, Kanu Ramdas Gandhi (the son of Gandhi's third son Ramdas ), was found living at an old age home in Delhi despite having taught earlier in the United States.

[ 384 ] [ 385 ] See also Religion portal Hinduism portal India portal Philosophy portal Gandhian socialism Gandhi cap Gandhi Teerth – Gandhi International Research Institute and Museum for Gandhian study, research on Mahatma Gandhi and dialogue Inclusive Christianity List of civil rights leaders List of peace activists Seven Social Sins (a.k.a. Seven Blunders of the World) Trikaranasuddhi Composite nationalism Abdul Ghaffar Khan NCERT textbook controversies (rationalisation on topics related to Gandhi) Notes Explanatory notes ^ Did not graduate ^ Informal auditing student between 1888 and 1891 ^ Pronounced variously / ˈ ɡ ɑː n d i , ˈ ɡ æ n d i / GA(H)N -dee ; [ 1 ] Gujarati pronunciation: [ˈmoɦəndɑs ˈkəɾəmtʃənd ˈɡɑndʱi] ^ [ 98 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] ^ [ 242 ] [ 243 ] [ 244 ] ^ [ 285 ] [ 286 ] [ 287 ] [ 288 ] [ 289 ] [ 290 ] ^ The earliest record of usage, however, is in a private letter from Pranjivan Mehta to Gopal Krishna Gokhale dated 1909.

[ 300 ] [ 301 ] References ^ "Gandhi" .

Archived 14 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ "Mahatma Gandhi" . Retrieved 24 January 2025 .

^ Goswami, K.P (1971).

Mahatma Gandhi A Chronology . Publications Division. p. 60.

ISBN 9788123001395 .

^ Gandhi, Mohandas K. (2009).

An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth . The Floating Press. p. 21.

ISBN 978-1-77541-405-6 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ a b Ganguly, Debjani; Docker, John, eds. (2008).

Rethinking Gandhi and Nonviolent Relationality: Global Perspectives .

Routledge . pp. 4–.

ISBN 978-1-134-07431-0 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 .

... marks Gandhi as a hybrid cosmopolitan figure who transformed ... anti-colonial nationalist politics in the twentieth-century in ways that neither indigenous nor westernized Indian nationalists could.

^ a b c Guha (2015) , pp. 19–21.

^ Misra, Amalendu (2004).

Identity and Religion: Foundations of anti-Islamism in India . Sage Publications. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-7619-3227-7 .

^ Gandhi (2007a) , p.

5 .

^ Malhotra, S.L. (2001).

Lawyer to Mahatma: Life, Work and Transformation of M. K. Gandhi . Deep & Deep Publications. p. 5.

ISBN 978-81-7629-293-1 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Guha (2015) , p. 21.

^ Guha (2015) , p. 512.

^ Todd, Anne M. (2012).

Mohandas Gandhi . Infobase Publishing. p. 8.

ISBN 978-1-4381-0662-5 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

The name Gandhi means "grocer", although Mohandas's father and grandfather were politicians not grocers.

^ Gandhi (2008) , pp. 1–3.

^ a b c Guha (2015) , pp. 24–25.

^ Kateshiya, Gopal B (14 July 2024).

"Know Your City: Gandhi's family house which witnessed his transformation from 'Mohan to Mahatma' " .

The Indian Express .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 .

^ Guha (2015) , p. 22.

^ Sorokin, Pitirim Aleksandrovich (2002).

The Ways and Power of Love: types, factors, and techniques of moral transformation . Templeton Foundation Press. p. 169.

ISBN 978-1-890151-86-7 .

^ Rudolph, Susanne Hoeber & Rudolph, Lloyd I. (1983).

Gandhi: The Traditional Roots of Charisma .

University of Chicago Press . p. 48.

ISBN 978-0-226-73136-0 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

^ Guha (2014a) , p.

42 . "The subcaste the Gandhis belonged to was known as Modh Bania, the prefix apparently referring to the town of Modhera, in Southern Gujarat." ^ Renard, John (1999).

Responses to 101 Questions on Hinduism . Paulist Press. p.

139 .

ISBN 978-0-8091-3845-6 . Retrieved 16 August 2020 .

^ Gandhi (2008) , pp. 2, 8, 269.

^ a b Arvind Sharma (2013).

Gandhi: A Spiritual Biography .

Yale University Press . pp.

11 –14.

ISBN 978-0-300-18738-0 .

^ Rudolph, Susanne Hoeber & Rudolph, Lloyd I. (1983).

Gandhi: The Traditional Roots of Charisma . University of Chicago Press. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-226-73136-0 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Gerard Toffin (2012). John Zavos; et al. (eds.).

Public Hinduisms . Sage Publications. pp.

249– 57.

ISBN 978-81-321-1696-7 .

^ Guha (2015) , p. 23.

^ Guha (2015) , pp. 25–26.

^ Ghose (1991) , p.

4 .

^ a b Mohanty, Rekha (2011).

"From Satya to Sadbhavna" (PDF) .

Orissa Review (January 2011): 45– 49. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2012 .

^ Gandhi, Mohandas K. (1940).

"At the High School" .

The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Wikilivres.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Gandhi, Mohandas K. (1940).

"Playing the Husband" .

The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Wikilivres.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Guha (2015) , pp. 28–29.

^ Fischer, Louis (1982).

Gandhi, his life and message for the world . New American Library. p. 96.

ISBN 978-0-451-62142-9 .

^ a b Guha (2015) , p. 29.

^ Gandhi, M. K. (1 January 2009).

An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth . The Floating Press. pp.

61– 62.

ISBN 978-1-77541-405-6 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2020 .

^ Guha (2015) , p. 30.

^ a b c Guha (2015) , p. 32.

^ a b c Guha, Ramachandra (2014).

Gandhi Before India . Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-385-53229-7 .

^ a b c d e f Gandhi, Mohandas K. (1940).

"Preparation for England" .

The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Archived from the original on 2 July 2012.

^ a b B. R. Nanda (2019).

"Mahatma Gandhi" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2017 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 .

Mahatma Gandhi, byname of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, (born October 2, 1869, Porbandar, India – died January 30, 1948, Delhi), Indian lawyer, politician, ...

^ a b Guha (2015) , pp. 33–34.

^ Gandhi (2008) , pp.

20–21 .

^ Swapnajit Mitra (12 October 2014).

"My Experiment with Truth" .

India Currents .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2023 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 .

^ Thomas Weber (2004).

Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

19 –25.

ISBN 978-1-139-45657-9 .

^ "Narayan Hemchandra | Gandhi Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with Truth" .

www.mkgandhi.org .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Tendulkar, Dinanath Gopal (2 September 2008).

Mahatma: 1920-1929 . the University of Michigan: Vithalbhai K. Javeri & D.G. Tendulkar, 1951. p. 463.

^ a b c d Brown (1991) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ a b c d e Tendulkar, D. G. (1951).

Mahatma; life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi . Delhi: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India.

^ a b "Shyness my shield" .

Autobiography . 1927.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 11 August 2019 .

^ "International Vegetarian Union – Mohandas K. Gandhi (1869–1948)" .

ivu.org .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

^ a b Herman (2008) , pp. 82–83.

^ Giliomee, Hermann & Mbenga, Bernard (2007). "3". In Roxanne Reid (ed.).

New History of South Africa (1st ed.). Tafelberg. p. 193.

ISBN 978-0-624-04359-1 .

^ a b Power, Paul F. (1969).

"Gandhi in South Africa" .

The Journal of Modern African Studies .

7 (3): 441– 55.

doi : 10.1017/S0022278X00018590 .

ISSN 0022-278X .

JSTOR 159062 .

S2CID 154872727 .

^ Keshavjee, M.M. (2015).

Into that Heaven of Freedom: The Impact of Apartheid on an Indian Family's Diasporic History . Mawenzi House Publishers Limited.

ISBN 978-1-927494-27-1 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ "High Commission of India, Pretoria, South Africa : Mahatma Gandhi in South Africa" .

www.hcipretoria.gov.in .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2024 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

^ Parekh, Bhikhu C. (2001).

Gandhi: a very short introduction .

Oxford University Press . p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-19-285457-5 .

^ a b c Dhiman (2016) , pp. 25–27.

^ a b Gandhi (2002) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Herman (2008) , pp. 87–88.

^ Allen, Jeremiah (2011).

Sleeping with Strangers: A Vagabond's Journey Tramping the Globe . Other Places Publishing. p. 273.

ISBN 978-1-935850-01-4 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ a b Herman (2008) , pp. 88–89.

^ "March 1897 Memorial" .

The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi – via Wikisource .

: correspondence and newspaper accounts of the incident.

^ Herman (2008) , p. 125.

^ Herman (2008) , chapter 6.

^ "South African Medals that Mahatma Returned Put on View at Gandhi Mandap Exhibition" (PDF) .

Press Information Bureau of India – Archive . 5 March 1949.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 July 2020 .

^ Rai, Ajay Shanker (2000).

Gandhian Satyagraha: An Analytical And Critical Approach . Concept Publishing Company. p. 35.

ISBN 978-81-7022-799-1 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 .

^ Tolstoy, Leo (14 December 1908).

"A Letter to A Hindu: The Subjection of India-Its Cause and Cure" .

The Literature Network .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2006 . Retrieved 12 February 2012 .

The Hindu Kural ^ Parel, Anthony J.

(2002). "Gandhi and Tolstoy". In M. P. Mathai; M. S. John; Siby K. Joseph (eds.).

Meditations on Gandhi : a Ravindra Varma festschrift . New Delhi: Concept. pp.

96– 112.

ISBN 978-81-7022-961-2 . Retrieved 8 September 2012 .

^ Guha (2013a) , Ch. 22.

^ DiSalvo, Charles R. (2013).

M.K. Gandhi, Attorney at Law: The Man before the Mahatma . Univ of California Press. pp.

14– 15.

ISBN 978-0-520-95662-9 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ Jones, Constance; Ryan, James (2007).

Encyclopedia of Hinduism . New York: Facts On File. pp.

158– 159.

ISBN 978-0-8160-5458-9 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 .

^ a b c d Desai, Ashwin; Vahed, Goolem (2015).

The South African Gandhi: Stretcher-Bearer of Empire .

Stanford University Press . pp.

22– 26, 33– 38.

ISBN 978-0-8047-9717-7 .

^ DiSalvo, Charles R. (2013).

M.K. Gandhi, Attorney at Law: The Man Before the Mahatma . University of California Press. p. 153.

ISBN 978-0-520-28015-1 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ Reddy, E.S. (18 October 2016).

"Some of Gandhi's Early Views on Africans Were Racist. But That Was Before He Became Mahatma" .

The Wire .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .

^ Ramsamy, Edward; Mbanaso, Michael; Korieh, Chima (2010).

Minorities and the State in Africa .

Cambria Press . pp.

71– 73.

ISBN 978-1-62196-874-0 .

^ Guha, Ramachandra (2014).

Gandhi Before India . Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-385-53229-7 .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 September 2024 .

^ a b c Herman (2008) , pp. 136–137.

^ Herman (2008) , pp. 154–157, 280–281.

^ Guha, Ramachandra (23 December 2018).

"Setting the Record Straight on Gandhi and Race" .

The Wire .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2022 . Retrieved 25 December 2022 .

^ Vashi, Ashish (31 March 2011).

"For Gandhi, Kallenbach was a friend and guide" .

The Times of India .

ISSN 0971-8257 .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Bartley, Grant (2014).

"Satuagraha § A Medium for Truth" .

Philosophy Now . No. 101. Archived from the original on 24 March 2014.

^ Corder, Catherine; Plaut, Martin (2014). "Gandhi's Decisive South African 1913 Campaign: A Personal Perspective from the Letters of Betty Molteno".

South African Historical Journal .

66 (1): 22– 54.

doi : 10.1080/02582473.2013.862565 .

S2CID 162635102 .

^ Smith, Colleen (1 October 2006).

"Mbeki: Mahatma Gandhi Satyagraha 100th Anniversary (01/10/2006)" .

Speeches . Polityorg.za.

Archived from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 20 January 2012 .

^ Prashad, Ganesh (September 1966). "Whiggism in India".

Political Science Quarterly .

81 (3): 412– 31.

doi : 10.2307/2147642 .

JSTOR 2147642 .

^ Markovits (2002) , pp. 367–386.

^ Chronology of Mahatma Gandhi's Life:India 1918 in WikiSource based on the Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Based on public domain volumes.

^ a b Desai, Mahadev Haribhai (2009) [1930].

"Preface" .

Day-to-day with Gandhi: secretary's diary . Translated by Hemantkumar Nilkanth. Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan.

ISBN 978-81-906237-2-8 .

Alt URL [ usurped ] ^ Gandhi (1965), Collected Works , Vol 17.

Archived 15 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine Chapter "67. Appeal for enlistment", Nadiad, 22 June 1918.

^ Gandhi (1965), Collected Works , Vol 17.

Archived 15 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine "Chapter 8. Letter to J. L. Maffey", Nadiad, 30 April 1918.

^ Bartolf, Christian (22 August 2013).

"Gandhi and War: The Mahatma Gandhi / Bart de Ligt Correspondence" .

Satyagraha Foundation .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2024 . Retrieved 5 February 2024 .

^ Andrew T. Jarboe (2021).

Indian Soldiers in World War I: Race and Representation in an Imperial War . University of Nebraska. p. 238.

ISBN 9781496206787 .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2023 .

^ Hardiman, David (April 2001). "Champaran and Gandhi: Planters, Peasants and Gandhian Politics by Jacques Pouchepadass (Review)".

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society .

11 (1): 99– 101.

doi : 10.1017/S1356186301450152 .

JSTOR 25188108 .

S2CID 154941166 .

^ "Satyagraha Laboratories of Mahatma Gandhi" .

Indian National Congress website .

All India Congress Committee . 2004. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006 . Retrieved 25 February 2012 .

^ Gandhi (2008) , pp.

196–197 .

^ Brown, Judith M. (1974).

Gandhi's Rise to Power: Indian Politics 1915–1922 .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

94– 102.

ISBN 978-0-521-09873-1 .

^ Nojeim, M. (2004).

Gandhi and King: The Power of Nonviolent Resistance . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-275-96574-7 .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2024 . Retrieved 3 February 2024 .

^ Keith Robbins (2002).

The First World War .

Oxford University Press . pp.

133– 137.

ISBN 978-0-19-280318-4 .

^ Green, Michael J.; Nicholas Szechenyi (2017).

A Global History of the Twentieth Century: Legacies and Lessons from Six National Perspectives .

Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

89– 90.

ISBN 978-1-4422-7972-8 .

^ a b c Minault (1982) , pp. 68–72, 78–82, 96–102, 108–109.

^ Minault (1982) , pp. 4–8.

^ a b c Sarah C.M. Paine (2015).

Nation Building, State Building, and Economic Development: Case Studies and Comparisons . Routledge. pp.

20– 21.

ISBN 978-1-317-46409-9 .

^ a b c Ghose (1991) , p. 161–164.

^ Roderick Matthews (2012).

Jinnah vs. Gandhi . Hachette. p. 31.

ISBN 978-93-5009-078-7 .

Rabindranath Tagore heavily criticized Gandhi at the time in private letters (...). They reveal Tagore's belief that Gandhi had committed the Indian political nation to a cause that was mistakenly anti-Western and fundamentally negative.

^ Kham, Aqeeluzzafar (1990). "The All-India Muslim Conference and the Origin of the Khilafat Movement in India".

Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society .

38 (2): 155– 162.

^ a b Roberts, W.H. (1923). "A Review of the Gandhi Movement in India".

Political Science Quarterly .

38 (2): 227– 48.

doi : 10.2307/2142634 .

JSTOR 2142634 .

^ Bose, Sugata & Jalal, Ayesha (2004).

Modern South History, Culture, Political Economy . Psychology Press. pp.

112– 14.

ISBN 978-0-203-71253-5 .

^ Brown (1991) , pp. 140–147.

^ Minault (1982) , pp. 113–116.

^ Akbar S. Ahmed (1997).

Jinnah, Pakistan and Islamic Identity: The Search for Saladin . Routledge. pp.

57–71 .

ISBN 978-0-415-14966-2 .

^ "Gandhi and Islam" .

www.islamicity.org . 17 August 2010.

Archived from the original on 7 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2020 .

^ Bandyopādhyāẏa, Ś. (2004).

From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India . Orient Blackswan. p. 304.

ISBN 978-81-250-2596-2 .

Archived from the original on 10 July 2023 . Retrieved 25 August 2023 .

He was arrested on 10 March 1922 and was sentenced to prison for six years. [...] Gradually the Khilafat movement too died.

^ Brown, Judith Margaret (1994).

Modern India: the origins of an Asian democracy . Oxford University Press. p. 228.

ISBN 978-0-19-873112-2 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Sarkar, Sumit (1983).

Modern India: 1885–1947 . Macmillan. p.

233 .

ISBN 978-0-333-90425-1 .

^ Markovits (2002) , p. 372.

^ Baldwin, Lewis V.; Dekar, Paul R. (30 August 2013).

In an Inescapable Network of Mutuality: Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Globalization of an Ethical Ideal . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-61097-434-9 .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

^ a b c d e Wolpert (2002a) , pp. 99–103.

^ Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1993) [1940].

An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments With Truth (2nd ed.). Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. p.

82 .

ISBN 0-8070-5909-9 .

Also available at Wikisource .

^ Chakrabarty, Bidyut (2008).

Indian Politics and Society since Independence: events, processes and ideology . Routledge. p. 154.

ISBN 978-0-415-40868-4 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

^ Gandhi (1990a) , p. 89.

^ Shashi (1996) , p. 9.

^ Gandhi (1990a) , p. 131.

^ "Gandhi Freed on Government Order; Aged Indian Leader is Ill and Must Go to Coast to Convalesce", Montreal Gazette , 5 February 1924, p. 1 ^ Datta, Amaresh (2006).

The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature (Volume Two) (Devraj To Jyoti) . Sahitya Akademi. p. 1345.

ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

^ a b Gandhi (1990) , p. 172.

^ Ghose (1991) , p. 199–204.

^ Herman (2008) , pp. 419–420.

^ Bakshi, S. R. (1988).

Gandhi and Gandhi and the Mass Movement . New Delhi. pp.

133– 34.

^ Sarma, Bina Kumari (January 1994). "Gandhian Movement and Women's Awakening in Orissa".

Indian Historical Review .

21 (1/2): 78– 79.

ISSN 0376-9836 .

^ a b Marilyn French (2008).

From Eve to Dawn, A History of Women in the World, Volume IV: Revolutions and Struggles for Justice in the 20th Century . City University of New York Press. pp.

219– 20.

ISBN 978-1-55861-628-8 .

^ Suruchi Thapar-Bjorkert (2006).

Women in the Indian National Movement: Unseen Faces and Unheard Voices, 1930–42 . Sage Publications. pp.

77– 79.

ISBN 978-0-7619-3407-3 .

^ Fischer, L. (1950).

Gandhi and the Mass Movement . pp.

298– 99.

^ Hatt, Christine (2002).

Mahatma Gandhi . Evans Brothers. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-237-52308-4 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 .

^ Murali, Atlury (January 1985). "Non-Cooperation in Andhra in 1920–22: Nationalist Intelligentsia and the Mobilization of Peasantry".

Indian Historical Review .

12 (1/2): 188– 217.

ISSN 0376-9836 .

^ a b c Dalton (2012) , pp. 8–14, 20–23, 30–35.

^ Dhiman (2016) , pp. 46–49.

^ John M Levine; Michael A. Hogg (2010).

Encyclopedia of Group Processes and Intergroup Relations . Sage Publications. p. 73.

ISBN 978-1-4129-4208-9 .

^ Herman (2008) , pp.

375–377 .

^ Herman (2008) , p. 359.

^ a b Herman (2008) , pp. 378–381.

^ a b Muldoon (2016) , pp. 92–99.

^ Gandhi (2008) , pp. 332–333.

^ Muldoon (2016) , p. 97.

^ Brown (1991) , pp.

252–257 .

^ a b Gandhi, Rajmohan (1997).

The Good Boatman: A Portrait of Gandhi . Penguin Books India. pp.

115– 118.

ISBN 978-0-14-025563-8 .

^ "Mahatma Gandhi | Philosopher & Teacher | Blue Plaques" .

English Heritage .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

^ "Peace seeking social reformer who became Gandhi's dear friend" .

Gazette . 26 August 2017 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ "Gandhi visits the poor people of England in 1931 – Gandhi Video Footage" .

YouTube . Archived from the original on 2 October 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

^ Herman (2008) , pp. 382–390.

^ Nicholas B. Dirks (2011).

Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India .

Princeton University Press . pp.

267– 74.

ISBN 978-1-4008-4094-6 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 June 2017 .

^ Kamath, M. V. (1995).

Gandhi's Coolie: Life & Times of Ramkrishna Bajaj . Allied Publishers. p. 24.

ISBN 81-7023-487-5 .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 .

^ McDermott et al. (2014) , pp. 369–370.

^ Gandhi (1990) , p. 246.

^ Ghose, Sankar (1992).

Jawaharlal Nehru, A Biography . Allied Publishers. p. 137.

ISBN 8170233690 .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2023 .

^ Dash, Siddhartha (January 2005).

"Gandhi and Subhas Chandra Bose" (PDF) .

Orissa Review . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2012 . Retrieved 12 April 2012 .

^ Gandhi (1990) , pp. 277–281.

^ Sarkar, Jayabrata (18 April 2006). "Power, Hegemony and Politics: Leadership Struggle in Congress in the 1930s".

Modern Asian Studies .

40 (2): 333– 70.

doi : 10.1017/S0026749X0600179X .

S2CID 145725909 .

^ a b Herman (2008) , pp. 467–470.

^ Marques, J. (2020).

The Routledge Companion to Inclusive Leadership . Routledge Companions in Business, Management and Marketing. Taylor & Francis. p. 403.

ISBN 978-1-000-03965-8 .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ a b Anderson, D.; Killingray, D. (1992).

Policing and Decolonisation: Politics, Nationalism, and the Police, 1917-65 . Studies in imperialism. Manchester University Press. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-7190-3033-8 .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

Britain's hold over India weakened and an early resumption of Congress rule appeared inevitable ^ Bipan Chandra (2000).

India's Struggle for Independence .

Penguin Books . p. 543.

ISBN 978-81-8475-183-3 .

^ a b c Wolpert (2002a) , pp. 74–75.

^ Gandhi (1990) , p. 309.

^ Gurcharan Das (1990).

A Fine Family .

Penguin Books . pp.

49– 50.

ISBN 978-0-14-012258-9 .

^ a b c Wolpert (2002a) , pp. 205–211.

^ Brock, Peter (1983).

The Mahatma and mother India: essays on Gandhiʼs nonviolence and nationalism .

Navajivan Publishing House . p. 34.

^ Limaye, Madhu (1990).

Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru: a historic partnership . B.R. Publishing Corporation. p. 11.

ISBN 81-7018-547-5 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ von Pochhammer, Wilhelm (2005).

India's Road to Nationhood: A Political History of the Subcontinent . Allied Publishers. p. 469.

ISBN 81-7764-715-6 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Lapping, Brian (1989).

End of empire . Paladin.

ISBN 978-0-586-08870-8 .

^ a b Khan, Yasmin (2007).

The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan . Yale University Press. p.

18 .

ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3 . Retrieved 1 September 2013 . p. 18: the Muslim League had only caught on among South Asian Muslims during the Second World War. ... By the late 1940s, the League and the Congress had impressed in the British their own visions of a free future for Indian people. ... one, articulated by the Congress, rested on the idea of a united, plural India as a home for all Indians and the other, spelt out by the League, rested on the foundation of Muslim nationalism and the carving out of a separate Muslim homeland.

^ "Gandhi, Jinnah Meet First Time Since '44; Disagree on Pakistan, but Will Push Peace" .

The New York Times . 7 May 1947.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .

^ Bhattacharya, Sanjoy (2001).

Propaganda and information in Eastern India, 1939–45: a necessary weapon of war . Psychology Press. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1406-3 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Shashi (1996) , p. 13.

^ Gandhi (2002) , pp. 106–108.

^ Khan, Yasmin (2007).

The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan . Yale University Press. p.

1 .

ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3 . Retrieved 1 September 2013 . p. 1: South Asians learned that the British Indian Empire would be partitioned on 3 June 1947. They heard about it on the radio, from relations and friends, by reading newspapers and, later, through government pamphlets. Among a population of almost four hundred million, where the vast majority lived in the countryside, ..., it is hardly surprising that many ... did not hear the news for many weeks afterward. For some, the butchery and forced relocation of the summer months of 1947 may have been the first they know about the creation of the two new states rising from the fragmentary and terminally weakened British empire in India.

^ Hermann Kulke; Dietmar Rothermund (2004).

A History of India . Routledge. pp.

311– 12, context: 308–16.

ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0 .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 June 2017 .

^ Penderel Moon (1962).

Divide and Quit . University of California Press. pp.

11– 28.

^ Jack (1994) , p. 418.

^ a b Wolpert (2009) , pp. 118–121.

^ a b Wolpert (2001a) .

^ Wolpert (2009) , pp. 118–127.

^ a b c Dalton (2012a) , pp. 64–66.

^ Wolpert (2002) , p. 7.

^ Metcalf, Barbara Daly; Metcalf, Thomas R. (2006).

A concise history of modern India .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

221– 22.

ISBN 978-0-521-86362-9 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Lelyveld, Joseph (2011).

Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle with India . Random House Digital, Inc. pp.

278–81 .

ISBN 978-0-307-26958-4 .

^ a b c d e Brown (1991) , p. 380: "Despite and indeed because of his sense of helplessness Delhi was to be the scene of what he called his greatest fast. ... His decision was made suddenly, though after considerable thought – he gave no hint of it even to Nehru and Patel who were with him shortly before he announced his intention at a prayer-meeting on 12 January 1948. He said he would fast until communal peace was restored, real peace rather than the calm of a dead city imposed by police and troops. Patel and the government took the fast partly as condemnation of their decision to withhold a considerable cash sum still outstanding to Pakistan as a result of the allocation of undivided India's assets because the hostilities that had broken out in Kashmir; ... But even when the government agreed to pay out the cash, Gandhi would not break his fast: that he would only do after a large number of important politicians and leaders of communal bodies agreed to a joint plan for restoration of normal life in the city." ^ Talbot, Ian (2016).

A History of Modern South Asia, Politics, States, Diasporas . New Haven and London: Yale University Press. p. 183.

ISBN 978-0-300-19694-8 .

LCCN 2015937886 .

Disputes over Kashmir and the division of assets and water in the aftermath of Partition increased Pakistan's anxieties regarding its much larger neighbor. Kashmir's significance for Pakistan far exceeded its strategic value; its "illegal" accession to India challenged the state's ideological foundations and pointed to a lack of sovereign fulfillment. The "K" in Pakistan's name stood for Kashmir. Of less symbolic significance was the division of post-Partition assets. Not until December 1947 was an agreement reached on Pakistan's share of the sterling assets held by the undivided Government of India at the time of independence. The bulk of these (550 million rupees) was held back by New Delhi because of the Kashmir conflict and paid only following Gandhi's intervention and fasting. India delivered Pakistan's military equipment even more tardily, and less than a sixth of the 160,000 tons of ordnance allotted to Pakistan by the Joint Defence Council was actually delivered.

^ Elkins, Caroline (2022).

Violence: A History of the British Empire . New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 9780307272423 .

LCCN 2021018550 .

A few months later, with war-fueled tensions over Kashmir mounting and India refusing to pay Pakistan 550 million rupees, Pakistan's share of Britain's outstanding war debt, Gandhi began to fast. "This time my fast is not only against Hindus and Muslims," the Mahatma said, "but also against the Judases who put on false appearances and betray themselves, myself and society." The elderly and frail man who was India's symbolic political and spiritual leader went three days without food before India's cabinet agreed to pay Pakistan, something Nehru had long promised Jinnah he would do.

^ Blinkenberg, Lars (2022).

India-Pakistan: The History of Unsolved Conflicts: Volume I . Lindhardt og Ringhof.

ISBN 9788726894707 .

Sardar Patel decided, in the middle of December 1947, that the recent financial agreements with Pakistan should not be followed, unless Pakistan ceased to support the raiders. ... Gandhi was not convinced and he felt—like Mountbatten and Nehru—that the agreed transfer to Pakistan of a cash amount of Rs. 550 million should be implemented despite the Kashmir crisis. Gandhi started a fast unto death, which was officially done to stop communal trouble, especially in Delhi, but "word went round that it was directed against Sardar Patel's decision to withhold the cash balances"... Only because of Gandhi's interference, which was soon to cause his death, Sardar Patel gave in and the money was handed over to Pakistan.

^ Sarkar, Sumit (2014).

Modern India: 1885–1947 . Delhi and Chennai: Pearson Education. p. 375.

ISBN 9789332535749 .

This last fast seems to have been directed in part also against Patel's increasingly communal attitudes (the Home Minister had started thinking in terms of a total transfer of population in the Punjab, and was refusing to honour a prior agreement by which India was obliged to give 55 crores of pre-Partition Government of India financial assets to Pakistan). 'You are not the Sardar I once knew,' Gandhi is said to have remarked during the fast.

^ Gandhi, Gopalkrishna; Suhrud, Tridip (2022).

Scorching Love: Letters from Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi to his son, Devadas . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

The national capital and its surrounding areas are gripped by massacres and the spewing of hate. The two Punjabs on either side of the border are aflame. On 1 January 1948, a Thai visitor comes and compliments him on India's independence. "Today ... Indian fears his brother Indian. Is this independence?', Gandhi asks in response. Gandhi smarts at the Government of India's new cabinet headed by Jawaharlal Nehru deciding to withhold the transfer of Pakistan's share (Rs 55 crores) of the 'sterling balance' that undivided India has held at independence. The attack on Kashmur is cited as a reason for this. Patel says India cannot give money to Pakistan 'for making bullets to be shot at us'. Gandhi's intense agitation settles into an inner quiet on 12 January when the clear thought comes to him that he must fast. And indefinitely.

‘It will end when and if I am satisfied that there is a reunion of hearts of all communities...’ ^ Singh, Gurharpal; Shani, Georgio (2022).

Sikh Nationalism: From a Dominant Minority to an Ethno-Religious Diaspora . Cambridge University Press. p. 107.

ISBN 978-1-107-13654-0 .

LCCN 2021017207 .

For further evidence of Patel's involvement in the clearing of Muslims in north India, see Pandey (2001, 196). Against the background of the India-Pakistan conflict in Kashmir, the dispute between the two countries over the division of cash balances and Gandhi's fast in early 1948, Mountbatten noted the following of his interview with Patel: 'He expressed the view that the only way to re-establish decent relationship between the Muslims and non-Muslim communities was to remove Hindus and Sikhs from Pakistan and drive out the Muslims of the East Punjab and the affected neighbouring areas.' MB1/D76/1. Mountbatten Papers, University of Southampton.

^ Stein, Burton ; Arnold, David (2010).

A History of India . Blackwell History of the World Series (2nd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

352– 353.

ISBN 978-1-4051-9509-6 .

He undertook a fast not only to restrain those bent on communal reprisal but also to influence the powerful Home Minister, Sardar Patel, who was refusing to share out the assets of the former imperial treasury with Pakistan, as had been agreed. Gandhi's insistence on justice for Pakistan now that the partition was a fact ... had prompted Godse's fanatical action.

^ Ahmed, Raja Qaiser (2022).

Pakistan Factor and the Competing Perspectives in India: Party Centric View . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 11.

ISBN 978-981-16-7051-0 .

^ a b Cush, Denise; Robinson, Catherine; York, Michael (2008).

Encyclopedia of Hinduism . Taylor & Francis. p. 544.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1267-0 .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2013 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 .

^ Mahatma Gandhi (2000).

The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 130.

ISBN 978-81-230-0154-8 .

^ Gandhi, Tushar A. (2007).

"Let's Kill Gandhi !": A Chronicle of His Last Days, the Conspiracy, Murder, Investigation, and Trial .

Rupa & Company . p. 12.

ISBN 978-81-291-1094-7 .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.

^ Nicholas Henry Pronko (2013).

Empirical Foundations of Psychology . Routledge. pp.

342– 43.

ISBN 978-1-136-32701-8 .

^ a b Spear, Percival (1990) [1978].

History of India, Volume 2: From the sixteenth century to the twentieth century . Penguin. p. 239.

ISBN 978-0-140-13836-8 .

^ a b McDermott et al. (2014) , p. 344.

^ a b Wolpert (2004) , p. 358.

^ Ghose (1991) , p.

367 .

^ Jai, Janak Raj (July 2002).

Commissions and Omissions by Indian Prime Ministers . Regency Publications. pp.

45– 47.

ISBN 978-81-86030-25-7 .

^ Babb, Lawrence A. (2020).

Religion in India: Past and Present . Edinburgh: Dunedin Academic Press.

ISBN 9781780466231 .

^ Sarkar, Sumit (2014).

Modern India: 1885–1947 . Delhi and Chennai: Pearson Education. p. 375.

ISBN 9789332535749 .

Three days later the Mahatma was dead, murdered by a Hindu fanatic, Nathuram Godse, as a climax to a conspiracy hatched by a Poona Brahman group originally inspired by V.D. Savarkar—a conspiracy which, despite ample warnings, the police of Bombay and Delhi had done nothing to foil.

^ Hardiman (2003a) , pp. 174–176.

^ Bell, J. Bowyer (2017) [2005].

Assassin: Theory and Practice of Political Violence . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-4128-0509-4 .

^ Geva, Rotem (2022).

Delhi Reborn: Partition and Nation Building in India's Capital . Stanford University Press. pp.

130– 131.

ISBN 9781503631199 .

LCCN 2021051794 .

^ a b Talbot, Ian; Singh, Gurharpal (2009).

The Partition of India . Cambridge University Press. pp.

118– 119.

ISBN 978-0-521-85661-4 .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

It is now almost a cliché that the Partition transformed Delhi from a Mughal to a Punjabi city. The bitter experiences of the refugees encouraged them to support right-wing Hindu parties. ... Trouble began in September (1947) after the arrival from refugees from Pakistan who were determined on revenge and driving Muslims out of properties which they could then occupy. Gandhi in his prayer meetings in Birla House denounced the 'crooked and ungentlemanly' squeezing out of Muslims. Despite these exhortations, two-thirds of the city's Muslims were to eventually abandon India's capital.

^ Khosla (1965) , p. 15.

^ Jagdish Chandra Jain (1987).

Gandhi, the Forgotten Mahatma . Mittal Publications. pp.

76– 77.

ISBN 978-81-7099-037-6 .

^ Jay Robert Nash (1981).

Almanac of World Crime . New York: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 69.

ISBN 978-1-4617-4768-0 .

^ Khosla (1965) , p. 38.

^ Khosla (1965) , p. 15–29.

^ "Yakub Memon first to be hanged in Maharashtra after Ajmal Kasab" . 30 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2015 . Retrieved 30 July 2015 .

^ Menon, Vinod Kumar (30 January 2014).

"Revealed: The secret room where Godse was kept after killing Gandh" . Mid-Day.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2014 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ a b Mahatma Gandhi (1994).

The Gandhi Reader: A Sourcebook of His Life and Writings . Grove Press. pp.

483–89 .

ISBN 978-0-8021-3161-4 .

^ "Over a million get last darshan" .

The Indian Express . 1 February 1948. p. 1 (bottom left).

Archived from the original on 4 December 2020 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 .

^ "Of all faiths and races, together they shed their silent tears" .

The Indian Express . 31 January 1948. p. 5 (top centre).

Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 .

^ Michaels, James (31 January 1948).

"Cremation of Gandhi's body" .

United Press International .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2022 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Life . 15 March 1948. p. 76.

ISSN 0024-3019 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ a b Ramesh, Randeep (16 January 2008).

"Gandhi's ashes to rest at sea, not in a museum" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ Kumar, Shanti (2006).

Gandhi meets primetime: globalization and nationalism in Indian television . University of Illinois Press. p. 170.

ISBN 978-0-252-07244-4 .

^ Desai, Ian (2011). "Books Behind Bars: Mahatma Gandhi's Community of Captive Readers". In Towheed, Shafquat; Owens, W.R. (eds.).

The History of Reading, Volume 1: International Perspectives, c.1500–1990 . London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp.

178– 191.

doi : 10.1057/9780230316782_12 .

ISBN 978-0-230-31678-2 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 .

^ Bakshi, S. R. (1982). "Gandhi and Bhagat Singh".

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress .

43 : 679– 686.

ISSN 2249-1937 .

JSTOR 44141310 .

^ Ferrell, David (27 September 2001).

"A Little Serenity in a City of Madness" (Abstract) .

Los Angeles Times . p. B 2.

ProQuest 421687420 .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ "The Mahatma – Life Chronology" .

Gandhi Ashram .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Margot Bigg (2012).

Delhi . Avalon. p.

14 .

ISBN 978-1-61238-490-0 .

^ Misra, R.P. (2007).

Rediscovering Gandhi . Gandhian studies and peace research series (in Maltese). Concept Publishing Company in collaboration with Gandhi Smriti & Darshan Samiti. p. 102.

ISBN 978-81-8069-375-5 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

^ a b Marbaniang, Domenic (2023).

"Gandhian Pluralist Spirituality and the Anticorruption Mission of the Aam Aadmi Party in Delhi" .

Asian Spiritualities and Social Transformation . Springer Nature. pp.

247– 261.

doi : 10.1007/978-981-99-2641-1_14 .

ISBN 978-981-99-2641-1 .

Archived from the original on 10 August 2024 . Retrieved 10 August 2024 .

^ Borman (1986) , pp.

192 –195, 208–229.

^ Dalton (2012) , pp. 30–35. "Yet he [Gandhi] must bear some of the responsibility for losing his followers along the way. The sheer vagueness and contradictions recurrent throughout his writing made it easier to accept him as a saint than to fathom the challenge posed by his demanding beliefs. Gandhi saw no harm in self-contradictions: life was a series of experiments, and any principle might change if Truth so dictated." ^ Sharp, Gene (1960).

Gandhi Wields the Weapon of Moral Power: Three Case Histories . Navajivan. p.

4 .

^ Dalton (2012) , pp. 30–32.

^ Borman (1986) , pp.

26 –34.

^ Indira Carr (2012). Stuart Brown; et al. (eds.).

Biographical Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Philosophers . Routledge. p. 264.

ISBN 978-1-134-92796-8 .

^ Watson, I. Bruce (1977). "Satyagraha: The Gandhian Synthesis".

Journal of Indian History .

55 (1/2): 325– 35.

^ a b Richards, Glyn (1986). "Gandhi's Concept of Truth and the Advaita Tradition".

Religious Studies .

22 (1): 1– 14.

doi : 10.1017/S0034412500017996 .

ISSN 0034-4125 .

JSTOR 20006253 .

S2CID 170379545 .

^ Parel, Anthony (2006).

Gandhi's Philosophy and the Quest for Harmony .

Cambridge University Press . p. 195.

ISBN 978-0-521-86715-3 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 13 January 2012 .

^ Nicholas F. Gier (2004).

The Virtue of Nonviolence: From Gautama to Gandhi .

State University of New York Press . pp.

40– 42.

ISBN 978-0-7914-5949-2 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 .

^ Pletcher, Kenneth.

"Salt March | Definition, Causes, History, & Facts" .

Britannica .

Archived from the original on 21 November 2019 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Sita Anantha Raman (2009).

Women in India: A Social and Cultural History . ABC-CLIO. pp.

164– 166.

ISBN 978-0-313-01440-6 .

^ Herman (2008) , p.

176 .

^ Gandhi, M.K. "Some Rules of Satyagraha Young India (Navajivan) 23 February 1930".

The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Vol. 48. p. 340.

^ Misra, Bijoy (18 October 2017).

"Mahatma Gandhi's Rules for Satyagraha" .

www.lokvani.com . Archived from the original on 30 July 2023 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 .

(Young India, 27 February 1930, The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan, 23 February 1930) ^ Yadav, Yogendra (9 January 2013).

"Some Rules of Satyagraha" .

The Gandhi-King Community .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2024 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 .

^ Prabhu, R.K.; Rao, U.R., eds. (1967).

"Power of Satyagraha" .

The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi . Ahemadabad: Navajivan Mudranalaya.

ISBN 81-7229-149-3 . Archived from the original on 2 September 2007.

^ Gandhi, M.K. (1982) [Young India, 16 June 1920].

"156. The Law of Suffering" (PDF) .

Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Vol. 20 (electronic ed.). New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India. pp.

396– 99.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 January 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ Sharma, Jai Narain (2008).

Satyagraha: Gandhi's approach to conflict resolution . Concept Publishing Company. p. 17.

ISBN 978-81-8069-480-6 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

^ R. Taras (2002).

Liberal and Illiberal Nationalisms . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 91.

ISBN 978-0-230-59640-5 .

In 1920 Jinnah opposed satyagraha and resigned from the Congress, boosting the fortunes of the Muslim League.

^ Yasmin Khan (2007).

The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan . Yale University Press. pp.

11–22 .

ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3 .

^ Rafiq Zakaria (2002).

The Man who Divided India . Popular Prakashan. pp.

83– 85.

ISBN 978-81-7991-145-7 .

^ Herman (2008) , p. 586.

^ Cháirez-Garza, Jesús Francisco (2 January 2014). "Touching space: Ambedkar on the spatial features of untouchability".

Contemporary South Asia .

22 (1). Taylor & Francis: 37– 50.

doi : 10.1080/09584935.2013.870978 .

S2CID 145020542 .

^ Ambedkar, B. R. (1945), What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables , Thacker & Co. Editions, First Edition, pp. v, 282–297.

^ Herman (2008) , pp. 359, 378–380.

^ Asirvatham, Eddy (1995).

Political Theory . S.chand.

ISBN 81-219-0346-7 .

^ Parel, Anthony J. (2016).

Pax Gandhiana: The Political Philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press. pp. 202–.

ISBN 978-0-19-049146-8 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 .

Gandhi staked his reputation as an original political thinker on this specific issue. Hitherto, violence had been used in the name of political rights, such as in street riots, regicide, or armed revolutions. Gandhi believes there is a better way of securing political rights, that of nonviolence, and that this new way marks an advance in political ethics.

^ Christopher Chapple (1993).

Nonviolence to Animals, Earth, and Self in Asian Traditions .

State University of New York Press . pp.

16– 18, 54– 57.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1497-2 .

^ Gandhi, Mohandis K. (11 August 1920).

"The Doctrine of the Sword" .

Young India . M. K. Gandhi: 3.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2017 .

Cited from Borman (1986) , pp.

253 .

^ Devji, Faisal (2012).

The Impossible Indian: Gandhi and the Temptation of Violence . Harvard University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Johnson (2006) , p.

xi .

^ a b Stein, Burton (2010).

A History of India . John Wiley & Sons. pp. 289–.

ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 .

Gandhi was the leading genius of the later, and ultimately successful, campaign for India's independence.

^ Gupta, Sourabh (2 October 2013).

"Gandhi Jayanti: Why non-violent Mahatma Gandhi preferred violence to cowardice" .

India Today .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

^ a b Jahanbegloo, R. (2020).

Mahatma Gandhi: A Nonviolent Perspective on Peace . Peacemakers. Taylor & Francis. p. 69.

ISBN 978-1-000-22313-2 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

^ a b A. P. Sharma (2010).

Indian & Western Educational Philosophy . Pustak Mahal. pp.

154– 56.

ISBN 978-81-7806-201-3 .

^ Winthrop Sargeant (2010). Christopher Key Chapple (ed.).

The Bhagavad Gita: Twenty-fifth–Anniversary Edition .

State University of New York Press . pp.

x– xviii, 285 (verse 6.14), 415 (verse 10.5), 535 (verse 13.7).

ISBN 978-1-4384-2840-6 .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2017.

^ Thomas Weber (2004).

Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor .

Cambridge University Press . p.

33 .

ISBN 978-1-139-45657-9 .

^ Mahatma Gandhi (1957).

An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Vol. 39.

Beacon Press . p.

328 .

ISBN 978-0-8070-5909-8 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Sankar Ghose (1991).

Mahatma Gandhi . Allied Publishers. pp.

66– 67.

ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6 .

^ a b Sankar Ghose (1991).

Mahatma Gandhi . Allied Publishers. pp.

354– 57.

ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6 .

^ Bhikhu C. Parekh (1999).

Colonialism, tradition, and reform: an analysis of Gandhi's political discourse . Sage Publications. pp.

210– 21.

ISBN 978-0-7619-9382-7 .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2014.

^ a b c Jad Adams (2 January 2012).

"Thrill of the chaste: The truth about Gandhi's sex life" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2013.

^ a b Uma Majmudar (2012).

Gandhi's Pilgrimage of Faith: From Darkness to Light .

State University of New York Press . pp.

224– 25.

ISBN 978-0-7914-8351-0 .

^ Sean Scalmer (2011).

Gandhi in the West: The Mahatma and the Rise of Radical Protest .

Cambridge University Press . pp. 12–17 with footnotes.

ISBN 978-1-139-49457-1 .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2016.

^ Howard, Veena R. (2013). "Rethinking Gandhi's celibacy: Ascetic power and women's empowerment".

Journal of the American Academy of Religion .

81 (1).

Oxford University Press : 130–61 [130, 137].

doi : 10.1093/jaarel/lfs103 .

^ Alcohol and Temperance in Modern History An International Encyclopedia · Volume 1 .

ABC-CLIO . 2003. p. 692.

^ "M.K. Gandhi as a Author | M.K. Gandhi: Author, Journalist, Printer-Publisher | Journalist Gandhi" .

www.mkgandhi.org .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Would Gandhi have been a Wikipedian?" .

The Indian Express . 17 January 2012.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

^ "Peerless Communicator" Archived 4 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine by V. N. Narayanan. Life Positive Plus, October–December 2002.

^ Roberts, Andrew (26 March 2011).

"Among the Hagiographers (A book review of "Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India" by Joseph Lelyveld)" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ Gandhi, M.K.

Unto this Last: A paraphrase . Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House.

ISBN 81-7229-076-4 . Archived from the original on 30 October 2012 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

^ Pareku, Bhikhu (2001).

Gandhi .

Oxford University Press . p. 159.

ISBN 978-0-19-160667-0 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ M.K. Gandhi (1934).

Songs From Prison . Public Resource.

^ "Revised edition of Bapu's works to be withdrawn" .

The Times of India . 16 November 2005.

Archived from the original on 29 October 2012 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .

^ Peter Rühe.

"Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi (CWMG) Controversy" . Gandhiserve.org. Archived from the original on 7 September 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 .

^ Vilanilam, J.V. (2005).

Mass Communication In India: A Sociological Perspective . SAGE Publications. p. 68.

ISBN 978-93-5280-570-9 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

The greatest of all national leaders (and journalists) of the independence movement was Mahatma Gandhi.

^ Parker, Geoffrey (1995).

The Times Illustrated History of the World . HarperCollins. p. 290.

ISBN 978-0-06-270010-0 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

The hero of Indian independence from the British, and the greatest figure in decolonization, was Mahatma Gandhi ^ Douglas, R. (2021).

The World War 1939–1945: The Cartoonists' Vision . Routledge Library Editions: WW2. Routledge. p. 192.

ISBN 978-1-000-46048-3 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

Mahatma Gandhi was the most influential of all the Indian politicians in the campaign for independence ^ Prashad, G.; Nawani, A. (2006).

Writings on Nehru: Some Reflections on Indian Thoughts and Related Essays . Northern Book Centre. p. 92.

ISBN 978-81-7211-204-2 .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

Mahatma Gandhi was the greatest absorbant [sic] and the greatest personality of modern India ^ Blamberger, G.; Kakar, S. (2018).

Imaginations of Death and the Beyond in India and Europe . Springer Nature Singapore. p. 3.

ISBN 978-981-10-6707-5 .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

Mahatma Gandhi, modern India's greatest icon, elevated his search for moksha above any of his social or political goals, including India's freedom from colonial rule.

^ Carson, C. (2001).

The Autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr . Grand Central Publishing. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-7595-2037-0 .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

Gandhi is not only the greatest figure in India's history, but his influence is felt in almost every aspect of life and public policy.

^ Wolpert (2001) , pp. 32–263.

^ "Indira 'woman of millennium', Mahatma 'Asian of century' " .

Tribune India . 2 December 1999.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ "Mahatma Gandhi 'greatest man' " .

BBC News . 1 January 2000.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ a b "Mahatma Gandhi Biography" .

Social Justice & Special Assistance, Government of Maharashtra .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

^ McGregor, Ronald Stuart (1993).

The Oxford Hindi-English Dictionary . Oxford University Press. p.

799 .

ISBN 978-0-19-864339-5 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 .

mahā- (S. 'great, mighty, large, ..., eminent') + ātmā (S. ' 1.

soul, spirit; the self, the individual; the mind, the heart; 2.

the ultimate being.'): 'high-souled, of noble nature; a noble or venerable man.' ^ Gandhi (2008) , p.

172 . "...Kasturba would accompany Gandhi on his departure from Cape Town for England in July 1914 en route to India. ... In different South African towns ( Pretoria , Cape Town, Bloemfontein , Johannesburg , and the Natal cities of Durban and Verulam ), the struggle's martyrs were honoured and the Gandhi's bade farewell. Addresses in Durban and Verulam referred to Gandhi as a 'Mahatma', 'great soul'. He was seen as a great soul because he had taken up the poor's cause. The whites too said good things about Gandhi, who predicted a future for the Empire if it respected justice." ^ Charan Shandilya.

India-China Relations . Pt. Sunderlal Institute of Asian Studies. p. 187.

^ Mahatma Gandhi: A Chronology .

Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (India) . 1971. p. 60.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ Tagore, Rabindranath (1998). Dutta, Krishna (ed.).

Rabindranath Tagore: an anthology . Robinson, Andrew. Macmillan. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-312-20079-4 .

^ Guha (2013a) , pp. 362, 662. "During my last trip to Europe I saw a great deal of Mr Gandhi. From year to year (I have known him intimately for over twenty years) I have found him getting more and more selfless. He is now leading almost an ascetic sort of life – not the life of an ordinary ascetic that we usually see but that of a great Mahatma and the one idea that engrosses his mind is his motherland." ^ Pranjivan Mehta to G. K. Gokhale, dated Rangoon, 8 November 1909, File No. 4, Servants of India Society Papers, NMML.

^ Gandhi (1990a) , p. viii.

^ Basu Majumdar, A. K. (1993), Rabindranath Tagore: The Poet of India , Indus Publishing, ISBN 81-85182-92-2 , p. 83: "When Gandhi returned to India, Rabindranath's eldest brother Dwijendranath, was perhaps the first to address him as Mahatma. Rabindranath followed suit and then the whole of India called him Mahatma Gandhi." ^ Ghose (1991) , p.

158 . "So Tagore differed from many of Gandhi's ideas, but yet he had great regard for him and Tagore was perhaps the first important Indian who called Gandhi a Mahatma. But in 1921 when Gandhi was asked whether he was really a Mahatma Gandhi replied that he did not feel like one, and that, in any event, he could not define a Mahatma for he had never met any." ^ "Champion of Liberty Issue" . Smithsonian National Postal Museum.

Archived from the original on 27 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 December 2023 .

^ Guha, Ramachandra (2007).

India After Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy . Delhi: Ecco Press.

ISBN 978-0-06-019881-7 .

^ "Stamps on Mahatma Gandhi in 150 countries" .

India Today . Press Trust of India. 2 October 2008.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ "Palestine, Turkey and Uzbekistan Issue Commemorative Gandhi Stamps" .

The Wire . 2 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ "Memorial stamp marking Mahatma Gandhi unveiled in Iran" .

Islamic Republic News Agency . 2 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 5 June 2023 .

^ Yojana October 2020 (English) (Special Edition): A Development Monthly . Public Division. p. 70.

^ Chaudhury, Dipanjan Roy (2 October 2019).

"Russia marks 150th year of Mahatma Gandhi with series of events" .

The Economic Times .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ Moore, Tony (16 November 2014).

"Indian PM Narendra Modi unveils Gandhi statue" .

Brisbane Times .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2018 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

^ "Mohandas Karamchand (Mahatma) Gandhi" .

Monument Australia .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2024 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

^ "The Minor Planet Circular 125471" (PDF) . Minor Planet Center. 24 September 2020. p. 939.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Айжан (14 October 2022).

"Statue of Mahatma Gandhi erected in Astana" .

jjtv.kz .

Archived from the original on 8 November 2022 . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ "Mahatma Gandhi's bust at UN, a reminder of values he upheld: UN Chief" .

Business Standard News . 15 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .

^ "Forgotten Indian sacrifices in SA War brought to light" .

The Witness . 14 April 2025 . Retrieved 22 April 2025 .

^ "King's Trip to India" . Mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ Sidner, Sara (17 February 2009).

"King moved, as father was, on trip to Gandhi's memorial" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ D'Souza, Placido P. (20 January 2003).

"Commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.: Gandhi's influence on King" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2013 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ Tougas, Shelley (2011).

Birmingham 1963: How a Photograph Rallied Civil Rights Support . Capstone Press. p. 12.

ISBN 978-0-7565-4398-3 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ Cone, James (1992).

Martin & Malcolm & America: A Dream Or a Nightmare . Orbis Books.

ISBN 0-88344-824-6 .

^ a b Mandela, Nelson (31 December 1999).

"The Sacred Warrior" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ "Commemorative Soirée: Relevance of Václav Havel Today" . Embassy of the Czech Republic in Delhi.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2022 . Retrieved 4 February 2022 .

^ Sethi, Rubina (22 February 2004).

"An alternative Gandhi" .

The Tribune . India.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2009 . Retrieved 12 March 2009 .

^ Bhana, Surendra; Vahed, Goolam H. (2005).

The Making of a Political Reformer: Gandhi in South Africa, 1893–1914 . Manohar. pp.

44– 45, 149.

ISBN 978-81-7304-612-4 .

^ "Einstein on Gandhi (Einstein's letter to Gandhi – Courtesy:Saraswati Albano-Müller & Notes by Einstein on Gandhi – Source: The Hebrew University of Jerusalem)" . Gandhiserve.org. 18 October 1931. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ Uwechue, Raph (1981).

Makers of Modern Africa: Profiles in History . Published by Africa Journal Ltd. for Africa Books Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-903274-14-2 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 .

^ Dhupelia-Mesthrie, Uma (2005).

Gandhi's prisoner?: the life of Gandhi's son Manilal . Permanent Black. p. 293.

ISBN 978-81-7824-116-6 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

^ "In the company of Bapu" .

The Telegraph . 3 October 2004. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

^ Gilmore, Mikal (5 December 2005).

"Lennon Lives Forever" .

Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on 28 May 2007 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ Applebome, Peter (30 March 2008).

"Applying Gandhi's Ideas to Climate Change" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

Al Gore cited both Gandhi and Abraham Lincoln in a speech on climate change in 2007. He noted Gandhi's sense of satyagraha ...

^ "Obama steers clear of politics in school pep talk" .

MSNBC .

Associated Press . 8 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ "The Children of Gandhi" (excerpt) .

Time . 31 December 1999.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2013.

^ Moreno, Jenalia (16 January 2010).

"Houston community celebrates district named for Gandhi" .

Houston Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ a b Mohan, Shaj; Dwivedi, Divya; Nancy, Jean-Luc (2018).

Gandhi and Philosophy: On Theological Anti-Politics . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4742-2173-3 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ "UN declares 2 October, Gandhi's birthday, as International Day of Nonviolence" . UN News Centre. 15 June 2007.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2012 . Retrieved 2 April 2012 .

^ "School Day of Nonviolence And Peace" .

Letter of Peace addressed to the UN . cartadelapaz.org. 30 January 2009.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2011 . Retrieved 9 January 2012 .

^ a b Eulogio Díaz del Corral (31 January 1983).

"DENIP: School Day of Nonviolence and Peace" .

DENIP (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 27 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ Clark, Ronald (2011).

Einstein: The Life and Times . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4482-0270-6 .

^ "University and Educational Intelligence" (PDF) .

Current Science .

6 (6): 314. December 1937.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 July 2018 . Retrieved 15 July 2018 .

^ "Peace Laureates – livinghumanity" . LivingHumanity.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 March 2024 .

^ Burger, D. (2002).

South Africa Yearbook 2002/03 . Government Communication and Information System. p. 99.

ISBN 978-1-919855-14-1 .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 March 2024 .

^ "Top 25 Political Icons" .

Time . 4 February 2011.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 9 February 2011 .

^ "Nobel Peace Prize Nominations" .

American Friends Service Committee . 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 4 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ a b c d Tønnesson, Øyvind (1 December 1999).

"Mahatma Gandhi, the Missing Laureate" .

Nobel Foundation .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2013 . Retrieved 16 January 2012 .

^ "Relevance of Gandhian Philosophy in the 21st Century" Archived 15 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Icrs.ugm.ac.id. Retrieved 5 August 2013.

^ "Vegetarian Hall of Fame" .

North American Vegetarian Society .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

^ Elkins, Zachary; Ginsburg, Tom; Melton, Melton (2009).

The Endurance of National Constitutions . Cambridge University Press. p. 158.

ISBN 978-0-521-51550-4 .

Whereas Pakistan's leaders died early, India's founding triumvirate of Jawaharlal Nehru , Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel , and Rajendra Prasad provided a stable hand for the early years, and a personal continuity with the father of the nation, Mahatma Gandhi ^ "Gandhi not formally conferred 'Father of the Nation' title: Govt" .

The Indian Express . 11 July 2012. Archived from the original on 6 September 2014.

^ "Constitution doesn't permit 'Father of the Nation' title: Government" .

The Times of India . 26 October 2012. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017.

^ a b Nehru, Jawaharlal.

An Autobiography . Bodley Head.

^ a b c McAllister, Pam (1982).

Reweaving the Web of Life: Feminism and Nonviolence . New Society Publishers. p.

194 .

ISBN 978-0-86571-017-7 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 .

With love, Yours, Bapu (You closed with the term of endearment used by your close friends, the term you used with all the movement leaders, roughly meaning 'Papa'.

Another letter written in 1940 shows similar tenderness and caring.

^ a b Eck, Diana L.

(2003).

Encountering God: A Spiritual Journey from Bozeman to Banaras .

Beacon Press . p. 210.

ISBN 978-0-8070-7301-8 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 .

... his niece Manu, who, like others called this immortal Gandhi 'Bapu,' meaning not 'father,' but the familiar, 'daddy'.

^ "Crusade with arms" .

The Hindu . February 2000. Archived from the original on 13 April 2018.

^ "Father of the Nation RTI" .

NDTV .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2016 . Retrieved 21 September 2016 .

^ "Constitution does not permit any titles" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2017 . Retrieved 21 September 2016 .

^ "Mahatma: Life of Gandhi, 1869–1948 (1968 – 5hrs 10min)" . Channel of GandhiServe Foundation.

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 .

^ "Vithalbhai Jhaveri" . GandhiServe Foundatiom. Archived from the original on 31 December 2014 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 .

^ Dwyer, Rachel (2011).

"The Case of the Missing Mahatma:Gandhi and the Hindi Cinema" (PDF) .

Public Culture .

23 (2). Duke University Press: 349– 76.

doi : 10.1215/08992363-1161949 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2017.

^ Fischer, Louis (1957).

The Life of Mahatma Gandhi . London: Johnathan Cape.

^ Melvani, Lavina (February 1997).

"Making of the Mahatma" .

Hinduism Today .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

^ Pandohar, Jaspreet (Reviewer).

"Movies – Maine Gandhi Ko Nahin Mara (I Did Not Kill Gandhi) (2005)" . BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation).

Archived from the original on 4 July 2015 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 .

^ Lal, Vinay.

"Moving Images of Gandhi" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 .

^ Barczewski, S.; Farr, M. (2019).

The MacKenzie Moment and Imperial History: Essays in Honour of John M. MacKenzie . Britain and the World. Springer International Publishing. p. 159.

ISBN 978-3-030-24459-0 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ Kostelanetz, Richard ; Flemming, Robert (1999).

Writings on Glass: Essays, Interviews, Criticism . University of California Press. p.

102 .

ISBN 978-0-520-21491-0 .

^ Philip Glass (2015).

Words Without Music: A Memoir . Liveright. pp. 192, 307.

ISBN 978-1-63149-081-1 .

^ Kostelanetz & Flemming (1999) , p. 168.

^ "It's fashionable to be anti-Gandhi" . DNA. 1 October 2005.

Archived from the original on 22 June 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2013 .

^ Dutt, Devina (20 February 2009).

"Drama king" .

Live Mint .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2013 .

^ Kunzru, Hari (29 March 2011).

"Appreciating Gandhi Through His Human Side" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

(Review of Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld).

^ "US author slams Gandhi gay claim" .

The Australian . Agence France-Presse. 29 March 2011.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

^ Kamath, Sudhish (28 February 2011).

"A Welcome Effort" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2014 . Retrieved 24 January 2014 .

^ Pandit, Unnati (5 March 2019).

"Bharat Bhagya Vidhata' captivates the audience" .

The Live Nagpur .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2019 .

^ "NEW YORK; Cole Porter's Lyrics Depend On the Music, But Even Solo They're So Easy to Love" .

The New York Times . 1 November 1987.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 24 May 2015 . Retrieved 7 May 2023 .

^ Ghosh, B. N. (2001).

Contemporary issues in development economics . Psychology Press. p. 211.

ISBN 978-0-415-25136-5 .

^ Yardley, Jim (6 November 2010).

"Obama Invokes Gandhi, Whose Ideal Eludes India" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2013 . Retrieved 22 January 2012 .

^ "Reserve Bank of India – Bank Notes" . Rbi.org.in. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2011 .

^ Chatterjee, Sailen.

"Martyrs' Day" .

Features . Press Information Bureau.

Archived from the original on 2 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ a b Kaggere, Niranjan (2 October 2010).

"Here, Gandhi is God" . BangaloreMirror.com.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 29 January 2011 .

^ "Mahatma Gandhi Temple" .

www.mahatmagandhitemple.org . Archived from the original on 14 April 2018 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ Abram, David; Edwards, Nick (2003).

The Rough Guide to South India . Rough Guides. p. 506.

ISBN 978-1-84353-103-6 . Retrieved 21 January 2012 .

^ Gandhi (2007a) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Dave, Hiral (22 June 2016).

"Lodged in old age home in Delhi, Gandhi's grandson looks to Rajkot" .

Hindustan Times .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 29 October 2018 .

^ Ians, Surat (8 November 2016).

"Kanu Gandhi, Gandhiji's grandson and ex-Nasa scientist, dies" .

Hindustan Times .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 October 2018 .

General and cited references Books Ahmed, Talat (2018).

Mohandas Gandhi: Experiments in Civil Disobedience .

ISBN 0-7453-3429-6 .

Barr, F. Mary (1956).

Bapu: Conversations and Correspondence with Mahatma Gandhi (2nd ed.). Bombay: International Book House.

OCLC 8372568 .

(see book article ) Bondurant, Joan Valérie (1971).

Conquest of Violence: the Gandhian philosophy of conflict .

University of California Press .

[ ISBN missing ] Borman, William (1986).

Gandhi and Non-Violence .

State University of New York Press .

ISBN 978-0-88706-331-2 .

Brown, Judith Margaret (1991).

Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-05125-4 .

Brown, Judith M. (2004). "Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand [Mahatma Gandhi] (1869–1948)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Oxford University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Brown, Judith M., and Anthony Parel, eds. (2012).

The Cambridge Companion to Gandhi ; 14 essays by scholars.

[ ISBN missing ] Chadha, Yogesh (1997).

Gandhi: a life . John Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-471-24378-6 .

Dwivedi, Divya; Mohan, Shaj; Nancy, Jean-Luc (2019).

Gandhi and Philosophy: On Theological Anti-politics . Bloomsbury Academic, UK.

ISBN 978-1-4742-2173-3 .

Dalton, Dennis (2012).

Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-15959-3 .

Dalton, Dennis (2012a).

Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-53039-2 .

Dhiman, S. (2016).

Gandhi and Leadership: New Horizons in Exemplary Leadership . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-137-49235-7 .

Easwaran, Eknath (2011).

Gandhi the Man: How One Man Changed Himself to Change the World . Nilgiri Press.

ISBN 978-1-58638-055-7 .

Hook, Sue Vander (2010).

Mahatma Gandhi: Proponent of Peace . ABDO.

ISBN 978-1-61758-813-6 .

Gandhi, Rajmohan (1990).

Patel, A Life . Navajivan Pub. House.

Gandhi, Rajmohan (2007a).

Mohandas: A True Story of a Man, His People, and an Empire . Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-310411-7 .

Gandhi, Rajmohan (2007b).

Mohandas: True Story of a Man, His People, and an Empire .

Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-81-8475-317-2 .

Gandhi, Rajmohan (2008).

Gandhi: The Man, His People, and the Empire .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8 .

Gangrade, K.D. (2004). "Role of Shanti Sainiks in the Global Race for Armaments".

Moral Lessons From Gandhi's Autobiography And Other Essays . Concept Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-81-8069-084-6 .

Ghose, Sankar (1991).

Mahatma Gandhi . Allied Publishers.

ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6 .

Guha, Ramachandra (2013).

Gandhi Before India . Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3 .

Guha, Ramachandra (2013a).

Gandhi Before India . Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0-670-08387-9 .

Guha, Ramachandra (2013x).

Gandhi Before India .

Penguin Books Limited .

ISBN 978-93-5118-322-8 .

Guha, Ramachandra (15 October 2014a).

Gandhi before India .

Penguin Books Limited .

ISBN 978-93-5118-322-8 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

[ verification needed ] Guha, Ramachandra (2015).

Gandhi before India . Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3 .

Hardiman, David (2003).

Gandhi in His Time and Ours: the global legacy of his ideas . C. Hurst & Co.

ISBN 978-1-85065-711-8 .

Hardiman, David (2003a).

Gandhi in His Time and Ours: The Global Legacy of His Ideas .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-13114-8 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

Hatt, Christine (2002).

Mahatma Gandhi . Evans Brothers.

ISBN 978-0-237-52308-4 .

Herman, Arthur (2008).

Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age . Random House Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5 .

Ebook: ISBN 978-0-553-80463-8 .

Jai, Janak Raj (1996).

Commissions and Omissions by Indian Prime Ministers: 1947–1980 . Regency Publications.

ISBN 978-81-86030-23-3 .

Majmudar, Uma (2005).

Gandhi's Pilgrimage of Faith: from darkness to light . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-6405-2 .

Markovits, Claude, ed. (2002).

A History of Modern India, 1480–1950 . Anthem Press.

ISBN 978-1-84331-004-4 .

McDermott, Rachel Fell; Gordon, Leonard A.

; Embree, Ainslie T.

; Pritchett, Frances W.; Dalton, Dennis , eds. (2014).

Sources of Indian Traditions, Volume 2: Modern India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh (3rd ed.). New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-13830-7 .

Miller, Jake C. (2002).

Prophets of a just society . Nova Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-59033-068-5 .

Minault, Gail (1982).

The Khilafat Movement Religious Symbolism and Political Mobilization in India .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 0-231-05072-0 .

Muldoon, Andrew (2016).

Empire, Politics and the Creation of the 1935 India Act: Last Act of the Raj . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-14431-1 .

Pāṇḍeya, Viśva Mohana (2003).

Historiography of India's Partition: an analysis of imperialist writings . Atlantic Publishers & Dist.

ISBN 978-81-269-0314-6 .

Pilisuk, Marc ; Nagler, Michael N. (2011).

Peace Movements Worldwide: Players and practices in resistance to war . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-0-313-36482-2 .

Rühe, Peter (2004).

Gandhi . Phaidon.

ISBN 978-0-7148-4459-6 .

Schouten, Jan Peter (2008).

Jesus as Guru: the image of Christ among Hindus and Christians in India . Rodopi.

ISBN 978-90-420-2443-4 .

Sharp, Gene (1979).

Gandhi as a Political Strategist: with essays on ethics and politics . P. Sargent Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-87558-090-6 .

Shashi, S. S. (1996).

Encyclopaedia Indica: India, Pakistan, Bangladesh . Anmol Publications.

ISBN 978-81-7041-859-7 .

Sinha, Satya (2015).

The Dialectic of God: The Theosophical Views Of Tagore and Gandhi . Partridge Publishing India.

ISBN 978-1-4828-4748-2 .

Sofri, Gianni (1999).

Gandhi and India: a century in focus . Windrush Press.

ISBN 978-1-900624-12-1 .

Thacker, Dhirubhai (2006).

"Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand" . In Amaresh Datta (ed.).

The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature (Volume Two) (Devraj To Jyoti) . Sahitya Akademi. p. 1345.

ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0 .

Todd, Anne M. (2004).

Mohandas Gandhi . Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7910-7864-8 .

; short biography for children Todd, Anne M. (2009).

Mohandas Gandhi . Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4381-0662-5 .

Wolpert, Stanley (2001).

Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 .

Wolpert, Stanley (2001a).

"Midnight in Calcutta" .

Gandhi's Passion: The life and legacy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-515634-X .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

Wolpert, Stanley (2002).

Gandhi's Passion: the life and legacy of Mahatma Gandhi .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-972872-5 .

Wolpert, Stanley (2002a).

Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8 .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2017.

Wolpert, Stanley (2004).

A New History of India (7th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0195166787 .

Wolpert, Stanley (2009).

Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-539394-1 .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2013.

Scholarly articles Danielson, Leilah C.

" 'In My Extremity I Turned to Gandhi': American Pacifists, Christianity, and Gandhian Nonviolence, 1915–1941".

Church History 72.2 (2003): 361–388.

Du Toit, Brian M. "The Mahatma Gandhi and South Africa." Journal of Modern African Studies 34#4 (1996): 643–660.

JSTOR 161593 .

Gokhale, B. G. "Gandhi and the British Empire", History Today (Nov 1969), 19#11 pp 744–751 online.

Juergensmeyer, Mark. "The Gandhi Revival – A Review Article." The Journal of Asian Studies 43#2 (Feb. 1984), pp. 293–298.

JSTOR 2055315 Khosla, G.D. (1965).

The Murder of the Mahatma (proceedings by the Chief Justice of Punjab) (PDF) . Jaico Publishers. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2015.

Kishwar, Madhu. "Gandhi on Women." Economic and Political Weekly 20, no. 41 (1985): 1753–758.

JSTOR 4374920 .

Mohammed, Fevin "Gandhi the Great". (2013) (PhD in Historical Research, Coordinated under Prof. Ram Prasad Sharma).

Murthy, C. S. H. N., Oinam Bedajit Meitei, and Dapkupar Tariang. "The Tale Of Gandhi Through The Lens: An Inter-Textual Analytical Study Of Three Major Films-Gandhi, The Making Of The Mahatma, And Gandhi, My Father." CINEJ Cinema Journal 2.2 (2013): 4–37.

online Power, Paul F. "Toward a Revaluation of Gandhi's Political Thought." Western Political Quarterly 16.1 (1963): 99–108 excerpt.

Rudolph, Lloyd I. "Gandhi in the Mind of America." Economic and Political Weekly 45, no. 47 (2010): 23–26.

JSTOR 25764146 .

Primary sources Abel M (2005).

Glimpses of Indian National Movement . ICFAI Books.

ISBN 978-81-7881-420-9 .

Andrews, C. F. (2008) [1930]. "VII – The Teaching of Ahimsa".

Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas Including Selections from His Writings . Pierides Press.

ISBN 978-1-4437-3309-0 .

Dalton, Dennis, ed. (1996).

Mahatma Gandhi: Selected Political Writings . Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-87220-330-3 .

Duncan, Ronald, ed. (2011).

Selected Writings of Mahatma Gandhi . Literary Licensing, LLC.

ISBN 978-1-258-00907-6 . Archived from the original on 1 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 .

Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1928).

Satyagraha in South Africa (in Gujarati). Translated by Valji G. Desai (1st ed.). Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House.

Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1994).

The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India.

ISBN 978-81-230-0239-2 .

(100 volumes). Free online access from Gandhiserve.

Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1928).

"Drain Inspector's Report" .

The United States of India .

5 ( 6– 8): 3– 4.

Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (1990a). Desai, Mahadev H. (ed.).

Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth . Mineola, N.Y.: Dover.

ISBN 0-486-24593-4 .

Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (2002). Fischer, Louis (ed.).

The Essential Gandhi: An Anthology of His Writings on His Life, Work and Ideas (2nd ed.). Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-1-4000-3050-7 .

Jack, Homer A., ed. (1994).

The Gandhi Reader: A Source Book of His Life and Writings . Grove Press.

ISBN 978-0-8021-3161-4 .

Johnson, Richard L., ed. (2006).

Gandhi's Experiments with Truth: Essential Writings by and about Mahatma Gandhi . Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0-7391-1143-7 .

Parel, Anthony J., ed. (2009).

Gandhi: "Hind Swaraj" and Other Writings Centenary Edition .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-14602-9 .

External links Mahatma Gandhi at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Gandhi's correspondence with the Indian government 1942–1944 About Mahatma Gandhi Gandhi at Sabarmati Ashram Works by Mahatma Gandhi at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Mahatma Gandhi at the Internet Archive Works by Mahatma Gandhi at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Newspaper clippings about Mahatma Gandhi in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Mahatma Gandhi Life events and movements Indian Ambulance Corps Tolstoy Farm Bardoli Satyagraha Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Indian independence movement Non-cooperation movement Chauri Chaura incident Purna Swaraj flag Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vaikom Satyagraha Aundh Experiment Gandhi–Irwin Pact Second Round Table Conference Padayatra Poona Pact Natal Indian Congress Quit India speech Gujarat Vidyapith University Harijan Sevak Sangh India ashrams (Kochrab Sabarmati Sodepur Khadi Sevagram) List of fasts Assassination Philosophy Practices and beliefs Composite nationalism Gandhism Economics trusteeship Education Sarvodaya Satyagraha Swadeshi Swaraj Eleven vows Gandhi cap Publications Harijan Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule) Indian Opinion The Story of My Experiments with Truth Mangal Prabhat Young India Seven Social Sins Navajivan Trust Gandhi Heritage Portal Influences " A Letter to a Hindu " Ahimsa ( nonviolence ) Bhagavad Gita Henry David Thoreau ( Civil Disobedience (essay) ) Civil disobedience Fasting Hinduism Khadi John Ruskin Parsee Rustomjee Leo Tolstoy ( The Kingdom of God Is Within You ) The Masque of Anarchy Narmad Pacifism Sermon on the Mount Shravan Shrimad Rajchandra Henry Stephens Salt Tirukkuṛaḷ Unto This Last Gandhi's translation " Raghupati Raghava Raja Ram " " Ekla Chalo Re " " Hari Tuma Haro " " Vaishnava Jana To " Vegetarianism Associates Swami Anand C. F. Andrews Jamnalal Bajaj Shankarlal Banker Sarla Behn Vinoba Bhave Brij Krishna Chandiwala Sudhakar Chaturvedi Jugatram Dave Mahadev Desai Dada Dharmadhikari Kanu Gandhi Shiv Prasad Gupta Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri J. C. Kumarappa Hermann Kallenbach Abdul Ghaffar Khan Acharya Kripalani Mirabehn Mohanlal Pandya Vallabhbhai Patel Narhari Parikh Mithuben Petit Chakravarti Rajagopalachari Bibi Amtus Salam Sonja Schlesin Anugrah Narayan Sinha Shri Krishna Sinha Rettamalai Srinivasan V. A. Sundaram Abbas Tyabji Ravishankar Vyas Kishorlal Mashruwala Legacy Artistic depictions Gandhigiri Gandhi Peace Award Gandhi Peace Foundation Gandhi Peace Prize Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith Indian currency (Gandhi Series, Gandhi New Series, Indian rupee ) Indian 10 Rupee postage stamp Family Karamchand Gandhi (father) Kasturba (wife) Harilal (son) Manilal (son) Ramdas (son) Devdas (son) Maganlal (cousin) Samaldas (nephew) Arun (grandson) Ela (granddaughter) Rajmohan (grandson) Gopalkrishna (grandson) Ramchandra (grandson) Kanu (grandson) Kanu (grandnephew) Tushar (great-grandson) Leela (great-granddaughter) Influenced 14th Dalai Lama Aung San Suu Kyi Abhay Bang Abdul Ghaffar Khan Brajkishore Prasad C. Rajagopalachari Eknath Easwaran Droupadi Murmu François Bayrou Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Govind Ballabh Pant Ho Chi Minh James Bevel James Lawson Jawaharlal Nehru Joan Bondurant Lal Bahadur Shastri Lanza del Vasto Maulana Azad Martin Luther King Jr.

Maria Lacerda de Moura Mehdi Bazargan Morarji Desai Narendra Modi Nelson Mandela Rajendra Prasad Ramjee Singh Steve Biko Sane Guruji Vinoba Bhave Vallabhbhai Patel Memorials Statues Ghana India Patna National Salt Satyagraha Memorial New Delhi South Africa Johannesburg Pietermaritzburg UK Parliament Square Tavistock Square U.S.

Davis Denver Houston Milwaukee New York San Francisco San Jose Washington, D.C.

Observances Gandhi Jayanti International Day of Non-Violence Martyrs' Day Season for Nonviolence Other Aga Khan Palace Gandhi Bhawan Gandhi Mandapam Gandhi Market Bookstores Gandhi Promenade Gandhi Smriti Gandhi Memorial Gandhi Memorial Museum, Madurai Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya Gandhi Teerth Gandhi Temple, Bhatara Kaba Gandhi No Delo Kirti Mandir Mahatma Gandhi College Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Centre, Matale Mani Bhavan Mahatma Gandhi Museum, Rajkot National Gandhi Museum Raj Ghat Roads named after Gandhi Sabarmati Ashram Satyagraha House Articles related to Mahatma Gandhi v t e Hindu reform movements Reform movements Adi Dharm / Brahmoism Brahmo Samaj Sadharan Brahmo Samaj Advait Mat Divine Light Mission American Meditation Institute Ananda Ananda Ashrama Ananda Marga Anandamayee Sangha Art of Living Arya Samaj Ayyavazhi Brahma Kumaris Chinmaya Mission Datta Yoga Divine Life Society Hanuman Foundation Himalayan Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Janajagruti Samiti Hindu Mahasabha Hindu Munnani Hindu Sena Hindu Yuva Vahini Sanatan Sanstha Sangh Parivar Vishva Hindu Parishad Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh International Vedanta ISKCON ISKCON Revival Isha Foundation Kriya Yoga Mahima Dharma Mata Amritanandamayi Math Matua Mahasangha Narayana Dharma Prarthana Samaj Ramakrishna Mission / Vedanta Societies Ravidassia Sahaja Yoga Sant Mat Radha Soami Sathya Sai Baba movement Satsang Satya Dharma Satyashodhak Samaj Science of Identity Self-Realization Fellowship / Yogoda Satsanga Sivananda yoga Sri Aurobindo Ashram Sri Ramana Ashram Abidance in Truth Swadhyay Parivar NNDYM Transcendental Meditation Topics Bhakti Brahmacharya Caste Ghar Wapsi God Speaks Moksha Neo-Vedanta Perfect Master Persecution of Hindus Shuddhi Women in Hinduism Saints , and Philosophers A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Amritanandamayi Ananda Yogi Anandamayi Ma Anukulchandra Chakravarty Arumuka Navalar Athavale Aurobindo Boro Maa Bankim Chandra Chatterjee BK Shivani Chaganti Koteswara Rao Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Chinmayananda Saraswati Chinna Jeeyar Chinmoy Dayananda Saraswati Daya Mata Ganapathi Sachchidananda Garikapati Narasimha Rao Haidakhan Babaji Haranath Thakur Hariharananda Giri Jaggi Vasudev Jiddu Krishnamurti Jyotirao Phule Kalki Bhagawan Kelkar, N. C.

Kripalu Maharaj Kriyananda Lekhraj Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Mahatma Gandhi Meher Baba Mirra Alfassa Mukundananda Narayana Guru Narayan Maharaj Neem Karoli Nirmala Om Swami Parashara Paramananda Prem Rawat Ram Dass Ram Mohan Roy Ramakrishna Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Sarkar Sathya Sai Baba Shiridi Sai Baba Savarkar Sen, K. C.

Samavedam Shanmukha Sarma Shraddhanand Sister Nivedita Sivananda Swami Rama Swami Samarth Sarvapriyananda Tagore, D.

Tilak Vaswani Vipulananda Upasani Maharaj Vishnudevananda Vivekananda Yogananda more General Indian diaspora Indianisation Influence of Indian religions Indian-origin religions Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Persecution of Hindus v t e Indian independence movement History Colonisation Porto Grande de Bengala Dutch Bengal East India Company British Raj French India Portuguese India Battle of Plassey Battle of Buxar Anglo-Mysore Wars First Second Third Fourth Anglo-Maratha Wars First Second Third Gwalior Polygar Wars Vellore Mutiny First Anglo-Sikh War Second Anglo-Sikh War Sannyasi rebellion Rebellion of 1857 Radcliffe Line more Philosophies and ideologies Ambedkarism Gandhism Hindu nationalism Indian nationalism Khilafat Movement Muslim nationalism in South Asia Satyagraha Socialism Swadeshi movement Swaraj Events and movements Partition of Bengal (1905) Partition of Bengal (1947) Revolutionaries Direct Action Day Delhi-Lahore Conspiracy The Indian Sociologist Singapore Mutiny Hindu–German Conspiracy Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Rowlatt Committee Rowlatt Bills Jallianwala Bagh massacre Noakhali riots Non-cooperation movement Christmas Day Plot Coolie-Begar movement Chauri Chaura incident, 1922 Kakori conspiracy Qissa Khwani massacre Flag Satyagraha Bardoli 1928 Protests Nehru Report Fourteen Points of Jinnah Purna Swaraj Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vedaranyam March Chittagong armoury raid Gandhi–Irwin Pact Round table conferences Act of 1935 Aundh Experiment Indian Legion Cripps Mission Quit India Bombay Mutiny Royal Air Force strikes Coup d'état of Yanaon Provisional Government of India Independence Day Praja Mandala movement Lucknow Pact Organisations All India Kisan Sabha All-India Muslim League Anushilan Samiti Arya Samaj Azad Hind Berlin Committee Ghadar Movement Hindustan Socialist Republican Association Indian National Congress India House Indian Home Rule movement Indian Independence League Indian National Army Jugantar Khaksar movement Khudai Khidmatgar Swaraj Party more Social reformers Ashfaqulla Khan A. Vaidyanatha Iyer Ayya Vaikundar Ayyankali B. R. Ambedkar Baba Amte Bal Gangadhar Tilak Dayananda Saraswati Dhondo Keshav Karve G. Subramania Iyer Gazulu Lakshminarasu Chetty Gopal Ganesh Agarkar Gopal Hari Deshmukh Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar J. B. Kripalani Jyotirao Phule Kandukuri Veeresalingam Mahadev Govind Ranade Mahatma Gandhi Muthulakshmi Reddy Narayana Guru Niralamba Swami Pandita Ramabai Periyar Ram Mohan Roy Rettamalai Srinivasan Sahajanand Saraswati Savitribai Phule Shahu Sister Nivedita Sri Aurobindo Syed Ahmad Khan Vakkom Moulavi Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Vinoba Bhave Vitthal Ramji Shinde Vivekananda Independence activists Abul Kalam Azad Accamma Cherian Achyut Patwardhan A. K. Fazlul Huq Alluri Sitarama Raju Annapurna Maharana Annie Besant Ashfaqulla Khan Babu Kunwar Singh Bagha Jatin Bahadur Shah II Bakht Khan Bal Gangadhar Tilak Basawon Singh Begum Hazrat Mahal Bhagat Singh Bharathidasan Bhavabhushan Mitra Bhikaiji Cama Bhupendra Kumar Datta Bidhan Chandra Roy Bipin Chandra Pal C. Rajagopalachari Chandra Shekhar Azad Chetram Jatav Chittaranjan Das Dadabhai Naoroji Dayananda Saraswati Dhan Singh Dukkipati Nageswara Rao Gopal Krishna Gokhale Govind Ballabh Pant Har Dayal Hemu Kalani Inayatullah Khan Mashriqi Jatindra Mohan Sengupta Jatindra Nath Das Jawaharlal Nehru K. Kamaraj Kanaiyalal Maneklal Munshi Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan Khudiram Bose Shri Krishna Singh Lala Lajpat Rai M. Bhaktavatsalam M. N. Roy Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi Mahadaji Shinde Mahatma Gandhi Mangal Pandey Mir Qasim Mithuben Petit Mohammad Ali Jauhar Muhammad Ali Jinnah Muhammad Mian Mansoor Ansari Nagnath Naikwadi Nana Fadnavis Nana Saheb P. Kakkan Prafulla Chaki Pritilata Waddedar Purushottam Das Tandon Rafi Ahmed Kidwai R. Venkataraman Rahul Sankrityayan Rajendra Prasad Ram Prasad Bismil Rani Lakshmibai Rash Behari Bose Sahajanand Saraswati Sangolli Rayanna Sarojini Naidu Satyapal Dang Shuja-ud-Daula Shyamji Krishna Varma Sibghatullah Shah Rashidi Siraj ud-Daulah Subhas Chandra Bose Subramania Bharati Subramaniya Siva Surya Sen Syama Prasad Mukherjee Tara Rani Srivastava Tarak Nath Das Tatya Tope Tiruppur Kumaran Ubaidullah Sindhi V. O. Chidamabaram V. K. Krishna Menon Vallabhbhai Patel Vanchinathan Veeran Sundaralingam Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Virendranath Chattopadhyaya Yashwantrao Holkar Yogendra Shukla more British leaders Wavell Canning Cornwallis Irwin Chelmsford Curzon Ripon Minto Dalhousie Bentinck Mountbatten Wellesley Lytton Clive Outram Cripps Linlithgow Hastings Independence Cabinet Mission Constitution Republic of India Indian annexation of Goa Indian Independence Act Partition of India Political integration Simla Conference v t e Indian National Congress History Electoral history Nehru–Gandhi family The Emergency Breakaway parties Organisation National president State presidents All India Congress Committee Congress Core Committee Congress Working Committee Pradesh Congress Committee States Andhra PCC Arunachal PCC Assam PCC Bihar PCC Chhattisgarh PCC Goa PCC Gujarat PCC Haryana PCC Himachal PCC Jharkhand PCC Karnataka PCC Kerala PCC Madhya Pradesh CC Maharashtra PCC Manipur PCC Meghalaya PCC Mizoram PCC Nagaland PCC Odisha PCC Punjab PCC Rajasthan PCC Sikkim PCC Tamil Nadu CC Telangana PCC Tripura PCC Uttarakhand PCC Uttar Pradesh CC West Bengal PCC Union territories Andaman and Nicobar TCC Chandigarh TCC Dadra and Nagar Haveli Diu and Daman and Diu TCC Delhi PCC Jammu and Kashmir PCC Ladakh TCC Lakshadweep TCC Puducherry PCC Regions Mumbai RCC National presidents Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee Dadabhai Naoroji Badruddin Tyabji George Yule William Wedderburn Pherozeshah Mehta Anandacharlu Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee Dadabhai Naoroji Alfred Webb Surendranath Banerjee Rahimtulla M. Sayani C. Sankaran Nair Anandamohan Bose Romesh Chunder Dutt N. G. Chandavarkar Dinshaw Edulji Wacha Surendranath Banerjee Lalmohan Ghosh Henry Cotton Gopal Krishna Gokhale Dadabhai Naoroji Rash Behari Ghosh Madan Mohan Malaviya William Wedderburn Bishan Narayan Dar Raghunath Narasinha Mudholkar Nawab Syed Muhammad Bahadur Bhupendra Nath Bose Satyendra Prasanna Sinha, 1st Baron Sinha Ambica Charan Mazumdar Annie Besant Madan Mohan Malaviya Syed Hasan Imam Motilal Nehru Lala Lajpat Rai C. Vijayaraghavachariar Hakim Ajmal Khan Chittaranjan Das Mohammad Ali Jauhar Abul Kalam Azad Mahatma Gandhi Sarojini Naidu S. Srinivasa Iyengar Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari Motilal Nehru Jawaharlal Nehru Vallabhbhai Patel Madan Mohan Malaviya Nellie Sengupta Rajendra Prasad Jawaharlal Nehru Subhas Chandra Bose Abul Kalam Azad J. B. Kripalani Bhogaraju Pattabhi Sitaramayya Purushottam Das Tandon Jawaharlal Nehru U. N. Dhebar Indira Gandhi Neelam Sanjiva Reddy K. Kamaraj S. Nijalingappa Jagjivan Ram Shankar Dayal Sharma D. K. Barooah Indira Gandhi Rajiv Gandhi P. V. Narasimha Rao Sitaram Kesri Sonia Gandhi Rahul Gandhi Mallikarjun Kharge Presidential elections 2022 National vice presidents Kamalapati Tripathi Arjun Singh Jitendra Prasada Rahul Gandhi Prime ministers Jawaharlal Nehru Lal Bahadur Shastri Indira Gandhi Rajiv Gandhi P. V. Narasimha Rao Manmohan Singh Deputy prime ministers Vallabhbhai Patel Morarji Desai Leaders Lok Sabha Jawaharlal Nehru Gulzarilal Nanda Lal Bahadur Shastri Satya Narayan Indira Gandhi Yashwantrao Chavan Chembakassery Mathai Stephen Rajiv Gandhi Arjun Singh P. V. Narasimha Rao Sharad Pawar Sonia Gandhi Pranab Mukherjee Sushilkumar Shinde Mallikarjun Kharge Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury Ravneet Singh Bittu Rahul Gandhi Rajya Sabha N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar Charu Chandra Lal Bahadur Shastri Govind Ballabh Hafiz Mohamad Ibrahim Yashwantrao Chavan Jaisukhlal Hathi M. C. Chagla Jaisukhlal Hathi Kodardas Kalidas Shah Uma Shankar Dikshit Kamalapati Tripathi Pranab Mukherjee V.P. Singh Narayan Dutt Tiwari P. Shiv Shankar Shankarrao Chavan Motilal Vora Ahmed Patel Anand Sharma Jairam Ramesh A. K. Antony Digvijaya Singh P. Chidambaram Abhishek Singhvi Rajeev Shukla Manmohan Singh Ghulam Nabi Azad Mallikarjun Kharge Frontal wings All India Mahila Congress All India Professionals Congress Indian National Trade Union Congress Indian Youth Congress Kisan and Khet Mazdoor Congress National Students' Union of India Seva Dal Chief ministers Current Revanth Reddy Siddaramaiah Sukhvinder Singh Sukhu Revanth Reddy Deputy chief ministers Current Mukesh Agnihotri D. K. Shivakumar Mallu Bhatti Vikramarka Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface v t e People in veganism and vegetarianism Academics, activists, authors, physicians Vegan Elisa Aaltola Carol J. Adams Amos Bronson Alcott Suzanne M. Babich Martin Balluch Neal D. Barnard Danielle Belardo David Benatar Steven Best Conrad Beissel Yves Bonnardel Will Bonsall Will Bulsiewicz Georges Butaud Jodey Castricano T. Colin Campbell Sherry Colb Robert Cook Brenda Davis Garth Davis Jan Deckers Alan Desmond Freya Dinshah H. Jay Dinshah George Dornbusch George Eisman Frey Ellis Mylan Engel Caldwell Esselstyn Gary L. Francione Joel Fuhrman Kristi Funk Valéry Giroux Lewis Gompertz Al Gore Brigitte Gothière Michael Greger A. Breeze Harper Oscar Horta Melanie Joy Colin Kaepernick Joel Kahn Avery Yale Kamila Michael Klaper Aph Ko Renan Larue Maxwell G. Lee Tobias Leenaert Thomas Lepeltier Howard Lyman Al-Ma'arri Reed Mangels John Mackey John A. McDougall James E. McWilliams Vesanto Melina Virginia Messina Gemma Newman David Nibert Catherine Nimmo Jack Norris David Olivier David Pearce Emelia Quinn Tom Regan Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Kim Stallwood Joanne Stepaniak David Sztybel Sunaura Taylor Richard Twine Louise Wallis Donald Watson Rupert H. Wheldon Kim A. Williams Corey Lee Wrenn Laura Wright Sophie Zaïkowska Vegetarian Phyllis B. Acosta William Alcott Bertrand P. Allinson Thomas Allinson Charles R. Attwood William Axon Eduard Baltzer H. S. Bathgate Horace A. Barrows Geoffrey Barstow Minta Beach Sidney H. Beard George Bedborough Ernest Bell Robert Bell Ragnar Berg Bernardin de Saint-Pierre Rynn Berry Maximilian Bircher-Benner George Black Ernest Bonnejoy Frances L. Boult Annie Bradshaw Lucius Duncan Bulkley J. L. Buttner Paul Carton Job Caudwell James Clark George Cheyne Henry S. Clubb Antonio Cocchi Edwin Collier Lenna F. Cooper Marion E. Coville Daniël de Clercq Georges Danjou Daniel Dombrowski James Elmslie Duncan Eknath Easwaran John Evelyn T. Forster Charles W. Forward Michael Allen Fox Peter Foxcroft Harriet Putnam Fowler Greta Gaard Mahatma Gandhi James Gaskill Narasinh Narayan Godbole Sylvester Graham Jules Grand Jeremiah Hacker John Haddon Walter Hadwen Alexander Haig Edward Hare George Harrison William Harrison William Harvey Philippe Hecquet Mary Foote Henderson Arnold Hills Brian Hines Martin Luther Holbrook Elizabeth Horsell William Horsell Caroline van der Hucht-Kerkhoven Isaac Jennings Marie Jungius John Harvey Kellogg Norman Kerr Joseph Knight Daniel H. Kress Lauretta E. Kress Fanny E. Lacy William Lambe W. R. C. Latson Elmer Lee Jules Lefèvre Susan M. Levin Beatrice Lindsay Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Jacques de Marquette Alice Garrett Marsh Paul McCartney Stella McCartney Elmer McCollum William Metcalfe Eli Peck Miller Harry Willis Miller Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Howard Moore Robert Morris Reuben D. Mussey Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Francis William Newman George Nicholson R. E. O'Callaghan Josiah Oldfield John Oswald Dean Ornish Felix Ortt Robert Pigott Cyril V. Pink Isaac Pitman Rod Preece Mary Stallard Purnell James Rachels Ulma Doyle Register Kenneth Romanes Rollo Russell Henry Stephens Salt Johan Lindström Saxon James Scholefield Richard H. Schwartz W. B. Shearn James Simpson Ernest Lester Smith Arthur St. John William O. Stephens Alan Stoddard Russell Thacher Trall Frederick Towgood Sidney Trist Valluvar Emil Weilshäuser Meta Wellmer Ellen G. White Severin Wielobycki Howard Williams Frank Wokes W. A. Sibly John Smith E. Dolby Shelton Thomas Tryon Jon Wynne-Tyson Tzachi Zamir Kathleen Keen Zolber Chefs, cookbook authors Pamela Anderson Akiko Aoyagi Nava Atlas Eva Batt Mayim Bialik Margaret Blatch Carleigh Bodrug Gypsy Boots BOSH!

Mrs. Bowdich Martha Brotherton Edward Espe Brown Tabitha Brown Suzy Amis Cameron Hannah Che Anna L. Colcord Pinky Cole Chloe Coscarelli Tarla Dalal Yamuna Devi Sue Donaldson Crescent Dragonwagon Henrietta Latham Dwight Rose Elliot Rip Esselstyn Toni Fiore Carol Lee Flinders Emily L. B. Forster E. G. Fulton Alexis Gauthier Florence A. George Maria McIlvaine Gillmore Dick Gregory Salma Hage Calum Harris Richa Hingle Madhur Jaffrey Jeanne Jardine Mollie Katzen Ella Eaton Kellogg Almeda Lambert Frances Moore Lappé Fania Lewando Benjamin Smith Lyman Deborah Madison Richard Makin Linda McCartney Mary McCartney Hetty Lui McKinnon Tracye McQuirter Hallie Eustace Miles Joanne Lee Molinaro Charity Morgan Isa Chandra Moskowitz Bawa Muhaiyaddeen Asenath Nicholson Gaz Oakley Eleanor E. Orlebar Colleen Patrick-Goudreau Evora Bucknum Perkins James Peterson Mary Pope Mathew Pritchard John and Vera Richter Satchidananda Saraswati Derek Sarno Miyoko Schinner William Shurtleff Alicia Silverstone Harriet Hayes Skinner Hannah Sunderani Bryant Terry Anna Thomas Haile Thomas Lauren Toyota Mellie Uyldert Jeeca Uy E. M. Valk-Heijnsdijk Umberto Veronesi Nisha Vora Edith Waldemar Leverton Chandos Leigh Hunt Wallace Alan Wakeman Joe Yonan Related General topics in veganism and vegetarianism v t e Modern Hindu writers ( 1848 to date) Hinduism Hinduism in the West Indian philosophy Indian religions Religious writers Mirra Alfassa (The Mother) Sri Anirvan Sri Aurobindo Ananda Coomaraswamy Dayananda Eknath Easwaran Satsvarupa dasa Goswami Mahendranath Gupta Jiddu Krishnamurti Nisargadatta Maharaj Ramana Maharshi A. G. Mohan Sister Nivedita Swami Prabhavananda A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Krishna Prem Swami Rama Srivatsa Ramaswami Swami Ramdas Chinmayananda Saraswati Dayananda Saraswati (Arya Samaj) Krishnananda Saraswati Sivananda Saraswati Swami Satprakashananda Swami Shraddhanand Ram Swarup Swami Vivekananda Paramahansa Yogananda Political writers Mahatma Gandhi François Gautier Sita Ram Goel Ram Gopal Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Arun Shourie Bal Gangadhar Tilak Kartik Oraon Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Jaswant Singh Literary writers Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay Ramdhari Singh Dinkar C. Rajagopalachari K. D. Sethna Amish Tripathi Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Westerners influenced by Hinduism Annie Besant Helena Blavatsky Deepak Chopra Aleister Crowley Ram Dass Wayne Dyer T. S. Eliot R.W. Emerson Allen Ginsberg René Guénon George Harrison Aldous Huxley Christopher Isherwood David Lynch André Malraux Henry Miller Maria Montessori H.S. Olcott Oppenheimer Helena Roerich Romain Rolland Arthur Schopenhauer Erwin Schrödinger Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Voltaire Alan Watts Ken Wilber W. B. Yeats Scholars Alain Daniélou S. N. Balagangadhara Michel Danino Paul Deussen Dharampal Mircea Eliade Sister Gargi Georg Feuerstein Meenakshi Jain Klaus Klostermaier Hajime Nakamura Anantanand Rambachan Arvind Sharma Graham Schweig Lists List of modern Eastern religions writers List of writers on Hinduism Hinduism Portal India Portal v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e Asian of the Century The Big Five Deng Xiaoping Akio Morita Akira Kurosawa Charles K. Kao Mohandas K. Gandhi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz KulturNav FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐w5nnd
Cached time: 20250817043548
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.875 seconds
Real time usage: 5.376 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 41825/1000000
Revision size: 259635/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1255018/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 210492/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 35/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1411152/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 3.052/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28728131/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 4426.566      1 -total
 45.16% 1999.166      2 Template:Reflist
 30.29% 1340.632    224 Template:Cite_book
 13.28%  587.916    130 Template:Sfnp
 11.35%  502.361      1 Template:Infobox_person
  8.81%  390.081     65 Template:Cite_web
  3.87%  171.371     33 Template:Cite_news
  3.70%  163.837      1 Template:Navboxes
  3.64%  161.069      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
  3.33%  147.556     15 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19379:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043548 and revision id 1306021464. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mahatma_Gandhi&oldid=1306021464 " Categories : Mahatma Gandhi 1869 births 1948 deaths Politicians assassinated in the 1940s 19th-century Indian lawyers 19th-century Indian male writers 19th-century Indian philosophers 19th-century Indian writers 20th-century Indian male writers 20th-century Indian philosophers 20th-century Indian writers Alumni of the University of London Alumni of University College London Anti–World War II activists Ascetics British Empire in World War II British military personnel of the Second Boer War Colony of Natal people Critics of political economy Deaths by firearm in India Founders of Indian schools and colleges Gujarati-language writers Gujarati people Hindu pacifists Hindu reformers Indian human rights activists Indian hunger strikers Indian activist journalists Indian animal rights activists Indian anti-imperialists Indian anti-poverty advocates Indian anti-war activists Indian autobiographers Indian barristers Indian civil rights activists Indian ethicists Indian expatriates in South Africa Indian expatriates in the United Kingdom Indian Hindus Indian memoirists Indian murder victims Indian nationalists Indian pacifists Indian people of World War II Indian political philosophers Indian revolutionaries Indian tax resisters Indian vegetarianism activists Family of Mahatma Gandhi Members of the Inner Temple Natal Indian Congress politicians Neo-Vedanta Indian nonviolence advocates People convicted of sedition People from Porbandar People murdered in Delhi Political prisoners in South Africa Presidents of the Indian National Congress Prisoners and detainees of British India Recipients of the Kaisar-i-Hind Medal Simple living advocates South African Indian Congress politicians Cape Colony lawyers Swadeshi activists Time Person of the Year Tolstoyans Translators of the Bhagavad Gita Writers about activism and social change Writers from Gujarat Indian politicians assassinated in the 20th century Assassinated revolutionaries Presidents of the Gujarati Sahitya Parishad Founders of Jamia Millia Islamia People murdered in 1948 Hidden categories: Pages with Gujarati IPA Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 CS1 Maltese-language sources (mt) CS1: unfit URL Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use Indian English from April 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from April 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2023 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2024 CS1 Gujarati-language sources (gu) Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 12:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mahatma Gandhi 202 languages Add topic

