Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sixth plenary session 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun 9 languages Español Esperanto Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Português Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese political maxim Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Unissued 1967 stamp with the quote Traditional Chinese 槍桿子 裏面 出 政權 Simplified Chinese 枪杆子里面出政权 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin qiānggǎnzi lǐmiàn chū zhèngquán Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun ( Chinese : 枪杆子里面出政权 ) is a phrase and slogan which was coined by Chinese communist leader and founder Mao Zedong . The phrase was originally used by Mao during an emergency meeting of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) on 7 August 1927, at the beginning of the Chinese Civil War .

[ 1 ] Mao employed the phrase a second time on 6 November 1938, during his concluding speech at the 6th Plenary Session of the CCP's 6th Central Committee . The speech was concerned with both the Civil War and the Second Sino-Japanese War , which had commenced the previous year.

In 1960, a portion of the 1938 speech was excerpted and included in Mao's Selected Works , with the title "Problems of War and Strategy". However, the central phrase was popularized largely as a result of its prominence in Mao's Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung (1964).

[ 2 ] Sixth plenary session [ edit ] The 1938 paragraph containing the phrase is reproduced below; the central phrase (in bold), cited as deriving from the 1938 speech via the Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung : Communists do not fight for personal military power (they must in no circumstances do that, and let no one ever again follow the example of Zhang Guotao ), but they must fight for military power for the Party , for military power for the people. As a national war of resistance is going on, we must also fight for military power for the nation. Where there is naivete on the question of military power, nothing whatsoever can be achieved. It is very difficult for the labouring people , who have been deceived and intimidated by the reactionary ruling classes for thousands of years, to awaken to the importance of having guns in their own hands. Now that Japanese imperialist oppression and the nation-wide resistance to it have pushed our labouring people into the arena of war, Communists should prove themselves the most politically conscious leaders in this war.

Every Communist must grasp the truth, "Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun." Our principle is that the Party commands the gun, and the gun must never be allowed to command the Party . Yet, having guns, we can create Party organizations, as witness the powerful Party organizations which the Eighth Route Army has created in northern China. We can also create cadres, create schools, create culture, create mass movements. Everything in Yan'an has been created by having guns. All things grow out of the barrel of a gun. According to the Marxist theory of the state , the army is the chief component of state power. Whoever wants to seize and retain state power must have a strong army . Some people ridicule us as advocates of the "omnipotence of war". Yes, we are advocates of the omnipotence of revolutionary war; that is good, not bad, it is Marxist . The guns of the Russian Communist Party created socialism . We shall create a democratic republic. Experience in the class struggle in the era of imperialism teaches us that it is only by the power of the gun that the working class and the labouring masses can defeat the armed bourgeoisie and landlords ; in this sense we may say that only with guns can the whole world be transformed. We are advocates of the abolition of war, we do not want war; but war can only be abolished through war, and in order to get rid of the gun it is necessary to take up the gun.

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. II, pp. 224-225; transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project, hosted by Marxists Internet Archive .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Enemy of the people Civil control of the military Monopoly on violence No War but the Class War Workers of the world, unite!

Serve the People Si vis pacem, para bellum War is a continuation of politics by other means References [ edit ] ^ Li Gucheng, ed. (1995).

A Glossary of Political Terms of the People's Republic of China (Illustrated ed.). Chinese University Press. p. 325.

ISBN 978-9622016156 .

^ Mao Zedong (1972).

Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung . Peking: Foreign Languages Press . p.

61 .

ISBN 9780835123884 .

^ Mao Zedong (1965) [6 November 1938].

"II. The War History of the Kuomintang" .

Problems of War and Strategy . Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung. Vol. II. Foreign Languages Press.

External links [ edit ] Quotations from Mao Tse Tung , Mao Tse Tung Internet Archive (marxists.org) v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_power_grows_out_of_the_barrel_of_a_gun&oldid=1303650210 " Categories : 1927 in China 1927 quotations August 1927 in Asia Maoist terminology Chinese political catchphrases Firearms Political science terminology Political violence Chinese Civil War Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 07:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun 9 languages Add topic

