Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fragmentation in various organisms 2 Plants 3 Animals Toggle Animals subsection 3.1 Coral 3.2 Echinoderms 4 Disadvantage of this process of reproduction 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Fragmentation (reproduction) 17 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Español Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Nederlands Português Русский Simple English Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of asexual reproduction This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fragmentation" reproduction – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fragmentation in multicellular or colonial organisms is a form of asexual reproduction or cloning, where an organism is split into fragments upon maturation and the split part becomes the new individual.

The organism may develop specific organs or zones to shed or be easily broken off. If the splitting occurs without the prior preparation of the organism, both fragments must be able to regenerate the complete organism for it to function as reproduction.

Fragmentation as a method of reproduction is seen in organisms such as spirogyra , filamentous cyanobacteria , molds , lichens , sponges , acoel flatworms , some annelid worms and sea stars .

Fragmentation in various organisms [ edit ] Molds, yeasts and mushrooms , all of which are part of the Fungi kingdom , produce tiny filaments called hyphae . These hyphae obtain food and nutrients from the body of other organisms to grow and fertilize. Then a piece of hyphae breaks off and grows into a new individual and the cycle continues.

Many lichens produce specialized structures that can easily break away and disperse. These structures contain both hyphae of the mycobiont and the algae ( phycobiont ) (see soredia and isidia ). Larger fragments of the thallus may break away when the lichen dries or due to mechanical disturbances (see the section on reproduction in lichens ).

Plants [ edit ] Fragmentation is a very common type of vegetative reproduction in plants . Many trees , shrubs , nonwoody perennials , and ferns form clonal colonies by producing new rooted shoots by rhizomes or stolons , which increases the diameter of the colony. If a rooted shoot becomes detached from the colony, then fragmentation has occurred. There are several other mechanisms of natural fragmentation in plants.

Production of specialized reproductive structures: A few plants produce adventitious plantlets on their leaves, which drop off and form independent plants, e.g.

Tolmiea menziesii and Kalanchoe daigremontiana . Others produce organs like bulbils and turions .

Easily lost parts that have high potential to grow into a complete plant: Some woody plants like the willow naturally shed twigs. This is termed cladoptosis . The lost twigs may form roots in a suitable environment to establish a new plant. River currents often tear off branch fragments from certain cottonwood species growing on riverbanks. Fragments reaching suitable environments can root and establish new plants.

[ 1 ] Some cacti and other plants have jointed stems. When a stem segment, called a pad, falls off, it can root and form a new plant. Leaves of some plants readily root when they fall off, e.g.

Sedum and Echeveria .

Fragmentation is observed in nonvascular plants as well, for example, in liverworts and mosses. Small pieces of moss "stems" or "leaves" are often scattered by the wind, water or animals. If a moss fragment reaches a suitable environment, it can establish a new plant.

[ 2 ] They also produce gemmae , for example in the splash-cups of Marchantia polymorpha , [ 3 ] that are easily broken off and distributed.

People use fragmentation to artificially propagate many plants via division , layering , cuttings , grafting , micropropagation and storage organs , such as bulbs , corms , tubers and rhizomes .

Many algae too, spirogyra for example also fragment, the mother plant breaks into two or more smaller fragments which then grow independently. After growing these individual spirogyra fragment, repeating the cycle.

Animals [ edit ] Sponges and coral colonies naturally fragment and reproduce. Many species of annelids and flatworms produce by this method. When the splitting occurs due to specific developmental changes, the terms orchiectomy, laparotomy, and budding are used. In ' architomy ' the animal splits at a particular point and the two fragments regenerate the missing organs and tissues. The splitting is not preceded by the development of the tissues to be lost. Before splitting, the animal may develop furrows at the zone of splitting. The headless fragment must regenerate a completely new head.
In ' paratomy ', the split occurs perpendicular to the antero-posterior axis and the split is preceded by the "pregeneration" of the anterior structures in the posterior portion. The two organisms have their body axis aligned i.e. they develop in a head to tail fashion. Budding is similar to paratomy except that the body axes need not be aligned: the new head may grow toward the side or even point backward (e.g.

Convolutriloba retrogemma an acoel flat worm).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Coral [ edit ] Corals can be multiplied in aquaria by attaching "frags" from a mother colony to a suitable substrate, such as a ceramic plug or a piece of live rock . This aquarium is designed specifically for growing coral colonies from frags.

Many types of coral colonies can increase in number by fragmentation occurring naturally [ 6 ] or artificially.

Reef aquarium enthusiasts fragment corals for various purposes including shape control; sharing with others; regrowth experiments; and minimizing damage to natural coral reefs. Both hard and soft corals can be fragmented.

Genera highly tolerant of fragmentation include Acropora , Montipora , Pocillopora , Euphyllia , and Caulastraea among others.

[ 7 ] Most sea anemones reproduce through fragmentation via a variety of methods including longitudinal fission , where the original anemone splits across the middle forming two equal-sized anemones, and basal laceration , in which small parts of the animal split from the base to form new anemones.

[ 8 ] Echinoderms [ edit ] In echinoderms , the process is usually known as fissiparity (a term also used infrequently for biological fission in general). Some species can intentionally reproduce in this manner through autotomy . This method is more common during the larval editing stages.

[ 9 ] Disadvantage of this process of reproduction [ edit ] As this process is a form of asexual reproduction, it does not produce genetic diversity in the offspring. Therefore, these are more vulnerable to changing environments, parasites, and diseases.

See also [ edit ] Fission (biology) Budding Micropropagation References [ edit ] ^ Rood, S.B., Kalischuk, M.L., and Braatne, J.H. 2003. Branch propagation, not cladoptosis, permits dispersive, clonal reproduction of riparian cottonwoods .

Forest Ecology and Management 186: 227–242.

[1] Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Moss asexual reproduction" . Archived from the original on 2006-09-27 . Retrieved 2006-08-06 .

^ Equihua, Clementina (1987). "Diseminación de yemas en Marchantia polymorpha L. (Hepaticae)".

Cryptogamie, Bryologie, Lichénologie (in Spanish).

8 (3): 199– 217.

^ Åkesson, Bertil; Robert Gschwentner; Jan Hendelberg; Peter Ladurner; Johann Müller; Reinhard Rieger (2001-12-01).

"Fission in Convolutriloba longifissura: asexual reproduction in acoelous turbellarians revisited" (PDF) .

Acta Zoologica .

82 (3): 231– 239.

doi : 10.1046/j.1463-6395.2001.00084.x .

ISSN 1463-6395 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2011-07-13 .

^ Egger, Bernhard (December 2008).

"Regeneration: rewarding, but potentially risky" (PDF) .

Birth Defects Research Part C: Embryo Today: Reviews .

84 (4): 257– 264.

doi : 10.1002/bdrc.20135 .

ISSN 1542-9768 .

PMID 19067421 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-08-11 . Retrieved 2011-07-13 .

^ Lirman, Diego (2000-08-23).

"Fragmentation in the branching coral Acropora palmata (Lamarck): growth, survivorship, and reproduction of colonies and fragments" (PDF) .

Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology .

251 (1): 41– 57.

doi : 10.1016/s0022-0981(00)00205-7 .

ISSN 0022-0981 .

PMID 10958900 . Retrieved 2011-07-13 .

^ Calfo, Anthony (2008).

"Coral fragmentation: Not just for beginners" .

Reefkeeping Magazine . Reef Central . Retrieved 2015-05-03 .

^ "Fact Sheet: Sea Anemones" .

Marine Biological Association . Archived from the original on 24 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 September 2018 .

^ Helen Nilsson Sköld; Matthias Obst; Mattias Sköld; Bertil Åkesson (2009).

"Stem Cells in Asexual Reproduction of Marine Invertebrates" . In Baruch Rinkevich; Valeria Matranga (eds.).

Stem Cells in Marine Organisms . Springer. p. 125.

ISBN 978-90-481-2766-5 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fragmentation_(reproduction)&oldid=1294554699 " Categories : Fertility medicine Asexual reproduction Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 11:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fragmentation (reproduction) 17 languages Add topic

