Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Professor 1.3 Priesthood and Bishop of Paris 2 Writings 3 Doctrine 4 Works 5 Notes 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter Lombard 40 languages Afrikaans Asturianu Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lombard Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval priest and theologian For the Irish archbishop, see Peter Lombard (archbishop of Armagh) . For the Guamanian cyclist, see Peter Lombard II .

Peter Lombard Peter Lombard writing "Omnes sitientes venite ad me (all you that thirst, come to me)" [ 4 ] Born c.

1096 [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Novara , Lombardy Died 21/22 August 1160 Paris , France [ 8 ] Occupation Bishop of Paris Title Master of the Sentences [ 8 ] Academic background Alma mater School of Reims University of Bologna [ 1 ] Influences Paul of Tarsus Augustine of Hippo Avicenna [ 2 ] Pseudo-Dionysius [ 3 ] Peter Abelard Hugh of Saint Victor Academic work School or tradition Scholasticism Notable works Libri Quattuor Sententiarum Magna glossatura Influenced Albert the Great Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Duns Scotus William of Ockham Gabriel Biel Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Peter Lombard (also Peter the Lombard , [ 9 ] [ 5 ] Pierre Lombard or Petrus Lombardus ; [ 10 ] c.

1096 – 21/22 August 1160) was an Italian scholastic theologian , Bishop of Paris, and author of Four Books of Sentences which became the standard textbook of theology, for which he earned the accolade Magister Sententiarum .

[ 11 ] Biography [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Peter Lombard was born in Lumellogno [ 12 ] (then a rural commune, now a quartiere of Novara , Piedmont ), in northwestern Italy , to a poor family.

[ 13 ] His date of birth was likely between 1095 and 1100.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] His education most likely began in Italy at the cathedral schools of Novara and Lucca and at the University of Bologna .

[ 8 ] The patronage of Odo, bishop of Lucca , who recommended him to Bernard of Clairvaux , allowed him to leave Italy and further his studies at Reims and Paris . Lombard studied first in the cathedral school at Reims , where Magister Alberich and Lutolph of Novara were teaching, and arrived in Paris about 1134, [ 14 ] where Bernard recommended him [ 15 ] to the canons of the church of St. Victor.

Professor [ edit ] In Paris, where he spent the next decade teaching at the cathedral school of Notre-Dame de Paris , he came into contact with Peter Abelard and Hugh of St. Victor , who were among the leading theologians of the time. There are no proven facts relating to his whereabouts in Paris until 1142, when he became recognized as a teacher and writer.  Around 1145, Peter became a "magister", or professor, at the cathedral school of Notre Dame in Paris. Peter's means of earning a living before he began to derive income as a teacher and from his canon 's prebend is shrouded in uncertainty.

Lombard's style of teaching gained quick acknowledgment. It can be surmised that this attention is what prompted the canons of Notre Dame to ask him to join their ranks. He was considered a celebrated theologian by 1144. The Parisian school of canons had not included among their number a theologian of high regard for some years. The canons of Notre Dame, to a man, were members of the Capetian dynasty , relatives of families closely aligned to the Capetians by blood or marriage, scions of the Île-de-France or eastern Loire Valley nobility, or relatives of royal officials. In contrast, Peter had no relatives, ecclesiastical connections, and no political patrons in France. It seems that he must have been invited by the canons of Notre Dame solely for his academic merit.

Priesthood and Bishop of Paris [ edit ] Portrait in Oratorio di Santa Maria , Garbagna Novarese, Italy (15th century) He became a subdeacon in 1147. Possibly he was present at the consistory of Paris in 1147, and certainly he attended the Council of Rheims in 1148, held in the presence of Pope Eugenius III to examine Gilbert de la Porrée and Éon de l'Étoile . Peter was among the signatories of the act condemning Gilbert's teachings.

[ 16 ] At some time after 1150 Peter became a deacon , then archdeacon , maybe as early as 1152. He was ordained priest some time before 1156. On 28 July 1159, on the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul , he was consecrated bishop of Paris .

Walter of St Victor accused Peter of obtaining the office by simony .

[ 17 ] The more usual story is that Philip, younger brother of Louis VII and archdeacon of Notre-Dame, was elected by the canons but declined in favor of Peter Lombard, his teacher.

Lombard's time as bishop was brief.

[ 18 ] Lombard died on either 21 or 22 August 1160 in Paris.

[ 19 ] [ 8 ] As to his administrative style or objectives little can be ascertained, since he left behind so few episcopal acta . He was succeeded by Maurice de Sully , the builder of the Cathedral of Notre Dame .

[ 20 ] Lombard's tomb in the church of Saint-Marcel in Paris was destroyed during the French Revolution , but a transcription of his epitaph survives.

Writings [ edit ] Sententiae , 1280 circa, Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana , Florence Peter Lombard wrote commentaries on the Psalms and the Pauline epistles; however, his most famous work by far was Libri Quatuor Sententiarum , or the Four Books of Sentences , which became the standard textbook of theology at the medieval universities.

[ 21 ] From the 1220s until the 16th century, no work of Christian literature, except for the Bible itself, was commented upon more frequently. Even Thomas Aquinas ' Summa Theologiae , written around 1270, would not eclipse the Sentences in importance until around the 16th century. All the major medieval thinkers in western Europe, from Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas to William of Ockham and Gabriel Biel , were influenced by it. Even the young Martin Luther still wrote glosses on the Sentences , and John Calvin quoted from it over 100 times in his Institutes .

The Four Books of Sentences formed the framework upon which four centuries of scholastic interpretation of Western Christian dogma was based; however, rather than being a dialectical work itself, the Four Books of Sentences is a compilation of biblical texts, together with relevant passages from the Church Fathers and many medieval thinkers. It covered virtually the entire field of Christian theology as it was understood at the time. Peter Lombard's magnum opus stands squarely within the pre-scholastic exegesis of biblical passages, in the tradition of Anselm of Laon who taught through quotations from authorities.

[ 22 ] It stands out as the first major effort to bring together commentaries on the full range of theological issues, arrange the material in a systematic order, and attempt to reconcile them where they appeared to defend different viewpoints. The Sentences starts with the Trinity in Book I, moves on to creation in Book II, treats Christ , the saviour of the fallen creation, in Book III, and deals with the sacraments , which mediate Christ's grace, in Book IV.

Doctrine [ edit ] Peter Lombard's most famous and most controversial doctrine in the Sentences was his identification of charity with the Holy Spirit in Book I, distinction 17. According to this doctrine, when the Christian loves God and his neighbour, this love literally is God; he becomes divine and is taken up into the life of the Trinity. This idea, in its inchoate form, can be extrapolated from certain remarks of Augustine of Hippo (cf. De Trinitate 13.7.11). Although this was never explicitly declared unorthodox, few theologians have been prepared to follow Peter Lombard in this aspect of his teaching. The Council of Trent however, may have condemned this view in an implicit manner, with The Catholic Encyclopedia noting that: According to the Council of Trent sanctifying grace is not merely a formal cause, but " the only formal cause" ( unica causa formalis ) of our justification. By this important decision the Council excluded the error of Butzer and some Catholic theologians (Gropper, Seripando, and Albert Pighius) who maintained that an additional "external favour of God" ( favor Dei externus ) belonged to the essence of justification. The same decree also effectually set aside the opinion of Peter Lombard, that the formal cause of justification (i.e. sanctifying grace) is nothing less than the Person of the Holy Ghost, Who is the hypostatic holiness and charity, or the uncreated grace ( gratia increata ). Since justification consists in an interior sanctity and renovation of spirit, its formal cause evidently must be a created grace ( gratia creata ), a permanent quality, a supernatural modification or accident ( accidens ) of the soul.

[ 23 ] Also in the Sentences was the doctrine that marriage was consensual and need not be consummated to be considered perfect, unlike Gratian 's analysis (see sponsalia de futuro ). Lombard's interpretation was later endorsed by Pope Alexander III , and had a significant impact on Church interpretation of marriage.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] He emphasized that reciprocal consent of the parties is sufficiently constitutive of an absolutely indissoluble marriage, and is its only cause independent of sexual intercourse.

[ 26 ] Works [ edit ] Magna glossatura Sentences . Book 1: The Mystery of the Trinity . Translated by Giulio Silano. Toronto, Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies (PIMS), 2007. LVIIII, 278 pp.

ISBN 978-0-88844-292-5 Sentences . Book 2: On Creation . Translated by Giulio Silano. Toronto, PIMS, 2008. XLVI, 236 pp.

ISBN 978-0-88844-293-2 Sentences . Book 3: On the Incarnation of the Word . Translated by Giulio Silano. Toronto, PIMS, 2008. XLVIII, 190 pp.

ISBN 978-0-88844-295-6 Sentences . Book 4: The Doctrine of Signs . Translated by Giulio Silano. Toronto, PIMS, 2010. 336 pp.

ISBN 978-0-88844-296-3 The Latin critical edition published by the College of St. Bonaventure (Ad Claras Aquas, 1916) is in two volumes.

Volume one contains Books 1 and 2, volume two contains Books 3 and 4.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Peter Lombard (1095-1160) ^ The Sheed & Ward Anthology of Catholic Philosophy . Rowman & Littlefield. 2005.

ISBN 9780742531987 .

^ Jean LeClercq, 'Influence and noninfluence of Dionysius in the Western Middle Ages', in Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete Works , trans. Colm Luibheid (New York: Paulist Press, 1987), pp25-33 ^ Prof. Harold Tarrant & Prof. Godfrey Tanner (2001).

The Cultural Collections Unit: 2nd Edition . University of Newcastle, Australia.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c W. and R. Chambers (1864).

Chambers's encyclopædia: Vol.VI . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1836).

Werke: Vol.XV . Berlin.

^ a b Ginsburg, Christian David (1861).

Coheleth; commonly called The Book of Ecclesiastes . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c d The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica (2 April 2024).

"Peter Lombard" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

{{ cite journal }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ Milman, Henry Hart (1857).

History of Latin Christianity: Vol.VI . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Baur, Ferdinand Christian (1858).

Lehrbuch der christlichen Dogmengeschichte . Tübingen.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ E.g., vide Alphonsus à Castro , O.F.M., De justa haereticorum punitione, libri III (Lugduni [i.e., Lyon ]: apud Sebastianum Barptolomai Honorati, 1555), lib. 2, c. 21.

^ Hödl, in Biografisch-Bibliografisches Kirchenlexikon .

^ The few known facts of Peter's life are presented in Philippe Delhaye, Pierre Lombard: sa vie, ses œuvres, sa morale (Paris/Montreal) 1961.

^ Hödl ^ In a surviving letter, Ep. 410, Opera omnia viii.391, noted by Hödl ^ Hödl.

^ In his polemic Contra quatuor labyrinthos Franciae II.4.

^ His successor, Maurice de Sully, was bishop by the end of 1160.

^ "Peter Lombard" .

NNDB . 2019 . Retrieved 17 May 2024 .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Peter Lombard" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Joseph Rickaby (1908).

Scholasticism . A. Constable. p. 23.

^ This is a central point of Delhaye 1961, who sees Abelard, rather than Peter, as the founder of scholasticism .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Justification" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 2024-10-06 .

^ Colish, Marcia L.

(2010). "The Pseudo-Peter of Poitiers Gloss". In Rosemann, Philipp (ed.).

Mediaeval Commentaries on the Sentences of Peter Lombard . pp.

1– 33.

doi : 10.1163/ej.9789004118614.i-551.6 .

ISBN 978-90-04-11861-4 .

^ Donahue, Charles (June 1983). "The Canon Law On the Formation of Marriage and Social Practice in the Later Middle Ages".

Journal of Family History .

8 (2): 144– 158.

doi : 10.1177/036319908300800204 .

S2CID 144042143 .

ProQuest 1300086562 .

^ Kamas, Juraj (1997).

The Separation of the Spouses with the Bond Remaining: Historical and Canonical Study with Pastoral Applications . Gregorian Biblical BookShop.

ISBN 978-88-7652-757-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] Doyle, Matthew.

Peter Lombard and His Students ( Studies and Texts , 201; Mediaeval Law and Theology , 8), Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 2016, ISBN 978-0-88844-201-7 Colish, Marcia L.

Peter Lombard . 2 Vols. New York: E.J. Brill , 1994.

Delhaye, Philippe.

Pierre Lombard: sa vie, ses œuvres, sa morale . Paris/Montreal: 1961.

Herlihy, David.

Medieval Households . Cambridge: Harvard UP , 1985.

Rosemann, Philipp W.

Peter Lombard . New York: Oxford UP , 2004.

Rosemann, Philipp W.

The Story of a Great Medieval Book: Peter Lombard's "Sentences" . Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview, 2007.

External links [ edit ] "Peter Lombard (1095–1160)" article in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Ludwig Hödl (1993). "Lombardus, Petrus". In Bautz, Traugott (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 5. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 197–202.

ISBN 3-88309-043-3 .

"Peter Lombard Magister Sententiarum" Texts and further links.

Peter Lombard's Book of Sentences in parallel Latin English (Book I) Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by Peter Lombard in .jpg and .tiff format.

Guide to Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, Collectanea in epistolas Pauli. Manuscript, 12-- at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center Works by Peter Lombard at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_Lombard&oldid=1299500339 " Categories : 1090s births 1160 deaths 12th-century Christian mystics 12th-century French Roman Catholic bishops 12th-century Italian philosophers 12th-century Italian Roman Catholic theologians 12th-century writers in Latin Bishops of Paris Italian male non-fiction writers Italian religious writers Italian Roman Catholic writers People from the Province of Novara Roman Catholic mystics Scholastic philosophers Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: generic name Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 19:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter Lombard 40 languages Add topic

