Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Political philosophy Toggle Political philosophy subsection 2.1 A Student's Guide to Political Philosophy 2.2 Taming the Prince 3 Political views Toggle Political views subsection 3.1 Western civilization 3.2 The "strong executive" 3.3 Gender roles and equality 3.4 LGBT rights 3.5 Grades and affirmative action 4 Books Toggle Books subsection 4.1 Translations 5 Awards and honors 6 Media appearances 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvey Mansfield 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Македонски مصرى Simple English Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political philosopher Harvey Mansfield Mansfield in March 2017 Born Harvey Claflin Mansfield Jr.

( 1932-03-21 ) March 21, 1932 (age 93) New Haven, Connecticut , U.S.

Occupation William R. Kenan Jr. Professor of Government Children 3 Awards National Humanities Medal Guggenheim Fellowship Bradley Prize Philip Merrill Award Education Education Harvard University ( BA , PhD ) Philosophical work Institutions University of California, Berkeley Harvard University Hoover Institution , Stanford University Notable works Manliness (2006) Harvey Claflin Mansfield Jr.

(born March 21, 1932) is an American political philosopher . He was the William R. Kenan Jr. Professor of Government at Harvard University , where he taught from 1962 until his retirement in 2023. He has held Guggenheim and NEH Fellowships and has been a Fellow at the National Humanities Center . In 2004, he was awarded the National Humanities Medal by President George W. Bush and delivered the Jefferson Lecture in 2007.

Mansfield is a scholar of political history , and was greatly influenced by Leo Strauss .

[ 1 ] He is also the Carol G. Simon Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institution of Stanford University . Mansfield is notable for his generally conservative stance on political issues in his writings. At Harvard, he became one of the university's most prominent conservative figures. In 2023, he retired from teaching as one of the university's longest-serving faculty members.

[ 2 ] His notable former students include: Mark Blitz , James Ceaser , Tom Cotton , [ 3 ] Andrew Sullivan , [ 4 ] Charles R. Kesler , Alan Keyes , William Kristol , [ 5 ] Clifford Orwin , Paul Cantor , Mark Lilla , Francis Fukuyama , Sharon Krause , Bruno Maçães , and Shen Tong .

Biography [ edit ] Mansfield was born in New Haven, Connecticut , on March 21, 1932.

[ 6 ] His father, Harvey Mansfield Sr., had been editor of the American Political Science Review and was the Ruggles Professor Emeritus of Public Law and Government at Columbia University at the time of his death in 1988 at the age of 83.

[ 7 ] Mansfield was educated at public schools before college. In 1949, he enrolled at Harvard University with a focus in studying government, receiving his Bachelor of Arts in 1953. As an undergraduate, he was a liberal who supported Adlai Stevenson in the 1952 presidential election . After graduating, Mansfield received a Fulbright Scholarship to study in England for a year.

[ 6 ] From 1954 to 1956, he served in the United States Army in Virginia and France.

[ 8 ] He returned to Harvard and received his Ph.D. in 1961. Mansfield initially began teaching at the University of California, Berkeley , for a few years before lecturing at Harvard. In 1969, he was appointed as a full professor and was chair of the university's government department from 1973 to 1976.

[ 6 ] Mansfield was married to Delba Winthrop, with whom he co-translated and co-authored work on Tocqueville .

Political philosophy [ edit ] A Student's Guide to Political Philosophy [ edit ] In his 2001 book A Student's Guide to Political Philosophy , Mansfield traces the history of political philosophy in "the great books" written by Plato , Aristotle , Locke , Rousseau , and others of the "highest rank" (1).

[ 9 ] He also finds political philosophy in practical politics , which Mansfield considers necessarily partisan, because it involves citizens "arguing passionately pro and con with advocacy and denigration, accusation and defense" (2). He argues that politics does not merely consist of liberal and conservative options, but rather, they are fundamentally opposed to each other, with each side defending its own interest as it attempts to appeal to the common good (2). Since such adversarial sides in a political dispute appeal to the common good, an observer of the dispute can use his capacity to reason to judge which side supplies the most compelling arguments. If such an observer is competent to be a judge, he or she may be thought of as a political philosopher, or as at least on the way to engaging in political philosophy (2–3).

Mansfield stresses the connection between politics and political philosophy, but he does not find political philosophy in political science , which for Mansfield is a rival to political philosophy and "apes" the natural sciences (3–5). From Mansfield's point of view, political science replaces words like "good", "just", and "noble" with other words like "utility" or "preferences." The terms are meant to be neutral, but as a result of the political scientist's purported change of role and perspective from judge to so‑called "disinterested observer", such a "scientist" is not able to determine whose arguments are the best, because he or she falls victim to relativism , which, according to Mansfield, is "a sort of lazy dogmatism " (4–5).

In his guide, Mansfield reminds students that political science rebelled from political philosophy in the seventeenth century and declared itself distinct and separate in the positivist movement of the late nineteenth century: thus, he argues in it that whereas "Today political science is often said to be 'descriptive' or 'empirical,' concerned with facts; political philosophy is called 'normative' because it expresses values. But these terms merely repeat in more abstract form the difference between political science, which seeks agreement, and political philosophy, which seeks the best" (6).

Furthermore, according to Mansfield, when people talk about the difference between political philosophy and political science, they are actually talking about two distinct kinds of political philosophy, one modern and the other ancient. The only way to understand modern political science and its ancient alternative fully, he stresses, is to enter the history of political philosophy, and to study the tradition handed down over the centuries: "No one can count himself educated who does not have some acquaintance with this tradition. It informs you of the leading possibilities of human life, and by giving you a sense of what has been tried and what is now dominant, it tells you where we are now in a depth not available from any other source" (7–8). Although modern political science feels no obligation to look at its roots, and might even denigrate the subject as if it could not be of any real significance, he says, "our reasoning shows that the history of political philosophy is required for understanding its substance" (7–8).

Taming the Prince [ edit ] In his book Taming the Prince , Mansfield traces the modern doctrine of executive power to Niccolò Machiavelli .  He argues that executive power had to be tamed to become compatible with liberal constitutionalism.

[ 10 ] Political views [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Western civilization [ edit ] In response to multiculturalism on college campuses, Mansfield has defended the importance of preserving and teaching courses on Western civilization , even proposing a survey course that selects a dozen or so books that capture the principal themes.  Mansfield believes that understanding Western civilization is important because the books that explain it deal with problems associated with the human condition.

[ 11 ] On May 8, 2007, Mansfield delivered the 36th Jefferson Lecture ("the highest honor the federal government bestows for distinguished intellectual and public achievement in the humanities", according to the National Endowment for the Humanities , which sponsored the lecture).

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] In his lecture, Mansfield suggests "two improvements for today’s understanding of politics arising from the humanities ... first ... to recapture the notion of thumos in Plato , and Aristotle ... [and] ...second ... the use of names—proper to literature and foreign to science".

[ 14 ] This is a reference to his own philosophy, which forbids discounting the wisdom of the past simply because those who spoke it lived a long time ago.

The "strong executive" [ edit ] Mansfield has argued that the President of the United States has "extra-legal powers such as commanding the military, making treaties (and carrying on foreign policy), and pardoning the convicted, not to mention a veto of legislation", observing that the U.S. Constitution does not ask the President to take an oath to execute the laws, but rather, to execute "the office of the president, which is larger." [ 15 ] Referring to domestic surveillance, Mansfield notes: Those arguing that the executive should be subject to checks and balances are wrong to say or imply that the president may be checked in the sense of stopped. The president can be held accountable and made responsible, but if he could be stopped, the Constitution would lack any sure means of emergency action.

[ 15 ] He defends the separation of powers , arguing that "the executive subordinated to the rule of law is in danger of being subordinate to the legislature." [ 16 ] Gender roles and equality [ edit ] External videos After Words interview with Mansfield on Manliness , March 18, 2006 , C-SPAN In his 2006 book Manliness , Mansfield defended a moderately conservative understanding of gender roles , and bemoaned the loss of the virtue of manliness in a " gender neutral " society. In a New York Times interview, he defined the concept briefly as "confidence in a situation of risk. A manly man has to know what he is doing." [ 17 ] He defines the idea in more concrete terms in the book. There, a manly man does not have to know what he is doing, but only has to act as though he does. Also in the book, Mansfield subjects the concept of manliness to a test in which he refers for support of his argument to such diverse authorities as Homer , Plato , Aristotle , Rudyard Kipling , Ernest Hemingway , and Naomi Wood. In his argument, manliness is ultimately related to assertiveness —"decisiveness without complete knowledge"—and its place in society is debated. In an interview with Bill Kristol, Mansfield said: What I wrote was a modest defense of manliness. And the emphasis [is] on modest because manliness can be bad as well as good. Not everyone who takes risks deserves to have them turn out right and so manliness is, I think, responsible for a lot of evil. You can say that terrorists are manly, they’re willing to risk their lives and give their lives for a principle they believe in or a point they believe in.

[ 18 ] Manliness was criticized by the philosopher and law scholar Martha Nussbaum in the June 22, 2006, issue of the New Republic .

[ 19 ] Nussbaum accuses Mansfield of misreading, or failing to read, many feminist and non-feminist texts, in addition to the ancient Greek and Roman classics he cites. She argues that his book is based on overt misogynistic assumptions that take a position of indifference towards violence against women . Mansfield asserts, she contends, that a woman can resist rape only with the aid of "a certain ladylike modesty enabling her to take offense at unwanted encroachment." Concerning controversial comments by former President of Harvard, Lawrence Summers , about mental differences between men and women, Mansfield said that it is "probably true" that women "innately have less capacity than men at the highest level of science .... It's common sense if you just look at who the top scientists are." [ 17 ] LGBT rights [ edit ] In 1993, Mansfield testified on behalf of Colorado's Amendment 2, which amended the state constitution to prevent gays, lesbians and bisexuals from pursuing legal claims of discrimination. In his testimony, he argued that being gay "is not a life that makes for happiness," that homosexuality is "shameful," and that by not being able to have children gay people were not "socially responsible." [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Nussbaum, who testified in the same trial against Amendment 2, later remarked that Mansfield's source for his claim that gay and lesbian people were unhappy was not contemporary social science research but the great books of the Western tradition (Plato, Tocqueville, Rousseau, etc.).

[ 22 ] Grades and affirmative action [ edit ] Mansfield has voiced criticism of grade inflation at Harvard University and claims it is due in part to affirmative action , but says he cannot show its causal effect.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Critics have shown that grade inflation predates any significant presence of black students at Harvard.

[ 25 ] In November 1997, Mansfield  participated in a debate on affirmative action between Cornel West and Michael Sandel (arguing for affirmative action) with Ruth Wisse and himself (arguing against affirmative action). The debate attracted a "massive audience" of a thousand Harvard students, requiring its campus venue to be changed twice before it could take place in Harvard's Sanders Theater , prompting Professor Sandel to comment, "This puts to rest the myth that this generation has a political apathy, and apathy to political debates." [ 26 ] In 2013, Mansfield, after hearing from a dean that "the most frequent grade is an A," claimed to give students two grades: one for their transcript, and the one he thinks they deserve. He commented, "I didn’t want my students to be punished by being the only ones to suffer for getting an accurate grade." [ 27 ] In response to grade inflation , according to Harvard Crimson , Mansfield revived the "ironic" (or the "inflated") grade in 2006, in order to let his students know what they really deserved in his class without causing them harm by grading them lower than the other professors at Harvard: "In Mansfield’s 'true and serious' grading system, 5 percent of students will receive A’s, and 15 percent will receive A-minuses. But Mansfield won’t share those marks with anyone other than his teaching fellows and students. ... By contrast, Mansfield’s 'ironic' grade—the only one that will appear on official transcripts—will follow average grade distribution in the College, with about a quarter of students receiving A’s and another quarter receiving A-minu[s]es"; in contrast, their privately received deserved "real" (lower) grades usually centered around a C or C-minus, earning him the nickname "Harvey C-minus Mansfield." [ 28 ] "This [grading] policy—meant to demonstrate the causes and effects of grade inflation—drew heat from students and faculty, and attracted national media attention." [ 29 ] Mansfield himself has joked that his middle initial "C" stands for compassion: "That's what I lack when it comes to grading." [ 29 ] In an interview with the Hoover Institution, Mansfield claimed that college professors are too quick to label students as exceptional.

[ 11 ] Books [ edit ] Statesmanship and Party Government: A Study of Burke and Bolingbroke .

Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1965.

The Spirit of Liberalism .

Cambridge : Harvard University Press , 1978.

Machiavelli's New Modes and Orders: A Study of the Discourses on Livy .

Ithaca : Cornell University Press , 1979. Rpt.

Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2001.

Thomas Jefferson : Selected Writings . Ed. and introd.

Wheeling, IL : H. Davidson, 1979.

Selected Letters of Edmund Burke . Ed. with introd. entitled "Burke's Theory of Political Practice".

Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1984.

Taming the Prince: The Ambivalence of Modern Executive Power .

New York : The Free Press , 1989.

America's Constitutional Soul .

Baltimore : The Johns Hopkins University Press , 1991.

Machiavelli’s Virtue .

Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1996.

A Student’s Guide to Political Philosophy .

Wilmington , DE : ISI Books , 2001.

Manliness .

New Haven : Yale University Press , 2006.

Tocqueville : A Very Short Introduction .

New York and Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2010.

Translations [ edit ] External videos Booknotes interview with Mansfield on his introduction to Tocqueville's Democracy in America , December 17, 2000 , C-SPAN The Prince , by Niccolò Machiavelli . Introd. 2nd (corr.) ed. 1985; Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1998. (Inc. glossary.) Florentine Histories , by Niccolò Machiavelli . Ed. and introd.

Princeton : Princeton University Press , 1988. (Co-trans. and co-ed., Laura F. Banfield.) Discourses on Livy , by Niccolò Machiavelli . Introd.

Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1996. (Co-trans., Nathan Tarcov.) Democracy in America , by Alexis de Tocqueville . Introd.

Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2000. (Co-trans., Delba Winthrop.) Awards and honors [ edit ] Guggenheim Fellowship (1970–71) [ 12 ] National Endowment for the Humanities Fellowship (1974–75) [ 12 ] Member of the Council of the American Political Science Association (1980–82, 2004) [ 12 ] Fellow of the National Humanities Center (1982) [ 12 ] Member of the USIA's Board of Foreign Scholarships (1987–89) [ 12 ] Member of the National Council on the Humanities (1991–94) [ 12 ] Joseph R. Levenson Teaching Award (1993) [ 12 ] President of the New England Historical Association (1993–94) [ 12 ] Sidney Hook Memorial Award (2002) [ 12 ] National Humanities Medal (2004) [ 12 ] 36th Jefferson Lecture [ 30 ] for the National Endowment for the Humanities (2007) [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 31 ] Media appearances [ edit ] "Harvey Mansfield on the Neil Gorsuch Confirmation Hearings," Conversations with Bill Kristol , April 24, 2017.

[ 32 ] "Harvey Mansfield on Donald Trump and Political Philosophy," Conversations with Bill Kristol , December 19, 2016.

[ 33 ] "Harvey Mansfield on mysteries, Wodehouse, Wilson, Churchill, and Swift," Conversations with Bill Kristol , September 25, 2016.

[ 34 ] "Harvey Mansfield on America's Constitutional Soul," Conversations with Bill Kristol, July 31, 2016.

[ 35 ] "Harvey Mansfield on Manliness," Conversations with Bill Kristol , May 8, 2016.

[ 36 ] "Harvey Mansfield on Alexis de Tocqueville's "Democracy in America" Conversations with Bill Kristol , June 15, 2019.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] Democracy in America Ellis Sandoz Leo Strauss References [ edit ] ^ See, e.g., Josh Harlan and Christopher Kagay, "Harvey C. Mansfield, Jr.: The Question of Conservatism" , interview, Harvard Review of Philosophy 3 (1993), accessed June 2, 2007. [Restricted access?] Cf. cached HTML version, "The Question of Conservatism" at the Wayback Machine (archived December 21, 2005), accessed June 17, 2007. (18 pages.) ^ Gibson, Lydialyle (April 26, 2023).

"Harvey Mansfield's Last Class" .

Harvard Magazine . Retrieved January 31, 2024 .

^ "G.I. Tom" .

National Review . 7 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 .

^ Andrew Sullivan , "Daily Express: Provocations" , The New Republic Online (NRO only; blog), January 19, 2005. (Subscription required for full access.) Cf.

Contributing Editor, Andrew Sullivan Archived 2007-08-14 at the Wayback Machine biography at The New Republic .

^ "Harvey Mansfield Transcript" .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-23 . Retrieved 2022-01-23 .

^ a b c Newcomer, Eric P. (March 1, 2012).

"The Harvey Mansfield Story" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 2024-02-01 .

^ "Harvey Mansfield, 83; Taught at Columbia" .

New York Times . 10 May 1988.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2016 . Retrieved 8 February 2017 .

^ "Appointment of Harvey C. Mansfield, Jr., as a Member of the Board of Foreign Scholarships" .

Ronald Reagan . Retrieved 2024-02-01 .

^ Harvey C. Mansfield, A Student's Guide to Political Philosophy (Wilmington, Delaware: ISI Books, 2001).

ISBN 1-882926-43-9 . (Subsequent parenthetical references to this work follow in the text.) ^ Mansfield, Harvey (1989).

Taming the Prince . New York: The Free Press.

^ a b "Harvey Mansfield – The Left on Campus" .

The Hoover Institution . 17 September 2010.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 19 May 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "Harvey Mansfield, Noted American Author and Political Theorist, to Deliver the 2007 Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities" Archived 2007-06-03 at the Wayback Machine , press release, National Endowment for the Humanities , March 22, 2007.

^ a b "About the Jefferson Lecture" Archived 2007-05-19 at the Wayback Machine , National Endowment for the Humanities , accessed June 16, 2007.

^ a b Harvey C. Mansfield, "How to Understand Politics: What the Humanities Can Say to Science" , 36th Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities, presented on May 8, 2007, at the Warner Theatre , Washington, D.C.

, neh.gov ( NEH ), accessed June 16, 2007.

^ a b Harvey Mansfield, "The Law and the President: Archived 2006-04-08 at the Wayback Machine In a National Emergency, Who You Gonna Call?" The Weekly Standard , January 16, 2006, accessed February 5, 2007.

^ Harvey C. Mansfield, "The Case for the Strong Executive: Archived 2007-06-03 at the Wayback Machine Under Some Circumstances, the Rule of Law Must Yield to the Need for Energy," Wall Street Journal , May 2, 2007, accessed June 17, 2007.

^ a b Solomon, Deborah (12 March 2006).

"Of Manliness and Men" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2023 . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ Mansfield, Harvey.

"Conversations with Bill Kristol" .

Conversations with Bill Kristol .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2014 . Retrieved 8 October 2014 .

^ Nussbaum, Martha (22 June 2006).

"Man Overboard" .

The New Republic .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2022 .

^ Anna D. Wilde (19 October 1993).

"Mansfield Speaks In Gay Rights Trial" .

The Harvard Crimson .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2014 . Retrieved 18 April 2014 .

^ Jeffrey Rosen (29 November 1993).

"Sodom and Demurrer" .

The New Republic .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2023 . Retrieved 7 March 2017 .

^ Martha C. Nussbaum (21 January 2010).

From Disgust to Humanity: Sexual Orientation and Constitutional Law . Oxford University Press. pp.

169– 170.

ISBN 978-0-19-974597-5 .

^ Mansfield, Harvey C. (April 6, 2001).

"Point of View: Grade Inflation: It's Time to Face the Facts" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education .

Archived from the original on May 27, 2022 . Retrieved June 18, 2007 .

^ Frank, Stephen E. (11 March 1993).

"Mansfield Holds To Grade Theory: Links Inflation to Affirmative Action" .

Harvard Crimson .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 .

Mansfield wrote that other "ignoble influences" might also be historically linked to grade inflation, including "the desire of some professors to ensure that Harvard students would keep their draft deferments, and an opinion (which is part of the reasoning behind affirmative action) that self-expression is diminished by being held to a standard of excellence." Mansfield added that it would be difficult to determine the role each factor played in pushing up grades, saying professors may have deliberately obscured the influence of affirmative action in their grading.

^ "Harvard Professor Continues His Attack on Black Students" , The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education , 7 (7): 17, Spring 1995, doi : 10.2307/2963407 , JSTOR 2963407 , archived from the original on 2022-07-01 , retrieved 2022-07-01 ^ As qtd. in Luke McLoughlin, "Walking the Walk: Dialogue Is Only a Prelude to Involvement" Archived 2006-09-01 at the Wayback Machine , archived issue of Digitas (Dec. 1997), accessed February 6, 2007. [Digitas is "a student organization dedicated to new technology" at Harvard University .] ^ Slavov, Sita (26 December 2013).

"How to Fix College Grade Inflation: Inflated grades are a serious problem, but there are ways to fix them" .

U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved 11 September 2015 .

^ Lulu Zhou, "'C-minus' Prof to Give More As" , The Harvard Crimson , February 13, 2006, accessed February 9, 2007.

^ a b Rebecca D. O'Brien, "Professor Fights Grade Inflation, Affirmative Action" Archived 2007-10-11 at the Wayback Machine , The Harvard Crimson , June 2, 2003, accessed February 6, 2007.

^ "NEG.gov" . Archived from the original on 2007-05-16 . Retrieved 2007-06-03 .

^ Philip Kennicott, "A Strauss Primer, With Glossy Mansfield Finish" Archived 2017-08-31 at the Wayback Machine , The Washington Post , May 9, 2007, accessed June 3, 2007.

^ "Harvey Mansfield on the Neil Gorsuch Confirmation Hearings" .

Conversations with Bill Kristol .

Archived from the original on 2017-05-06 . Retrieved 2017-06-02 .

^ "Harvey Mansfield on Donald Trump and Political Philosophy" .

Conversations with Bill Kristol .

Archived from the original on 2017-10-25 . Retrieved 2017-06-02 .

^ "Harvey Mansfield X on Conversations with Bill Kristol" .

Conversations with Bill Kristol .

Archived from the original on 2016-10-20 . Retrieved 2017-06-02 .

^ "Harvey Mansfield IX on Conversations with Bill Kristol" .

Conversations with Bill Kristol .

Archived from the original on 2016-10-20 . Retrieved 2017-06-02 .

^ "Harvey Mansfield VIII on Conversations with Bill Kristol" .

Conversations with Bill Kristol .

Archived from the original on 2023-01-19 . Retrieved 2017-06-02 .

^ "Harvey Mansfield on Alexis de Tocqueville's Democracy in America" .

Conversations with Bill Kristol .

Archived from the original on 2019-08-09 . Retrieved 2019-08-09 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Harvey Mansfield .

HarveyMansfield.org .  Website devoted to the work of Harvey Mansfield in a searchable format along with scholarly commentary, multimedia, biography, and other resources.

"Democracy in America" . Colloquium on their translation of the book Democracy in America , by Alexis de Tocqueville , presented by Harvey Mansfield and Delba Winthrop . March 30, 2001.

Ashbrook Center , Ashland University , Ashland , Ohio .

"Dr. Harvey Mansfield, Author of Manliness " . Public lecture at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics, Saint Anselm College , Goffstown , New Hampshire . April 20, 2006. Accessed June 17, 2007.

MP3 podcast.

Harvey Mansfield, William R. Kenan, Jr., Professor of Government Archived 2021-02-21 at the Wayback Machine . Faculty webpage. Department of Government, Harvard University .

"Harvey Mansfield" NEH website for 2007 Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities by Harvey C. Mansfield.

Ifill, Gwen .

"Then and Now: Mansfield" Archived 2013-12-23 at the Wayback Machine . Transcript of interview with Harvey Mansfield. Broadcast on The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer , September 13, 2002. Accessed June 18, 2007. (Inc. links to streaming video and RealPlayer audio.) Video [ permanent dead link ] of Stephen Colbert interviewing Harvey Mansfield about Mansfield's book Manliness on The Colbert Report , Comedy Central . Broadcast April 5, 2006. Accessed April 11, 2008. (Caption: "Harvey Mansfield and Stephen collide in a perfect storm of man musk.") Appearances on C-SPAN In Depth interview with Mansfield, September 4, 2005 CV v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville Ideas Mutual liberty Soft despotism Associated persons (contemporaries) Gustave de Beaumont Francis J. Lippitt Henry Reeve Jared Sparks John C. Spencer Scholars, editors, and translators Leo Damrosch Harvey Mansfield George Wilson Pierson Other The Old Regime and the Revolution The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour: Exploring Democracy in America Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐h6w4p
Cached time: 20250817045526
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.016 seconds
Real time usage: 1.301 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7939/1000000
Revision size: 38295/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 243375/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13596/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 152942/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.534/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23939115/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  903.789      1 -total
 27.49%  248.483      1 Template:Reflist
 19.81%  179.014      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 16.15%  146.000      1 Template:Conservatism
 13.47%  121.759     11 Template:Cite_news
 11.29%  102.069     10 Template:Lang
 10.37%   93.722      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  6.92%   62.537      1 Template:Short_description
  5.52%   49.856      4 Template:Infobox
  4.39%   39.714      9 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2857916:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045526 and revision id 1297135767. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvey_Mansfield&oldid=1297135767 " Categories : 1932 births Living people Harvard University alumni Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty American political scientists National Humanities Medal recipients The American Spectator people Claflin family American political philosophers 20th-century American writers 21st-century American writers 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers People from New Haven, Connecticut John M. Olin Foundation Leo Strauss scholars Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links People appearing on C-SPAN Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 10:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvey Mansfield 11 languages Add topic

