Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Foundation and charter 1.1.1 Brown family 1.1.2 American Revolution 1.2 Presidents 1.3 New Curriculum 1.4 "Slavery and Justice" report 1.5 Interaction with the Trump administration 2 Coat of arms 3 Campus Toggle Campus subsection 3.1 Main campus 3.1.1 Van Wickle Gates 3.2 John Hay Library 3.3 John Carter Brown Library 3.4 Haffenreffer Museum 3.5 Annmary Brown Memorial 3.6 The Walk 3.7 Pembroke campus 3.8 Sustainability 4 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 4.1 The College 4.2 Brown and RISD 4.2.1 Dual Degree Program 4.2.2 MADE Program 4.3 Theatre and playwriting 4.4 Writing programs 4.4.1 Author prizewinners 4.5 Computer science 4.6 Applied mathematics 4.7 The Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World 4.8 The Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs 4.9 The School of Engineering 4.10 IE Brown Executive MBA Dual Degree Program 4.11 The Pembroke Center 4.12 The Graduate School 4.13 Carney Institute for Brain Science 4.14 Alpert Medical School 4.15 School of Public Health 4.16 Online programs 5 Admissions and financial aid Toggle Admissions and financial aid subsection 5.1 Undergraduate 5.2 Graduate 6 Rankings 7 Research 8 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 8.1 Spring weekend 8.2 Residential and Greek societies 8.3 Societies and clubs 8.4 Student organizations 8.5 LGBTQ+ 8.6 Resource centers 8.7 Activism 8.7.1 1968 Black Student Walkout 8.7.2 Divestment from South Africa 8.7.3 Protest of speech by NYPD Commissioner Ray Kelly 8.7.4 Israel-Gaza protests 9 Athletics 10 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 10.1 Alumni 10.2 Faculty 10.3 In popular culture 11 See also 12 Explanatory notes 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Citations 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Brown University 69 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°49′34″N 71°24′11″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.826°N 71.403°W ﻿ / 41.826; -71.403 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private university in  Providence, Rhode Island, US This article is about the private Ivy League research university in Rhode Island. For the private Christian university in Arkansas, see John Brown University .

Brown University Coat of arms Latin : Universitas Brunensis [ 1 ] Former names Rhode Island College (1764–1804) Motto In Deo Speramus ( Latin ) Motto in English "In God We Hope" [ 2 ] Type Private research university Established September 15, 1764 ; 260 years ago ( 1764-09-15 ) Accreditation NECHE Academic affiliations AAU COFHE URA NAICU Space-grant Endowment $7.2 billion (2024) [ 3 ] Budget $1.28 billion (2023) [ 4 ] Chancellor Brian Moynihan [ 5 ] President Christina Paxson Provost Francis J. Doyle III Academic staff 848 [ 6 ] Students 11,005 [ 6 ] Undergraduates 7,272 [ 6 ] Postgraduates 3,130 [ 6 ] 602 medical students [ 6 ] Location Providence , Rhode Island , United States 41°49′34″N 71°24′11″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.826°N 71.403°W ﻿ / 41.826; -71.403 Campus Midsize city, 143 acres (58 ha) Other campuses Groton Madrid Newspaper The Brown Daily Herald Colors Seal brown, cardinal red, and white [ 7 ] Nickname Bears Sporting affiliations NCAA Division I FCS – Ivy League ECAC Hockey EARC EAWRC NEISA CWPA IRA Mascot Bruno the Bear Website brown.edu Brown University is a private Ivy League research university in Providence, Rhode Island , United States. It is the seventh-oldest institution of higher education in the US, founded in 1764 as the College in the English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations . One of nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution , [ 8 ] it was the first US college to codify that admission and instruction of students was to be equal regardless of the religious affiliation of students.

[ 9 ] The university is home to the oldest applied mathematics program in the country and oldest engineering program in the Ivy League.

[ a ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] It was one of the early doctoral-granting  institutions in the U.S., adding masters and doctoral studies in 1887.

[ 13 ] In 1969, it adopted its Open Curriculum after student lobbying, which eliminated mandatory general education distribution requirements.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In 1971, Brown's coordinate women's institution, Pembroke College , was fully merged into the university.

The university comprises the College , the Graduate School , Alpert Medical School , the School of Engineering , the School of Public Health and the School of Professional Studies. Its international programs are organized through the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs , and it is academically affiliated with the Marine Biological Laboratory and the Rhode Island School of Design , which offers undergraduate and graduate dual degree programs . Brown's main campus is in the College Hill neighborhood of Providence. The university is surrounded by a federally listed architectural district with a concentration of Colonial-era buildings.

Benefit Street has one of America's richest concentrations of 17th- and 18th-century architecture.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Undergraduate admissions are among the most selective in the country, with an acceptance rate of 5% for the class of 2026.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] As of March 2022 [update] , 11 Nobel Prize winners, 1 Fields Medalist , 7 National Humanities Medalists , [ b ] and 11 National Medal of Science laureates have been affiliated with Brown as alumni , faculty, or researchers . Alumni also include 29 Pulitzer Prize winners, [ c ] 21 billionaires, [ d ] 4 U.S. secretaries of state , over 100 members of the United States Congress , [ 26 ] 58 Rhodes Scholars , [ 27 ] 22 MacArthur Genius Fellows, [ e ] and 38 Olympic medalists.

[ 28 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of Brown University Foundation and charter [ edit ] Petitioner Ezra Stiles later became the seventh president of Yale College .

Petitioner William Ellery signed the United States Declaration of Independence in 1776.

In 1761, three residents of Newport, Rhode Island , drafted a petition to the colony's General Assembly : [ 29 ] That your Petitioners propose to open a literary institution or School for instructing young Gentlemen in the Languages, Mathematics, Geography & History, & such other branches of Knowledge as shall be desired. That for this End... it will be necessary... to erect a public Building or Buildings for the boarding of the youth & the Residence of the Professors.

The three petitioners were Ezra Stiles , pastor of Newport's Second Congregational Church and future president of Yale University ; William Ellery Jr.

, future signer of the United States Declaration of Independence ; and Josias Lyndon , future governor of the colony. Stiles and Ellery later served as co-authors of the college's charter two years later. The editor of Stiles's papers observes, "This draft of a petition connects itself with other evidence of Dr. Stiles's project for a Collegiate Institution in Rhode Island, before the charter of what became Brown University." [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 13 ] The Philadelphia Baptist Association was also interested in establishing a college in Rhode Island, which was founded as a Baptist colony in America, including the mother-church of all American Baptists : the First Baptist Church in America . At the time, the Baptists were unrepresented among the colonial colleges; the Congregationalists had Harvard University and Yale University, the Presbyterians had the College of New Jersey, which later became Princeton University , and the Episcopalians had the College of William & Mary and King's College, which later became Columbia University . The local University of Pennsylvania in their native Philadelphia was founded by Benjamin Franklin without direct association with any particular denomination.

[ 31 ] Isaac Backus , the Baptist minister and historian of the New England Baptists, who was an inaugural trustee of Brown University, wrote of the October 1762 resolution taken at Philadelphia: [ 13 ] The Philadelphia Association obtained such an acquaintance with our affairs, as to bring them to an apprehension that it was practicable and expedient to erect a college in the Colony of Rhode-Island, under the chief direction of the Baptists; ... Mr.

James Manning , who took his first degree in New-Jersey college in September, 1762, was esteemed a suitable leader in this important work.

James Manning arrived at Newport in July 1763 and was introduced to Stiles, who agreed to write the charter for the college. Stiles' first draft was read to the General Assembly in August 1763, and rejected by Baptist members who worried that their denomination would be underrepresented in the College Board of Fellows. A revised charter written by Stiles and Ellery was adopted by the Rhode Island General Assembly on March 3, 1764, in East Greenwich .

[ 32 ] Brown's first president, minister James Manning The Ezra Stiles copy of Brown's 1764 charter In September 1764, the inaugural meeting of the corporation—the college's governing body—was held in Newport's Old Colony House . Governor Stephen Hopkins was chosen chancellor, former and future governor Samuel Ward vice chancellor, John Tillinghast treasurer, and Thomas Eyres secretary. The charter stipulated that the board of trustees should be composed of 22 Baptists, 5 Quakers , 5 Episcopalians, and 4 Congregationalists. Of the 12 Fellows, 8 should be Baptists—including the college president—"and the rest indifferently of any or all Denominations." [ 13 ] At the time of its creation, Brown's charter was a uniquely progressive document.

[ 33 ] Other colleges had curricular strictures against opposing doctrines, while Brown's charter asserted, "Sectarian differences of opinions, shall not make any Part of the Public and Classical Instruction." The document additionally "recognized more broadly and fundamentally than any other [university charter] the principle of denominational cooperation." [ 13 ] The oft-repeated statement that Brown's charter alone prohibited a religious test for College membership is inaccurate; other college charters were similarly liberal in that particular.

[ 34 ] This 1792 engraving is the first published image of Brown.

University Hall stands on the right while the President's House sits on the left.

The college was founded as Rhode Island College, at the site of the First Baptist Church in Warren , Rhode Island.

[ 35 ] Manning was sworn in as the college's first president in 1765 and remained in the role until 1791. In 1766, the college authorized Rev.

Morgan Edwards to travel to Europe to "solicit Benefactions for this Institution".

[ 34 ] During his year-and-a-half stay in the British Isles , Edwards secured funding from benefactors including Thomas Penn and Benjamin Franklin .

[ 34 ] In 1770, the college moved from Warren to Providence. To establish a campus, John and Moses Brown purchased a four-acre lot on the crest of College Hill on behalf of the school. The majority of the property fell within the bounds of the original home lot of Chad Brown , an ancestor of the Browns and one of the original proprietors of Providence Plantations .

[ 36 ] After the college was relocated to the city, work began on constructing its first building.

A building committee, organized by the corporation, developed plans for the college's first purpose-built edifice, finalizing a design on February 9, 1770. The subsequent structure, referred to as "The College Edifice" and later as University Hall , may have been modeled on Nassau Hall , built 14 years prior at the College of New Jersey . President Manning, an active member of the building process, was educated at Princeton and might have suggested that Brown's first building resemble that of his alma mater .

[ 37 ] Brown family [ edit ] Following the gift of Nicholas Brown Jr.

(Class of 1786), the university was renamed in his honor.

Nicholas Brown , John Brown , Joseph Brown , and Moses Brown were instrumental in moving the college to Providence, constructing its first building, and securing its endowment. Joseph became a professor of natural philosophy at the college; John served as its treasurer from 1775 to 1796; and Nicholas Sr's son Nicholas Brown Jr.

succeeded his uncle as treasurer from 1796 to 1825.

[ 38 ] On September 8, 1803, the corporation voted, "That the donation of $5,000, if made to this College within one Year from the late Commencement, shall entitle the donor to name the College." The following year, the appeal was answered by College Treasurer Nicholas Brown Jr. In a letter dated September 6, 1804, Brown committed "a donation of Five Thousand Dollars to Rhode Island College, to remain in perpetuity as a fund for the establishment of a Professorship of Oratory and Belles Letters." In recognition of the gift, the corporation on the same day voted, "That this College be called and known in all future time by the Name of Brown University." [ 39 ] Over the years, the benefactions of Nicholas Brown Jr., totaled nearly $160,000 and included funds for building Hope College (1821–22) and Manning Hall (1834–35).

In 1904, the John Carter Brown Library was established as an independently funded research library on Brown's campus; the library's collection was founded on that of John Carter Brown , son of Nicholas Brown Jr.

The Brown family was involved in various business ventures in Rhode Island, and accrued wealth both directly and indirectly from the transatlantic slave trade . The family was divided on the issue of slavery. John Brown had defended slavery, while Moses and Nicholas Brown Jr. were fervent abolitionists .

In 2003, under the tenure of President Ruth Simmons , the university established a steering committee to investigate these ties of the university to slavery and recommend a strategy to address them.

[ 40 ] American Revolution [ edit ] With British vessels patrolling Narragansett Bay in the fall of 1776, the college library was moved out of Providence for safekeeping. During the subsequent American Revolutionary War , Brown's University Hall was used to house French and other revolutionary troops led by General George Washington and the Comte de Rochambeau as they waited to commence the march of 1781 that led to the Siege of Yorktown and the Battle of the Chesapeake . This has been celebrated as marking the defeat of the British and the end of the war. The building functioned as barracks and hospital from December 10, 1776, to April 20, 1780, and as a hospital for French troops from June 26, 1780, to May 27, 1782.

[ 13 ] A number of Brown's founders and alumni played roles in the American Revolution and subsequent founding of the United States. Brown's first chancellor, Stephen Hopkins, served as a delegate to the Colonial Congress in Albany in 1754, and to the Continental Congress from 1774 to 1776. James Manning represented Rhode Island at the Congress of the Confederation , while concurrently serving as Brown's first president.

[ 41 ] Two of Brown's founders, William Ellery and Stephen Hopkins signed the Declaration of Independence .

James Mitchell Varnum , who graduated from Brown with honors in 1769, served as one of General George Washington's Continental Army brigadier generals and later as major general in command of the entire Rhode Island militia . Varnum is noted as the founder and commander of the 1st Rhode Island Regiment , widely regarded as the first Black battalion in U.S. military history.

[ 42 ] David Howell , who graduated with an A.M. in 1769, served as a delegate to the Continental Congress from 1782 to 1785.

Presidents [ edit ] Brown's 2nd President, Jonathan Maxcy , was the first alum to serve as president.

Brown's 4th President, Francis Wayland , urged American universities to adopt a broader curriculum.

Brown's 18th President, Ruth Simmons , was the Ivy League's first African-American president.

Brown's 19th President, Christina Paxson , has served in the role since 2012.

Main article: List of Presidents of Brown University Nineteen individuals have served as presidents of the university since its founding in 1764. Since 2012, Christina Hull Paxson has served as president. Paxson had previously served as dean of Princeton University's School of Public and International Affairs and chair of Princeton's economics department.

[ 43 ] Paxson's immediate predecessor, Ruth Simmons , is noted as the first African American president of an Ivy League institution.

[ 44 ] Other presidents of note include academic, Vartan Gregorian ; and philosopher and economist, Francis Wayland .

New Curriculum [ edit ] Main article: Open Curriculum (Brown University) In 1966, the first Group Independent Study Project (GISP) at Brown was formed, involving 80 students and 15 professors. The GISP was inspired by student-initiated experimental schools, especially San Francisco State College , and sought ways to "put students at the center of their education" and "teach students how to think rather than just teaching facts".

[ 45 ] Members of the GISP, Ira Magaziner and Elliot Maxwell published a paper of their findings titled, "Draft of a Working Paper for Education at Brown University." [ 46 ] [ 45 ] The paper made proposals for a new curriculum, including interdisciplinary freshman-year courses that would introduce "modes of thought," with instruction from faculty from different disciplines as well as for an end to letter grades. The following year Magaziner began organizing the student body to press for the reforms, organizing discussions and protests.

[ 47 ] In 1968, university president Ray Heffner established a Special Committee on Curricular Philosophy. Composed of administrators, the committee was tasked with developing specific reforms and producing recommendations. A report, produced by the committee, was presented to the faculty, which voted the New Curriculum into existence on May 7, 1969. Its key features included: [ 48 ] Modes of Thought courses for first-year students The introduction of interdisciplinary courses The abandonment of "general education" distribution requirements The Satisfactory/No Credit (S/NC) grading option The ABC/No Credit grading system, which eliminated pluses, minuses, and D's; a grade of "No Credit" (equivalent to F's at other institutions) would not appear on external transcripts.

The Modes of Thought course was discontinued early on, but the other elements remain in place. In 2006, the reintroduction of plus/minus grading was proposed in response to concerns regarding grade inflation. The idea was rejected by the College Curriculum Council after canvassing alumni, faculty, and students, including the original authors of the Magaziner-Maxwell Report.

[ 49 ] "Slavery and Justice" report [ edit ] In 2003, then-university president Ruth Simmons launched a steering committee to research Brown's eighteenth-century ties to slavery. In October 2006, the committee released a report documenting its findings.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Titled "Slavery and Justice", the document detailed the ways in which the university benefited both directly and indirectly from the transatlantic slave trade and the labor of enslaved people. The report also included seven recommendations for how the university should address this legacy.

[ 52 ] Brown has since completed a number of these recommendations including the establishment of its Center for the Study of Slavery and Justice, the construction of its Slavery Memorial , and the funding of a $10 million permanent endowment for Providence Public Schools .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] The "Slavery and Justice" report marked the first major effort by an American university to address its ties to slavery and prompted other institutions to undertake similar processes.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Interaction with the Trump administration [ edit ] On July 30, 2025, Brown struck a deal with the Trump administration to restore federal research grant funding, after the administration froze it due to complaints mainly about antisemitism on the campus in the wake of pro-Palestinian protests . This deal included $50 million to be paid over ten years to state workforce development programs, a vow to exclude transgender women from women's spaces, a commitment to combatting antisemitism, and renewed partnership with Israeli institutions, among other items [ 56 ] [ 57 ] This is the third settlement of its kind from an elite university to the administration, following Columbia University and the University of Pennsylvania.

Coat of arms [ edit ] Main article: Coat of Arms of Brown University Brown's coat of arms was created in 1834. The prior year, president Francis Wayland had commissioned a committee to update the school's original seal to match the name the university had adopted in 1804. Central in the coat of arms is a white escutcheon divided into four sectors by a red cross. Within each sector of the coat of arms lies an open book. Above the shield is a crest consisting of the upper half of a sun in splendor among the clouds atop a red and white torse .

[ 58 ] Campus [ edit ] University Hall , Brown's oldest building, was constructed in 1770 and is a National Historic Landmark Soldiers Memorial Gate (1921) long marked the eastern edge of Brown's campus.

Brown is the largest institutional landowner in Providence, with properties on College Hill and in the Jewelry District .

[ 59 ] The university was built contemporaneously with the eighteenth and nineteenth-century precincts surrounding it, making Brown's campus tightly integrated into Providence's urban fabric. Among the noted architects who have shaped Brown's campus are McKim, Mead & White , Philip Johnson , Rafael Viñoly , Diller Scofidio + Renfro , and Robert A. M. Stern .

[ 60 ] Main campus [ edit ] Further information: List of Brown University buildings Brown's main campus, comprises 235 buildings and 143 acres (0.58 km 2 ) in the East Side neighborhood of College Hill. The university's central campus sits on a 15-acre (6.1-hectare) block bounded by Waterman, Prospect, George, and Thayer Streets ; newer buildings extend northward, eastward, and southward. Brown's core, historic campus, constructed primary between 1770 and 1926, is defined by three greens: the Front or Quiet Green, the Middle or College Green, and the Ruth J. Simmons Quadrangle (historically known as Lincoln Field).

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] A brick and wrought-iron fence punctuated by decorative gates and arches traces the block's perimeter. This section of campus is primarily Georgian and Richardsonian Romanesque in its architectural character.

[ 61 ] To the south of the central campus are academic buildings and residential quadrangles, including Wriston, Keeney, and Gregorian quadrangles. Immediately to the east of the campus core sit Sciences Park and Brown's School of Engineering . North of the central campus are performing and visual arts facilities, life sciences labs, and the Pembroke Campus, which houses both dormitories and academic buildings. Facing the western edge of the central campus sit two of the Brown's seven libraries, the John Hay Library and the John D. Rockefeller Jr. Library .

The university's campus is contiguous with that of the Rhode Island School of Design , which is located immediately to Brown's west, along the slope of College Hill.

Van Wickle Gates [ edit ] Main article: Van Wickle Gates The Van Wickle Gates stand at the crest of College Hill Built in 1901, the Van Wickle Gates are a set of wrought iron gates that stand at the western edge of Brown's campus. The larger main gate is flanked by two smaller side gates. At Convocation the central gate opens inward to admit the procession of new students; at Commencement, the gate opens outward for the procession of graduates.

[ 63 ] A Brown superstition holds that students who walk through the central gate a second time prematurely will not graduate, although walking backward is said to cancel the hex.

John Hay Library [ edit ] Main article: John Hay Library The John Hay Library is home to rare books, special collections, and the university archives.

The John Hay Library is the second oldest library on campus.

[ 64 ] Opened in 1910, the library is named for John Hay (class of 1858), private secretary to Abraham Lincoln and Secretary of State under William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt . The construction of the building was funded in large part by Hay's friend, Andrew Carnegie , who contributed half of the $300,000 cost of construction.

[ 65 ] The John Hay Library serves as the repository of the university's archives, rare books and manuscripts, and special collections. Noteworthy among the latter are the Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection [ 66 ] (described as "the foremost American collection of material devoted to the history and iconography of soldiers and soldiering"), [ 67 ] the Harris Collection of American Poetry and Plays (described as "the largest and most comprehensive collection of its kind in any research library"), the Lownes Collection of the History of Science (described as "one of the three most important private collections of books of science in America"), and the papers of H. P. Lovecraft . The Hay Library is home to one of the broadest collections of incunabula in the Americas, one of Brown's two Shakespeare First Folios , the manuscript of George Orwell 's Nineteen Eighty-Four , and three books bound in human skin .

[ 68 ] John Carter Brown Library [ edit ] Main article: John Carter Brown Library The John Carter Brown Library is one of the world's leading repositories of books, maps, and manuscripts relating to the colonial Americas .

[ 69 ] Founded in 1846, the John Carter Brown Library is generally regarded as the world's leading collection of primary historical sources relating to the exploration and colonization of the Americas. While administered and funded separately from the university, the library has been owned by Brown and located on its campus since 1904.

[ 70 ] The library contains the best preserved of the eleven surviving copies of the Bay Psalm Book —the earliest extant book printed in British North America and the most expensive printed book in the world.

[ 71 ] Other holdings include a Shakespeare First Folio and the world's largest collection of 16th-century Mexican texts.

[ 72 ] The galleries of Brown's anthropology museum, the Haffenreffer , are located in Manning Hall.

Haffenreffer Museum [ edit ] Main article: Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology The exhibition galleries of the Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology, Brown's teaching museum, are located in Manning Hall on the campus's main green. Its one million artifacts, available for research and educational purposes, are located at its Collections Research Center in Bristol, Rhode Island .

[ 73 ] The museum's goal is to inspire creative and critical thinking about culture by fostering an interdisciplinary understanding of the material world. It provides opportunities for faculty and students to work with collections and the public, teaching through objects and programs in classrooms and exhibitions. The museum sponsors lectures and events in all areas of anthropology and also runs an extensive program of outreach to local schools.

Annmary Brown Memorial [ edit ] Main article: Annmary Brown Memorial The Annmary Brown Memorial was constructed from 1903 to 1907 by the politician, Civil War veteran, and book collector General Rush Hawkins , as a mausoleum for his wife, Annmary Brown, a member of the Brown family. In addition to its crypt—the final repository for Brown and Hawkins—the Memorial includes works of art from Hawkins's private collection, including paintings by Angelica Kauffman , Peter Paul Rubens , Gilbert Stuart , Giovanni Battista Tiepolo , Benjamin West , and Eastman Johnson , among others. His collection of over 450 incunabula was relocated to the John Hay Library in 1990.

[ 74 ] Today the Memorial is home to Brown's Medieval Studies and Renaissance Studies programs.

The Walk [ edit ] The Walk, a landscaped pedestrian corridor, connects the Pembroke Campus to the main campus. It runs parallel to Thayer Street and serves as a primary axis of campus, extending from Ruth Simmons Quadrangle at its southern terminus to the Meeting Street entrance to the Pembroke Campus at its northern end.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] The walk is bordered by departmental buildings as well as the Lindemann Performing Arts Center and Granoff Center for the Creative Arts The corridor is home to public art including sculptures by Maya Lin and Tom Friedman .

[ 77 ] Pembroke campus [ edit ] Three dormitories, Metcalf Hall (1919), Andrews Hall (1947), and Miller Hall (1910), formed the heart of Pembroke College and now serve as freshman residences.

The Women's College in Brown University , known as Pembroke College, was founded in October 1891. Upon its 1971 merger with the College of Brown University, Pembroke's campus was absorbed into the larger Brown campus. The Pembroke campus is bordered by Meeting, Brown, Bowen, and Thayer Streets and sits three blocks north of Brown's central campus. The campus is dominated by brick architecture, largely of the Georgian and Victorian styles . The west side of the quadrangle comprises Pembroke Hall (1897), Smith-Buonanno Hall (1907), and Metcalf Hall (1919), while the east side comprises Alumnae Hall (1927) and Miller Hall (1910). The quadrangle culminates on the north with Andrews Hall (1947).

East Campus, centered on Hope and Charlesfield streets, originally served as the campus of Bryant University . In 1969, as Bryant was preparing to relocate to Smithfield, Rhode Island , Brown purchased their Providence campus for $5 million. The transaction expanded the Brown campus by 10 acres (40,000 m 2 ) and 26 buildings. In 1971, Brown renamed the area East Campus.

[ 78 ] Today, the area is largely used for dormitories.

Thayer Street runs through Brown's main campus. As a commercial corridor frequented by students, Thayer is comparable to Harvard Square or Berkeley's Telegraph Avenue .

Wickenden Street , in the adjacent Fox Point neighborhood, is another commercial street similarly popular among students.

Built in 1925, Brown Stadium —the home of the school's football team—is located approximately a mile and a half northeast of the university's central campus.

[ 79 ] Marston Boathouse, the home of Brown's crew teams, lies on the Seekonk River , to the southeast of campus. Brown's sailing teams are based out of the Ted Turner Sailing Pavilion at the Edgewood Yacht Club in adjacent Cranston .

Since 2011, Brown's Warren Alpert Medical School has been located in Providence's historic Jewelry District , near the medical campus of Brown's teaching hospitals, Rhode Island Hospital and the Women and Infants Hospital of Rhode Island . Other university facilities, including molecular medicine labs and administrative offices, are likewise located in the area.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] Brown's School of Public Health occupies a landmark modernist building along the Providence River . Other Brown properties include the 376-acre (1.52 km 2 ) Mount Hope Grant in Bristol, Rhode Island, an important Native American site noted as a location of King Philip's War . Brown's Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology Collection Research Center, particularly strong in Native American items, is located in the Mount Hope Grant.

Sustainability [ edit ] Brown has committed to "minimize its energy use, reduce negative environmental impacts, and promote environmental stewardship." [ 82 ] Since 2010, the university has required all new buildings meet LEED silver standards.

[ 83 ] Between 2007 and 2018, Brown reduced its greenhouse emissions by 27 percent; the majority of this reduction is attributable to the university's Thermal Efficiency Project which converted its central heating plant from a steam-powered system to a hot water-powered system.

[ 84 ] In 2020, Brown announced it had sold 90 percent of its fossil fuel investments as part of a broader divestment from direct investments and managed funds that focus on fossil fuels .

[ 85 ] In 2021, the university adopted the goal of reducing quantifiable campus emissions by 75 percent by 2025 and achieving carbon neutrality by 2040.

[ 86 ] Brown is a member of the Ivy Plus Sustainability Consortium, through which it has committed to best-practice sharing and the ongoing exchange of campus sustainability solutions along with other member institutions.

[ 87 ] According to the A. W. Kuchler U.S.

potential natural vegetation types, Brown would have a dominant vegetation type of Appalachian Oak ( 104 ) with a dominant vegetation form of Eastern Hardwood Forest ( 25 ).

[ 88 ] Academics [ edit ] The College [ edit ] Main article: College of Brown University Robinson Hall (1878) was designed by Walker and Gould in the Venetian Gothic style to house Brown's library.

Founded in 1764, The college is Brown's oldest school. About 7,200 undergraduate students are enrolled in the college [ when?

] , and 81 concentrations are offered. For the graduating class of 2020, the most popular concentrations were Computer Science, Economics, Biology, History, Applied Mathematics, International Relations, and Political Science. A quarter of Brown undergraduates complete more than one concentration before graduating.

[ 89 ] If the existing programs do not align with their intended curricular interests, undergraduates may design and pursue independent concentrations.

[ 90 ] Around 35 percent [ needs update ] of undergraduates pursue graduate or professional study immediately, 60 percent within 5 years, and 80 percent within 10 years.

[ 91 ] For the Class of 2009, 56 percent of all undergraduate alumni have since earned graduate degrees. Among undergraduate alumni who go on to receive graduate degrees, the most common degrees earned are J.D. (16%), M.D. (14%), M.A. (14%), M.Sc. (14%), and Ph.D. (11%). The most common institutions from which undergraduate alumni earn graduate degrees are Brown University, Columbia University , and Harvard University .

[ 92 ] The highest fields of employment for undergraduate alumni ten years after graduation are education and higher education (15%), medicine (9%), business and finance (9%), law (8%), and computing and technology (7%).

[ 92 ] Brown and RISD [ edit ] The List Art Center, built 1969–71, designed by Philip Johnson , houses Brown's Department of Visual Art and the David Winton Bell Gallery .

Since its 1893 relocation to College Hill, Rhode Island School of Design (RISD) has bordered Brown to its west. Since 1900, Brown and RISD students have been able to cross-register at the two institutions, with Brown students permitted to take as many as four courses at RISD to count towards their Brown degree.

[ 93 ] The two institutions partner to provide various student-life services and the two student bodies compose a synergy in the College Hill cultural scene.

Dual Degree Program [ edit ] After several years of discussion between the two institutions and several students pursuing dual degrees unofficially, Brown and RISD formally established a five-year dual degree program in 2007, with the first class matriculating in the fall of 2008.

[ 94 ] The Brown|RISD Dual Degree Program, among the most selective in the country, offered admission to 20 of the 725 applicants for the class entering in autumn 2020, for an acceptance rate of 2.7%.

[ 95 ] The program combines the complementary strengths of the two institutions, integrating studio art and design at RISD with Brown's academic offerings. Students are admitted to the Dual Degree Program for a course lasting five years and culminating in both the Bachelor of Arts (A.B.) or Bachelor of Science (Sc.B.) degree from Brown and the Bachelor of Fine Arts (B.F.A.) degree from RISD. Prospective students must apply to the two schools separately and be accepted by separate admissions committees. Their application must then be approved by a third Brown|RISD joint committee.

The Granoff Center , designed by Diller Scofidio + Renfro , hosts the annual Brown|RISD Dual Degree exhibition.

Admitted students spend the first year in residence at RISD completing its first-year Experimental and Foundation Studies curriculum while taking up to three Brown classes. Students spend their second year in residence at Brown, during which students take mainly Brown courses while starting on their RISD major requirements. In the third, fourth, and fifth years, students can elect to live at either school or off-campus, and course distribution is determined by the requirements of each student's unique combination of Brown concentration and RISD major. Program participants are noted for their creative and original approach to cross-disciplinary opportunities, combining, for example, industrial design with engineering, or anatomical illustration with human biology, or philosophy with sculpture, or architecture with urban studies. An annual "BRDD Exhibition" is a well-publicized and heavily attended event, drawing interest and attendees from the broader world of industry, design, the media, and the fine arts.

MADE Program [ edit ] In 2020, the two schools announced the establishment of a new joint Master of Arts in Design Engineering program. Abbreviated as MADE, the program intends to combine RISD's programs in industrial design with Brown's programs in engineering. The program is administered through Brown's School of Engineering and RISD's Architecture and Design Division.

[ 96 ] Theatre and playwriting [ edit ] Lyman Hall, built 1890–92, houses the Department of Theatre Arts and Performance Studies.

Brown's theatre and playwriting programs are among the best-regarded in the country.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Six Brown graduates have received the Pulitzer Prize for Drama ; Alfred Uhry '58, Lynn Nottage '86, Ayad Akhtar '93, Nilo Cruz '94, Quiara Alegría Hudes '04, and Jackie Sibblies Drury MFA '04.

[ 99 ] In American Theater magazine's 2009 ranking of the most-produced American plays, Brown graduates occupied four of the top five places—Peter Nachtrieb '97, Rachel Sheinkin '89, Sarah Ruhl '97, and Stephen Karam '02.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] The undergraduate concentration encompasses programs in theatre history, performance theory, playwriting, dramaturgy, acting, directing, dance, speech, and technical production. Applications for doctoral and master's degree programs are made through the University Graduate School. Master's degrees in acting and directing are pursued in conjunction with the Brown/Trinity Rep MFA program, which partners with the Trinity Repertory Company , a local regional theatre .

[ 102 ] In January 2025, The Brown/Trinity Rep Master of Fine Arts Programs in Acting and Directing indefinitely paused its new student admissions, effectively ending the program.

[ 103 ] Aerial view of the Brown University English department Writing programs [ edit ] Writing at Brown—fiction, non-fiction, poetry, playwriting, screenwriting, electronic writing, mixed media, and the undergraduate writing proficiency requirement—is catered for by various centers and degree programs, and a faculty that has long included nationally and internationally known authors. The undergraduate concentration in literary arts offers courses in fiction, poetry, screenwriting, literary hypermedia, and translation. Graduate programs include the fiction and poetry MFA writing programs in the literary arts department and the MFA playwriting program in the theatre arts and performance studies department. The non-fiction writing program is offered in the English department. Screenwriting and cinema narrativity courses are offered in the departments of literary arts and modern culture and media. The undergraduate writing proficiency requirement is supported by the Writing Center.

Author prizewinners [ edit ] Alumni authors take their degrees across the spectrum of degree concentrations, but a gauge of the strength of writing at Brown is the number of major national writing prizes won. To note only winners since the year 2000: Pulitzer Prize for Fiction -winners Jeffrey Eugenides '82 (2003), Marilynne Robinson '66 (2005), and Andrew Sean Greer '92 (2018); British Orange Prize -winners Marilynne Robinson '66 (2009) and Madeline Miller '00 (2012); Pulitzer Prize for Drama -winners Nilo Cruz '94 (2003), Lynn Nottage '86 (twice, 2009, 2017), Quiara Alegría Hudes '04 (2012), Ayad Akhtar '93 (2013), and Jackie Sibblies Drury MFA '04 (2019); Pulitzer Prize for Biography -winners David Kertzer '69 (2015) and Benjamin Moser '98 (2020); Pulitzer Prize for Journalism -winners James Risen '77 (2006), Gareth Cook '91 (2005), Tony Horwitz '80 (1995), Usha Lee McFarling '89 (2007), David Rohde '90 (1996), Kathryn Schulz '96 (2016), and Alissa J. Rubin '80 (2016); Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction -winner James Forman Jr.

'88 (2018); Pulitzer Prize for History -winner Marcia Chatelain PhD '08 (2021); Pulitzer Prize for Criticism -winner Salamishah Tillet MAT '97 (2022); and Pulitzer Prize for Poetry -winner Peter Balakian PhD '80 (2016) [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Computer science [ edit ] The Brown Computing Laboratory, designed by Philip Johnson Brown began offering computer science courses through the departments of Economics and Applied Mathematics in 1956 when it acquired an IBM machine. Brown added an IBM 650 in January 1958, the only one of its type between Hartford and Boston. In 1960, Brown opened its first dedicated computer building, the Brown University Computing Laboratory . The facility, designed by Philip Johnson , received an IBM 7070 computer the following year. The first undergraduate Computer Science degrees were awarded in 1974. Brown granted computer sciences full Departmental status in 1979. In 2009, IBM and Brown announced the installation of a supercomputer (by teraflops standards), the most powerful in the southeastern New England region.

[ 106 ] In the 1960s, Andries van Dam , along with Ted Nelson and Bob Wallace invented The Hypertext Editing Systems , HES and FRESS while at Brown. Nelson coined the word hypertext while Van Dam's students helped originate XML , XSLT , and related Web standards. Among the school's computer science alumni are principal architect of the Classic Mac OS , Andy Hertzfeld ; principal architect of the Intel 80386 and Intel 80486 microprocessors, John Crawford ; former CEO of Apple , John Sculley ; and digital effects programmer Masi Oka .

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] Other alumni include former CS department head at MIT, John Guttag ; software-defined networking pioneer Scott Shenker ; Workday founder, Aneel Bhusri ; MongoDB founder Eliot Horowitz ; Figma founders Dylan Field and Evan Wallace (the latter of whom also created esbuild ); OpenSea founder Devin Finzer ; and Edward D. Lazowska , professor and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Chair emeritus at the University of Washington .

[ 109 ] Between 2012 and 2018, the number of concentrators in CS tripled.

[ 110 ] In 2017, computer science overtook economics as the school's most popular undergraduate concentration.

[ 111 ] Applied mathematics [ edit ] Brown's program in applied mathematics was established in 1941 making it the oldest such program in the United States.

[ 10 ] [ 112 ] The division is highly ranked and regarded nationally.

[ 113 ] Among the 67 recipients of the Timoshenko Medal , 22 have been affiliated with Brown's applied mathematics division as faculty, researchers, or students.

[ f ] The Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World [ edit ] Greek Revival Rhode Island Hall (1840) on the Main Green is home to the Joukowsky Institute .

The Department of Egyptology and Assyriology in Wilbour Hall (1888). Wilbour Hall is named for Egyptologist Charles Edwin Wilbour (class of 1854).

Main article: Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World Established in 2004, the Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World is Brown's interdisciplinary research center for archeology and ancient studies. The institute pursues fieldwork, excavations, regional surveys, and academic study of the archaeology and art of the ancient Mediterranean, Egypt, and Western Asia from the Levant to the Caucasus .

[ 114 ] The institute has a very active fieldwork profile, with faculty-led excavations and regional surveys presently in Petra (Jordan), Abydos (Egypt), Turkey, Sudan, Italy, Mexico, Guatemala, Montserrat , and Providence.

The Joukowsky Institute's faculty includes cross-appointments from the departments of Egyptology, Assyriology, Classics, Anthropology, and History of Art and Architecture. Faculty research and publication areas include Greek and Roman art and architecture, landscape archaeology, urban and religious architecture of the Levant, Roman provincial studies, the Aegean Bronze Age, and the archaeology of the Caucasus . The institute offers visiting teaching appointments and postdoctoral fellowships which have, in recent years, included Near Eastern Archaeology and Art, Classical Archaeology and Art, Islamic Archaeology and Art, and Archaeology and Media Studies.

Egyptology and Assyriology Facing the Joukowsky Institute, across the Front Green, is the Department of Egyptology and Assyriology, formed in 2006 by the merger of Brown's departments of Egyptology and History of Mathematics. It is one of only a handful of such departments in the United States.

[ 115 ] The curricular focus is on three principal areas: Egyptology , Assyriology , and the history of the ancient exact sciences (astronomy, astrology, and mathematics). Many courses in the department are open to all Brown undergraduates without prerequisites and include archaeology, languages, history, and Egyptian and Mesopotamian religions , literature, and science. Students concentrating in the department choose a track of either Egyptology or Assyriology. Graduate-level study comprises three tracks to the doctoral degree: Egyptology, Assyriology, or the History of the Exact Sciences in Antiquity.

The Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs [ edit ] Main article: Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs The main building at the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs was designed by Rafael Viñoly in 2001 Stephen Robert Hall (2018) at the Watson Institute, was designed by Toshiko Mori The Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs, Brown's center for the study of global Issues and public affairs, is one of the leading institutes of its type in the country. The institute occupies facilities designed by Uruguayan architect Rafael Viñoly and Japanese architect Toshiko Mori . The institute was initially endowed by Thomas Watson Jr.

(Class of 1937), former Ambassador to the Soviet Union and longtime president of IBM .

Institute faculty and faculty emeritus include Italian prime minister and European Commission president Romano Prodi , [ 116 ] Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso , [ 117 ] Chilean president Ricardo Lagos Escobar , [ 118 ] Mexican novelist and statesman Carlos Fuentes , [ 119 ] Brazilian statesman and United Nations commission head Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro , [ 120 ] Indian foreign minister and ambassador to the United States Nirupama Rao , [ 121 ] American diplomat and Dayton Peace Accords author Richard Holbrooke (Class of 1962), [ 122 ] and Sergei Khrushchev , [ 123 ] editor of the papers of his father Nikita Khrushchev , leader of the Soviet Union .

The institute's curricular interest is organized into the principal themes of development, security, and governance—with further focuses on globalization, economic uncertainty, security threats, environmental degradation , and poverty. Six Brown undergraduate concentrations are hosted by the Watson Institute: Development Studies , International and Public Affairs, International Relations, Latin American and Caribbean Studies, Middle East Studies, Public Policy, and South Asian Studies. Graduate programs offered at the Watson Institute include the Graduate Program in Development (Ph.D.) and the Master of Public Affairs (M.P.A) Program. The institute also offers postdoctoral, professional development, and global outreach programming. In support of these programs, the institute houses various centers, including the Brazil Initiative, Brown-India Initiative, China Initiative, Middle East Studies Center, The Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies (CLACS), and the Taubman Center for Public Policy. In recent years, the most internationally cited product of the Watson Institute has been its Costs of War Project , first released in 2011 and continuously updated since. The project comprises a team of economists, anthropologists, political scientists, legal experts, and physicians, and seeks to calculate the economic costs, human casualties, and impact on civil liberties of the wars in Iraq , Afghanistan , and Pakistan since 2001.

[ 124 ] The School of Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Brown University School of Engineering The Brown University Engineering Research Center, completed in 2018 and designed by KieranTimberlake [ 125 ] Established in 1847, Brown's engineering program is the oldest in the Ivy League and the third oldest civilian engineering program in the country.

[ g ] In 1916, Brown's departments of electrical, mechanical, and civil engineering were merged into a single Division of Engineering. In 2010 the division was elevated to a School of Engineering.

[ 126 ] Engineering at Brown is especially interdisciplinary. The school is organized without the traditional departments or boundaries found at most schools and follows a model of connectivity between disciplines—including biology, medicine, physics, chemistry, computer science, the humanities, and the social sciences. The school practices an innovative clustering of faculties in which engineers team with non-engineers to bring a convergence of ideas.

Student teams have launched two CubeSats with the support of the School of Engineering. Brown Space Engineering developed EQUiSat a 1U satellite, and another interdisciplinary team developed SBUDNIC a 3U satellite.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] IE Brown Executive MBA Dual Degree Program [ edit ] Since 2009, Brown has developed an Executive MBA program in conjunction with one of the leading Business Schools in Europe, IE Business School in Madrid. This relationship has since strengthened resulting in both institutions offering a dual degree program.

[ 129 ] In this partnership, Brown provides its traditional coursework while IE provides most of the business-related subjects making a differentiated alternative program to other Ivy League's EMBAs.

[ 130 ] The cohort typically consists of 25–30 EMBA candidates from some 20 countries.

[ 131 ] Classes are held in Providence, Madrid , Cape Town and Online.

Pembroke Hall (1897) houses the administrative offices of the Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women .

The Pembroke Center [ edit ] Main article: Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women The Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women was established at Brown in 1981 by Joan Wallach Scott as an interdisciplinary research center on gender.

[ 132 ] The center is named for Pembroke College, Brown's former women's college, and is affiliated with Brown's Sarah Doyle Women's Center . The Pembroke Center supports Brown's undergraduate concentration in Gender and Sexuality Studies , post-doctoral research fellowships, the annual Pembroke Seminar, and other academic programs. It also manages various collections, archives, and resources, including the Elizabeth Weed Feminist Theory Papers and the Christine Dunlap Farnham Archive.

The Graduate School [ edit ] Main article: Brown University Graduate School Sayles Hall on the Main Green Brown introduced graduate courses in the 1870s and granted its first advanced degrees in 1888. The university established a Graduate Department in 1903 and a full Graduate School in 1927.

[ 133 ] With an enrollment of approximately 2,600 students, the school currently offers 33 and 51 master's and doctoral programs, respectively. The school additionally offers a number of fifth-year master's programs.

[ 134 ] Overall, admission to the Graduate School is most competitive with an acceptance rate averaging at approximately 9 percent in recent years.

Carney Institute for Brain Science [ edit ] Main article: Carney Institute for Brain Science The Robert J. & Nancy D. Carney Institute for Brain Science is Brown's cross-departmental neuroscience research institute . The institute's core focus areas include brain-computer interfaces and computational neuroscience ; additional areas of focus include research into mechanisms of cell death with the interest of developing therapies for neurodegenerative diseases .

The Carney Institute was founded by John Donoghue in 2009 as the Brown Institute for Brain Science and renamed in 2018 in recognition of a $100 million gift.

[ 135 ] The donation, one of the largest in the university's history, established the institute as one of the best-endowed university neuroscience programs in the country.

[ 136 ] Alpert Medical School [ edit ] Main article: Alpert Medical School The Alpert Medical School building on Richmond Street Established in 1811, Brown's Alpert Medical School is the fourth oldest medical school in the Ivy League.

[ 12 ] [ h ] In 1827, medical instruction was suspended by President Francis Wayland after the program's faculty declined to follow a new policy requiring students to live on campus. The program was reorganized in 1972; the first M.D. degrees from the new Program in Medicine were awarded to a graduating class of 58 students in 1975. In 1991, the school was officially renamed the Brown University School of Medicine, then renamed once more to Brown Medical School in October 2000.

[ 137 ] In January 2007, entrepreneur and philanthropist Warren Alpert donated $100 million to the school. In recognition of the gift, the school's name was changed to the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University.

In 2020, U.S. News & World Report ranked Brown's medical school the 9th most selective in the country, with an acceptance rate of 2.8%.

[ 138 ] U.S. News ranks the school 38th for research and 35th for primary care.

[ 139 ] Brown's medical school is known especially for its eight-year Program in Liberal Medical Education (PLME), an eight-year combined baccalaureate-M.D. medical program. Inaugurated in 1984, the program is one of the most selective and renowned programs of its type in the country, offering admission to only 2% of applicants in 2021.

[ 140 ] Since 1976, the Early Identification Program (EIP) has encouraged Rhode Island residents to pursue careers in medicine by recruiting sophomores from Providence College , Rhode Island College , the University of Rhode Island , and Tougaloo College . In 2004, the school once again began to accept applications from premedical students at other colleges and universities via AMCAS like most other medical schools. The medical school also offers M.D./PhD, M.D./ M.P.H.

and M.D./ M.P.P.

dual degree programs.

School of Public Health [ edit ] Main article: Brown University School of Public Health The primary building of the Brown University School of Public Health viewed from across the Providence River Brown's School of Public Health grew out of the Alpert Medical School's Department of Community Health and was officially founded in 2013 as an independent school.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] The school issues undergraduate (A.B., Sc.B.), graduate (M.P.H., Sc.M., A.M.), doctoral (Ph.D.), and dual-degrees (M.P.H./M.P.A., M.D./M.P.H.).

[ 143 ] Online programs [ edit ] The Brown University School of Professional Studies currently offers blended learning Executive master's degrees in Healthcare Leadership , Cyber Security, and Science and Technology Leadership.

[ 144 ] The master's degrees are designed to help students who have a job and life outside of academia to progress in their respective fields. The students meet in Providence every 6–7 weeks for a weekly seminar each trimester.

The university has also invested in MOOC development starting in 2013, when two courses, Archeology's Dirty Little Secrets and The Fiction of Relationship , both of which received thousands of students.

[ 145 ] However, after a year of courses, the university broke its contract with Coursera and revamped its online persona and MOOC development department. By 2017, the university released new courses on edx , two of which were The Ethics of Memory and Artful Medicine: Art's Power to Enrich Patient Care . In January 2018, Brown published its first "game-ified" course called Fantastic Places, Unhuman Humans: Exploring Humanity Through Literature , which featured out-of-platform games to help learners understand materials, as well as a story-line that immerses users into a fictional world to help characters along their journey.

[ 146 ] Admissions and financial aid [ edit ] Undergraduate admissions statistics 2021 entering class [ 147 ] Change vs.

2016 [ 148 ] Admit rate 4% ( +0.67) Yield rate 62.05% ( +1.25) Test scores middle 50% SAT EBRW 750–780 SAT Math 750–790 ACT Composite 34–36 High school GPA [ii] Top 10% 95% ( +4.7) Among students who chose to submit Among students whose school ranked Undergraduate [ edit ] Undergraduate admission to Brown University is considered "most selective" by U.S. News & World Report .

[ 149 ] For the undergraduate class of 2026, Brown received 50,649 applications—the largest applicant pool in the university's history and a 9% increase from the prior year. Of these applicants, 2,560 were admitted for an acceptance rate of 5.0%, the lowest in the university's history.

[ 150 ] In 2021, the university reported a yield rate of 69%.

[ 151 ] For the academic year 2019–20 the university received 2,030 transfer applications, of which 5.8% were accepted.

[ 152 ] Brown's admissions policy is currently stipulated need-blind for all domestic first-year applicants, [ 153 ] but will be extended to international first-year applicants starting with the Class of 2029.

[ 154 ] In 2017, Brown announced that loans would be eliminated from all undergraduate financial aid awards starting in 2018–2019, as part of a new $30 million campaign called the Brown Promise .

[ 155 ] In 2016–17, the university awarded need-based scholarships worth $120.5 million. The average need-based award for the class of 2020 was $47,940.

[ 156 ] Graduate [ edit ] In 2017, the Graduate School accepted 11% of 9,215 applicants.

[ 157 ] In 2021, Brown received a record 948 applications for roughly 90 spots in its Master of Public Health Degree.

[ 158 ] In 2020, U.S. News ranked Brown's Warren Alpert Medical School the 9th most selective in the country, with an acceptance rate of 2.8 percent.

[ 159 ] Rankings [ edit ] Academic rankings National Forbes [ 160 ] 18 U.S. News & World Report [ 161 ] 13 (tie) Washington Monthly [ 162 ] 30 WSJ /College Pulse [ 163 ] 36 Global ARWU [ 164 ] 100–150 QS [ 165 ] 69 THE [ 166 ] 58 U.S. News & World Report [ 167 ] 150 (tie) USNWR graduate school rankings (2022) [ 168 ] Engineering 53 Medicine (Primary Care) 14 Medicine (Research) 35 USNWR departmental rankings (2022) [ 168 ] Biological Sciences 37 Biostatistics 13 Chemistry 62 Computer Science 26 Earth Sciences 12 Economics 20 English 13 History 18 Mathematics 14 Physics 28 Political Science 41 Psychology 23 Public Affairs 62 Public Health 16 Sociology 20 Brown University is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education .

[ 169 ] For their 2021 rankings, The Wall Street Journal/Times Higher Education ranked Brown 5th in the "Best Colleges 2021" edition.

[ 170 ] The Forbes magazine annual ranking of "America's Top Colleges 2022"—which ranked 600 research universities, liberal arts colleges and service academies—ranked Brown 19th overall and 18th among universities.

[ 171 ] U.S. News & World Report ranked Brown 9th among national universities in its 2023 edition.

[ 172 ] The 2022 edition also ranked Brown 2nd for undergraduate teaching, 25th in Most Innovative Schools, and 14th in Best Value Schools.

[ 173 ] Washington Monthly ranked Brown 30th in 2024 among 438 national universities in the U.S. based on its contribution to the public good, as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting public service.

[ 174 ] In 2022, U.S. News & World Report ranks Brown 129th globally.

In 2014, Forbes magazine ranked Brown 7th on its list of "America's Most Entrepreneurial Universities." [ 175 ] The Forbes analysis looked at the ratio of "alumni and students who have identified themselves as founders and business owners on LinkedIn" and the total number of alumni and students. LinkedIn particularized the Forbes rankings, placing Brown third (between MIT and Princeton ) among "Best Undergraduate Universities for Software Developers at Startups." LinkedIn's methodology involved a career-path examination of "millions of alumni profiles" in its membership database.

[ 176 ] In 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2021 the university produced the most Fulbright recipients of any university in the nation.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] [ 179 ] Brown has also produced the 7th most Rhodes Scholars of all colleges and universities in the United States.

[ 180 ] In 2025 the university ranked 229 of 257 top colleges in free speech rankings by the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression and "College Pulse," after ranking at 69 in 2024 and at 114 in 2022/2023.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ] Research [ edit ] Brown is a member of the Association of American Universities since 1933 and is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities – Very High Research Activity".

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] In FY 2017, Brown spent $212.3 million on research and was ranked 103rd in the United States by total R&D expenditure by National Science Foundation .

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] In 2021 Brown's School of Public Health received the 4th most funding in NIH awards among schools of public health in the U.S.

[ 188 ] Student life [ edit ] Undergraduate demographics as of Fall 2023 [ 189 ] Race and ethnicity Total White 36% Asian 20% Hispanic 12% International student 12% Black 9% Two or more races 8% Unknown 2% Economic diversity Low-income [ i ] 14% Affluent [ j ] 86% Spring weekend [ edit ] Main article: Spring Weekend Established in 1950, Spring Weekend is an annual spring music festival for students. Historical performers at the festival have included Ella Fitzgerald , Dizzy Gillespie , Ray Charles , Bob Dylan , Janis Joplin , Bruce Springsteen , and U2. More recent headliners include Kendrick Lamar , Young Thug , Daniel Caesar , Anderson .Paak , Mitski , Aminé , and Mac DeMarco .

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] Since 1960, Spring Weekend has been organized by the student-run Brown Concert Agency.

Many Spring Weekend events are hosted on Brown's Main Green.

[ 194 ] Residential and Greek societies [ edit ] Approximately 12 percent of Brown students participate in Greek Life .

[ 195 ] The university recognizes thirteen active Greek organizations. Since the early 1950s, all Greek organizations on campus have been located in Wriston Quadrangle.

[ 196 ] Societies and clubs [ edit ] Ladd Observatory , built 1890–1891, is used by Brown Space Engineering, a student group focused on aerospace engineering .

The earliest societies at Brown were devoted to oration and debate. The Pronouncing Society is mentioned in the diary of Solomon Drowne , class of 1773, who was voted its president in 1771.

[ 13 ] The organization seems to have disappeared during the American Revolutionary War . Subsequent societies include the Misokosmian Society (est. 1798 and renamed the Philermenian Society), the Philandrian Society (est. 1799), the United Brothers (1806), the Philophysian Society (1818), and the Franklin Society (1824). Societies served social as well as academic purposes, with many supporting literary debate and amassing large libraries.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] Older societies generally aligned with Federalists while younger societies generally leaned Republican .

[ 13 ] Societies remained popular into the 1860s, after which they were largely replaced by fraternities.

[ 198 ] The Cammarian Club in 1910 The Cammarian Club was at first a semi-secret society that "tapped" 15 seniors each year. In 1915, self-perpetuating membership gave way to popular election by the student body, and thenceforward the club served as the de facto undergraduate student government. The organization was dissolved in 1971 and ultimately succeeded by a formal student government.

Societas Domi Pacificae , known colloquially as "Pacifica House", is a present-day, self-described secret society. It purports a continuous line of descent from the Franklin Society of 1824, citing a supposed intermediary "Franklin Society" traceable in the nineteenth century.

Student organizations [ edit ] See also: Category:Brown University organizations There are over 300 registered student organizations on campus with diverse interests. The Student Activities Fair, during the orientation program, provides first-year students the opportunity to become acquainted with a wide range of organizations. A sample of organizations includes: The Brown Daily Herald Brown Debating Union The Brown Derbies Brown International Organization Brown Journal of World Affairs The Brown Jug The Brown Noser Brown Political Review The Brown Spectator BSR Brown University Band Brown University Orchestra Chinese Students and Scholars Association The College Hill Independent Critical Review Ivy Film Festival Jabberwocks Production Workshop Strait Talk Starla and Sons Students for Sensible Drug Policy WBRU LGBTQ+ [ edit ] In 2023, 38% of Brown's students identified as being LGBTQ+, in a poll by The Brown Daily Herald .

[ 199 ] The 2023 LGBTQ+ self-identification level was an increase, up from 14% LGBT identification in 2010.

[ 199 ] "Bisexual" was the most common answer amongst LGBTQ+ respondents to the poll.

[ 199 ] Resource centers [ edit ] The Sarah Doyle Women's Center Brown has several resource centers on campus. The centers often act as sources of support as well as safe spaces for students to explore certain aspects of their identity. Additionally, the centers often provide physical spaces for students to study and have meetings. Although most centers are identity-focused, some provide academic support as well.

The Brown Center for Students of Color (BCSC) is a space that provides support for students of color . Established in 1972 at the demand of student protests, the BCSC encourages students to engage in critical dialogue, develop leadership skills, and promote social justice .

[ 200 ] The center houses various programs for students to share their knowledge and engage in discussion. Programs include the Third World Transition Program, the Minority Peer Counselor Program, the Heritage Series, and other student-led initiatives. Additionally, the BCSC hopes to foster community among the students it serves by providing spaces for students to meet and study.

The Sarah Doyle Women's Center aims to provide a space for members of the Brown community to examine and explore issues surrounding gender .

[ 201 ] The center was named after one of the first women to attend Brown, Sarah Doyle . The center emphasizes intersectionality in its conversations on gender, encouraging people to see gender as present and relevant in various aspects of life. The center hosts programs and workshops in order to facilitate dialogue and provide resources for students, faculty, and staff.

[ 202 ] Other centers include the LGBTQ Center, the Undocumented, First-Generation College and Low-Income Student (U-FLi) Center, [ 203 ] and the Curricular Resource Center.

Activism [ edit ] 1968 Black Student Walkout [ edit ] On December 5, 1968, several Black women from Pembroke College initiated a walkout in protest of an atmosphere at the colleges described by Black students as a "stifling, frustrating, [and] degrading place for Black students" after feeling the colleges were non-responsive to their concerns. In total, 65 Black students participated in the walkout. Their principal demand was to increase Black student enrollment to 11% of the student populace, in an attempt to match that of the proportion in the US. This ultimately resulted in a 300% increase in Black enrollment the following year, but some demands have yet to be met.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] Divestment from South Africa [ edit ] In the mid-1980s, under student pressure, the university divested from certain companies involved in South Africa. Some students were still unsatisfied with partial divestment and began a fast in Manning Chapel and the university disenrolled them. In April 1987, "dozens" of students interrupted a university corporation meeting, leading to 20 being put on probation.

[ 206 ] Protest of speech by NYPD Commissioner Ray Kelly [ edit ] In 2013, students and Providence community members protested and disrupted a speech by then-NYPD Commissioner Raymond Kelly . The incident was cited by Greg Lukianoff , president of the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression , as a high-profile example of a form of student protest questioning conceptions of free speech.

[ 207 ] The incident was also the subject of a short critical documentary in 2016 by Brown alumnus Rob Montz.

[ 208 ] Israel-Gaza protests [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: developments regarding the Israel-Gaza protests. You can help by adding to it .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( May 2025 ) In early November 2023, twenty students of Jewish background staged a sit in at University hall, resulting in their arrests. The students were protesting the Gaza war and calling for a ceasefire, as well as for the university to divest from companies that "facilitate the 'Israeli military occupation' in Gaza." In early December 2023, forty-one more students held a sit-in with similar demands, resulting in more arrests by the university. Nineteen students participated in an eight-day hunger strike preceding a corporation meeting in early February 2024 with the demand to present their case to corporation members.

[ 209 ] Athletics [ edit ] Main article: Brown Bears The 1879 Brown baseball varsity, with W.E. White seated second from right. White's appearance in an 1879 major league game may be the first person of color to play professional baseball, 68 years before Jackie Robinson .

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] [ 212 ] [ 213 ] Brown is a member of the Ivy League athletic conference, which is categorized as a Division I (top-level) conference of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).

The Brown Bears has one of the largest university sports programs in the United States, sponsoring 32 varsity intercollegiate teams.

[ 214 ] Brown's athletic program is one of the U.S. News & World Report top 20—the "College Sports Honor Roll"—based on breadth of the program and athletes' graduation rates.

Athletic facilities Brown Stadium (opened 1925) Nelson Fitness Center (opened 2012) Marston Boathouse, on the Seekonk River Meehan Auditorium (opened 1961) Brown's newest varsity team is women's rugby, promoted from club-sport status in 2014. Brown women's rowing has won 7 national titles between 1999 and 2011.

[ 215 ] Brown men's rowing perennially finishes in the top 5 in the nation, most recently winning silver, bronze, and silver in the national championship races of 2012, 2013, and 2014. The men's and women's crews have also won championship trophies at the Henley Royal Regatta and the Henley Women's Regatta . Brown's men's soccer is consistently ranked in the top 20 [ 216 ] and has won 18 Ivy League titles overall; recent [ when?

] soccer graduates play professionally in Major League Soccer and overseas.

Brown football, under its most successful coach historically, Phil Estes , won Ivy League championships in 1999, 2005, and 2008. high-profile alumni of the football program include former Houston Texans head coach Bill O'Brien ; former Penn State football coach Joe Paterno , Heisman Trophy namesake John W. Heisman , and Pollard Award namesake Fritz Pollard .

Brown women's gymnastics won the Ivy League tournament in 2013 and 2014. The Brown women's sailing team has won 5 national championships, most recently in 2019 [ 217 ] while the coed sailing team won 2 national championships in 1942 and 1948.

[ 218 ] Both teams are consistency ranked in the top 10 in the nation.

[ 219 ] The first intercollegiate ice hockey game in America was played between Brown and Harvard on January 19, 1898.

[ 220 ] The first university rowing regatta larger than a dual-meet was held between Brown, Harvard, and Yale at Lake Quinsigamond in Massachusetts on July 26, 1859.

[ 221 ] [ 13 ] Brown also supports competitive intercollegiate club sports, including ultimate frisbee . The men's ultimate team, Brownian Motion, has won four national championships, in 2000, 2005, 2019 and 2024.

[ 222 ] Notable people [ edit ] Alumni [ edit ] This section contains an excessive or unencyclopedic gallery of images .

Please help improve it by removing unnecessary or indiscriminate images , and by moving relevant images beside adjacent text in accordance with Wikipedia's Manual of Style .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section may contain excessive or irrelevant examples .

Please help improve it by removing less pertinent examples and elaborating on existing ones.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: List of Brown University alumni Alumni in politics and government include U.S. Secretary of State John Hay (1852), U.S. Secretary of State and U.S. Attorney General Richard Olney (1856), Chief Justice of the United States and U.S. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes (1881), Governor of Wyoming Territory and Nebraska Governor John Milton Thayer (1841), Rhode Island Governor Augustus Bourn (1855), Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal '92, U.S. Senator Maggie Hassan '80 of New Hampshire, Delaware Governor Jack Markell '82, Rhode Island Representative David Cicilline '83, Minnesota Representative Dean Phillips '91, 2020 Presidential candidate and entrepreneur Andrew Yang '96, DNC Chair Tom Perez '83, diplomat Richard Holbrooke '62, and career United States diplomat W. Stuart Symington '74.

[ 223 ] Prominent alumni in business and finance include philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr.

(1897), managing director of McKinsey & Company and "father of modern management consulting " Marvin Bower '25, former Chair of the Federal Reserve and current U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet Yellen '67, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim '82, Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan '81, CNN founder Ted Turner '60, IBM chairman and CEO Thomas Watson Jr.

'37, co-founder of Starwood Capital Group Barry Sternlicht '82, Apple Inc.

CEO John Sculley '61, Blackberry Ltd.

CEO John S. Chen '78, Facebook CFO David Ebersman '91, and Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi '91.

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] Companies founded by Brown alumni include CNN , The Wall Street Journal , Searchlight Pictures , Netgear , W Hotels , Workday , Warby Parker , Casper , Figma , ZipRecruiter , and Cards Against Humanity .

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] Alumni in the arts and media include actors Emma Watson '14, John Krasinski '01, Daveed Diggs '04, [ 231 ] Julie Bowen '91, Tracee Ellis Ross '94, and Jessica Capshaw '98; NPR program host Ira Glass '82; singer-composer Mary Chapin Carpenter '81; humorist and Marx Brothers screenwriter S. J. Perelman '25; novelists Nathanael West '24, Jeffrey Eugenides '83, Edwidge Danticat (MFA '93), and Marilynne Robinson '66; and composer and synthesizer pioneer Wendy Carlos '62, journalist James Risen '77; political pundit Mara Liasson ; MSNBC hosts Alex Wagner '99 and Chris Hayes '01; New York Times publisher A. G. Sulzberger '03, and magazine editor John F. Kennedy Jr.

'83.

Important figures in the history of education include the father of American public school education Horace Mann (1819), civil libertarian and Amherst College president Alexander Meiklejohn , first president of the University of South Carolina Jonathan Maxcy (1787), Bates College founder Oren B. Cheney (1836), University of Michigan president (1871–1909) James Burrill Angell (1849), University of California president (1899–1919) Benjamin Ide Wheeler (1875), and Morehouse College 's first African-American president John Hope (1894).

Alumni in the computer sciences and industry include architect of Intel 386 , 486 , and Pentium microprocessors John H. Crawford '75, inventor of the first silicon transistor Gordon Kidd Teal '31, MongoDB founder Eliot Horowitz '03, Figma founder Dylan Field , and Macintosh developer Andy Hertzfeld '75.

Other notable alumni include "Lafayette of the Greek Revolution " and its historian Samuel Gridley Howe (1821), NASA head during first seven Apollo missions Thomas O. Paine '42, sportscaster Chris Berman '77, Houston Texans head coach Bill O'Brien '92, 2018 Miss America Cara Mund '16, Penn State football coach Joe Paterno '50, Heisman Trophy namesake John W. Heisman '91, distinguished professor of law Cortney Lollar '97, Former SEC Commissioner Annette Nazareth ‘78, Olympic and world champion triathlete Joanna Zeiger , royals and nobles such as Prince Rahim Aga Khan , Prince Faisal bin Al Hussein of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Princess Leila Pahlavi of Iran '92, Prince Nikolaos of Greece and Denmark , Prince Nikita Romanov , Princess Theodora of Greece and Denmark , Prince Jaime of Bourbon-Parma, Duke of San Jaime and Count of Bardi , Prince Ra'ad bin Zeid , Lady Gabriella Windsor , Prince Alexander von Fürstenberg , Countess Cosima von Bülow Pavoncelli , and her half-brother Prince Alexander-Georg von Auersperg .

Nobel Laureate alumni include humanitarian Jerry White '87 ( Peace , 1997), biologist Craig Mello '82 ( Physiology or Medicine , 2006), economist Guido Imbens (AM '89, PhD '91; Economic Sciences , 2021), and economist Douglas Diamond '75 ( Economic Sciences , 2022).

Notable Brown University alumni include: Horace Mann , class of 1819, regarded as the father of American public education John Hay , class of 1858, private secretary to Abraham Lincoln and U.S. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes , class of 1881, Chief Justice of the United States and U.S. Secretary of State John D. Rockefeller Jr.

, class of 1897, philanthropist and developer of Rockefeller Center Ted Turner , class of 1960, founder of CNN , TBS , and WCW and philanthropist Janet Yellen , class of 1967, the first woman to serve as Chair of the Federal Reserve and U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Maggie Hassan , class of 1980, U.S. Senator of New Hampshire Brian Moynihan , class of 1981, chairman and CEO of Bank of America John F. Kennedy Jr.

, class of 1983, lawyer, journalist, and magazine publisher Laura Linney , class of 1986, actress, recipient of 4 Emmy Awards and 3 time Oscar nominee Julie Bowen , class of 1991, actress, six time Emmy Award nominee Tracee Ellis Ross , class of 1994, actress, model, comedienne, and television host Chris Hayes , class of 2001, political commentator and host of All In with Chris Hayes John Krasinski , class of 2001, actor, director, producer, and screenwriter Daveed Diggs , class of 2004, actor, rapper, Grammy Award and Tony Award for Best Actor in a Featured Role in a Musical recipient Emma Watson , class of 2014, actress and model Faculty [ edit ] Main article: List of Brown University faculty Among Brown's past and present faculty are seven Nobel Laureates : Lars Onsager ( Chemistry , 1968), Leon Cooper ( Physics , 1972), George Snell ( Physiology or Medicine , 1980), George Stigler ( Economic Sciences , 1982), Henry David Abraham ( Peace , 1985), Vernon L. Smith ( Economic Sciences , 2002), and J. Michael Kosterlitz ( Physics , 2016).

Notable past and present faculty include biologists Anne Fausto-Sterling (Ph.D. 1970) and Kenneth R. Miller (Sc.B. 1970); computer scientists Robert Sedgewick and Andries van Dam ; economists Hyman Minsky , Glenn Loury , George Stigler , Mark Blyth , and Emily Oster ; historians Gordon S. Wood and Joan Wallach Scott ; mathematicians David Gale , David Mumford , Mary Cartwright , and Solomon Lefschetz ; physicists Sylvester James Gates and Gerald Guralnik . Faculty in literature include Chinua Achebe , Ama Ata Aidoo , Julio Ortega , and Carlos Fuentes . Among Brown's faculty and fellows in political science, and public affairs are the former prime minister of Italy and former EU chief, Romano Prodi ; former president of Brazil , Fernando Cardoso ; former president of Chile , Ricardo Lagos ; and son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev , Sergei Khrushchev . Other faculty include philosopher Martha Nussbaum , author Ibram X. Kendi , and public health doctor Ashish Jha .

In popular culture [ edit ] Main article: Brown University in popular culture Mentions of Brown  in fiction and popular culture include the following.

[ 232 ] Family Guy character Brian Griffin is a Brown alumnus.

[ 233 ] The O.C.

' s main character Seth Cohen is denied acceptance to Brown while his girlfriend Summer Roberts is accepted.

[ 234 ] See also [ edit ] Renewable energy portal List of Brown University statues Brown University Alma Mater Josiah S. Carberry Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ The school's founding was preceded by that of Harvard Medical School and Dartmouth Medical School . While Yale chartered a medical school in 1810, instruction did not begin for another three years.

^ Vartan Gregorian (1998), Edmund Morgan (2000), Donald Kagan (2002), Marilynne Robinson (2012), Gordon S. Wood (2010), Krista Tippett (2014), Natalie Zemon Davis (2012) ^ George W. Potter , Martin Bernheimer , Kirk Scharfenberg , Alfred Uhry , Tony Horwitz , Joan D. Hedrick , David S. Rohde , Steven Millhauser , Nilo Cruz , Jeffrey Eugenides , Marilynne Robinson , Gareth Cook , James Risen , Usha Lee McFarling , Lynn Nottage , Quiara Alegría Hudes , Ayad Akhtar , David Kertzer , Alissa J. Rubin , Peter Balakian , Kathryn Schulz , Lynn Nottage , Andrew Sean Greer , James Forman Jr.

, Jackie Sibblies Drury , Benjamin Moser , Marcia Chatelain , Salamishah Tillet , Percival Everett .

[ 20 ] ^ John D. Rockefeller Jr.

(1897), Sidney Frank (Class of 1942), Ted Turner (Class of 1960), Wilbur Edwin "Ed" Bosarge (1969), Orlando Bravo (1970), Jonathan M. Nelson (1977), Paul Kazarian (1980), Barry Sternlicht (1982), Glenn Creamer (1984), Aneel Bhusri (1988), Chung Yong-jin (1994), Cho Hyun-Sang [ ko ] (1994), [ 21 ] Carl Ferdinand Oetker [ de ] (1996), [ 22 ] Andres Santo Domingo (2000), İpek Kıraç (2007), [ 23 ] Evan Wallace (2012), [ 24 ] Akash Ambani (2013), Devin Finzer (2013), Dylan Field (Class of 2013½), [ 24 ] Roberta Anamaria Civita [ 25 ] ^ Richard Benson , Joanna Scott (1985), Richard Foreman (1959), John C. Bonifaz (1989), Lucy Blake (1981), Michael H. Dickinson (1984), Jim Yong Kim (1982), Nawal M. Nour (1984), Sarah Ruhl (1997, 2001), Jennifer Richeson (1994), Lynn Nottage (1986), Edwidge Danticat (1993), Kelly Benoit-Bird (1998), Sebastian Ruth (1997), William Seeley (1993), Donald Antrim (1981), David Lobell (2000), Ben Lerner (2001, 2003), Lauren Redniss (1996), Greg Asbed (1985), Monica Muñoz Martinez (2006), Rina Foygel Barber (2005) ^ Maurice Anthony Biot (1962), William Prager (1966), Hillel Poritsky (1967), Albert E. Green (1974), Chia-Chiao Lin (1975), Erastus H. Lee (1976), George F. Carrier (1978), Daniel C. Drucker (1983), Eli Sternberg (1985), Ronald Rivlin (1987), Bernard Budiansky (1989), James R. Rice (1994), Rodney J. Clifton (2000), L. Ben Freund (2003), Morton Gurtin (2004), Kenneth L. Johnson (2006), Alan Needleman (2011), Subra Suresh (2012), Robert McMeeking (2014), Viggo Tvergaard (2017), Ares J. Rosakis (2018), Huajian Gao (2021) ^ The program was preceded by that of the Rensselaer Institute (1824) and Union College (1845) ^ The school's founding was preceded by that of Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons , Harvard Medical School , and Dartmouth Medical School . While Yale chartered a medical school in 1810, instruction did not begin for another three years.

^ The percentage of students who received an income-based federal Pell grant intended for low-income students.

^ The percentage of students who are a part of the American middle class at the bare minimum.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "1834: Third College Seal" .

Brown University Timeline . Providence, Rhode Island: Brown University . Retrieved July 26, 2024 .

("Sigillum Universitatis Brunensis" in Latin), ^ "Brown University Admission Facts and Figures" . Brown University. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012 . Retrieved October 8, 2014 .

^ As of October 6, 2024.

"With 11.3% return in 2024, Brown endowment provides record support for academic priorities" . October 4, 2024 . Retrieved October 6, 2024 .

^ "Brown sees 2.2% increase in net assets, 2.7% return on endowment in 2023 fiscal year" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

^ "Brian T. Moynihan, Chancellor" .

The Corporation of Brown University . Brown University . Retrieved May 26, 2025 .

^ a b c d e "Brown at a Glance" .

Brown University . Retrieved July 22, 2025 .

^ "Brown University Athletics & Recreation Brand Guidelines" (PDF) . June 17, 2022 . Retrieved June 25, 2022 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Bicentennial celebration" . Brown University.

Archived from the original on May 28, 2010 . Retrieved July 9, 2009 .

^ Bronson, Walter Cochrane (1914).

The History of Brown University, 1764–1914 . Providence: The University. p. 30.

ISBN 978-0-405-03697-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Suzuki, Jeff (August 27, 2009).

Mathematics in Historical Context . MAA. p. 374.

ISBN 978-0-88385-570-6 .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2021 .

^ Maugin, Gerard A. (April 8, 2013).

Continuum Mechanics Through the Twentieth Century: A Concise Historical Perspective . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-94-007-6353-1 .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2021 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

^ a b Parsons, Charles W; Rhode Island Historical Society (1881).

The medical school formerly existing in Brown University, its professors and graduates . Providence, R.I.: S.S. Rider.

OCLC 1038137370 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Bronson, Walter Cochrane (1914).

The History of Brown University, 1764–1914 . Providence: The University. p. 147.

ISBN 978-0-405-03697-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Skidmore, Lydia Defusto, Alex (May 24, 2019).

"Open Curriculum at 50" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Curriculum" . Brown University.

Archived from the original on July 20, 2014 . Retrieved December 27, 2014 .

^ Méras, Phyllis (2012).

Explorer's Guide Rhode Island . Katherine Palmer Imbrie (6 ed.). Woodstock, VT. p. 42.

ISBN 978-1-58157-786-0 .

OCLC 918312532 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ NEWS, BILL RAPPLEYE, NBC 10 (October 13, 2017).

"Homes on Benefit Street in Providence neglected" .

WJAR .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 14, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Brown admits record-low 5% of applicants to class of 2026" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved January 1, 2023 .

^ "Top 100 – Lowest Acceptance Rates" .

U.S. News & World Report . 2021.

^ Brennan, Elizabeth A. (1999).

Who's who of Pulitzer Prize winners . Elizabeth C. Clarage. Phoenix, Ariz.: Oryx Press.

ISBN 1-57356-111-8 .

OCLC 40126493 .

^ "Cho Hyun-Sang" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2021 . Retrieved October 25, 2021 .

^ "Carl Ferdinand Oetker" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on April 22, 2021 . Retrieved April 22, 2021 .

^ "Ipek Kirac" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on April 22, 2021 . Retrieved April 22, 2021 .

^ a b Martin, Iain.

"Adobe's $20 Billion Takeover Of Figma Makes Cofounders Billionaires" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2022 . Retrieved September 15, 2022 .

^ "Roberta Anamaria Civita" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on April 22, 2021 . Retrieved April 22, 2021 .

^ Greene, Richard Henry (1890).

Official Positions Held by Alumni of Yale, Princeton, Columbia, Brown, University of Pennsylvania, and by the Men Educated at William and Mary College: With a Comparative Statement, Including a Resumé from the Material Gathered Concerning Harvard College for the N. E. Hist. and Gen. Register, July, 1887, by Chief Justice Wm. A. Richardson, LL.D., the Papers on Official Positions Held by Alumni of Yale, College of New Jersey, University of Pennsylvania, Columbia College and Brown University . D. Clapp & Son, printers. p. 34.

^ "Brown at a Glance" .

Brown University .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2021 . Retrieved August 2, 2021 .

^ "Olympians" .

Brown University Athletics .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2021 . Retrieved July 27, 2021 .

^ a b Stiles, Ezra (1916). Dexter, Franklin Bowditch (ed.).

Extracts From the Itineraries and Other Miscellanies of Ezra Stiles, D. D., Ll. D., 1755–1794: With a Selection From His Correspondence .

New Haven, Connecticut : Yale University Press . p. 25.

^ Dexter (1916) , p. 25.

^ History Archived July 27, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Note, however, that three-fourths of the original trustees of the University of Pennsylvania were affiliated with the Church of England as was the first provost, William Smith, an Anglican priest. The second provost, John Ewing, was a Presbyterian minister, and a succession of five ordained Anglicans headed the university for all but fifteen years between 1802 and 1868, the last year that an ordained minister was the chief administrator.

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Charter" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ International Dictionary of University Histories . Carol J. Summerfield, Mary Elizabeth Devine, Anthony Levi. Chicago. 1998. p. 56.

ISBN 978-1-134-26217-5 .

OCLC 864899539 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b c Phillips, Janet M (1992).

Brown University:A Short History (PDF) . Providence, RI: Office of University Relations, Brown University.

OCLC 30582651 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Beebe, Elaine (July 21, 2008).

"The small-town birthplace of Brown University" . Brown University.

Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Guild, Reuben Aldridge (1867).

History of Brown University: With Illustrative Documents . Providence Press Company, printers. p. 233.

OCLC 770834 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | University Hall" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2018 . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Szep, Jason.

Brown exhibit traces links to slave trade Archived July 19, 2020, at the Wayback Machine Reuters, March 29, 2007.

^ University, Brown (1914).

Historical Catalogue of Brown University, 1764–1914 . The University. p. 11.

Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Howell, Ricardo (2001, July). " Slavery, the Brown Family of Providence and Brown University Archived 2008-04-09 at the Wayback Machine ", Brown University News Service ^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Manning, James" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Evans, Farrell (February 3, 2021).

"America's First Black Regiment Gained Their Freedom by Fighting Against the British" .

HISTORY .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2021 . Retrieved April 5, 2021 .

^ Lewin, Tamar (March 2, 2012).

"A Princeton Dean Is Named to Lead Brown" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Plomin, Joe (October 16, 2001).

"Ivy league appoints first black president" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2014 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ a b Leubsdorf, Ben (March 2, 2005).

"The New Curriculum Then" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2017 . Retrieved November 9, 2017 .

^ Ira magaziner with Elliot Maxwell; et al.

"Draft of a working paper for education at Brown University" . Brown University Library.

Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 . Retrieved December 6, 2007 .

^ Mitchell, Martha (1993).

"Curriculum" .

Encyclopedia Brunoniana . Providence, Rhode Island: Brown University Library.

OCLC 31085279 .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2006 . Retrieved December 6, 2007 .

^ Skidmore, Lydia Defusto, Alex (May 24, 2019).

"Open Curriculum at 50" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Grade Inflation and the Brown Grading System: 2001–2002 Sheridan Center Research Project" .

The Teaching Exchange . Sheridan Center for Teaching, Brown University.

Archived from the original on February 4, 2007 . Retrieved December 5, 2007 .

; Lutts, Chloe (March 15, 2006).

"Plus/minus fails key test: Faculty could still vote to change grading system" .

Brown Daily Herald . Archived from the original on March 28, 2009 . Retrieved December 11, 2005 .

^ "Slavery and Justice" (PDF) .

www.brown.edu .

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 30, 2016 . Retrieved June 29, 2019 .

^ Belluck, Pam (October 19, 2006).

"Panel Suggests Brown U. Atone for Ties to Slavery" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

^ a b Lehrer-Small, Asher (October 16, 2019).

"Lehrer-Small '20: Revisiting the Slavery and Justice Report" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on June 2, 2020 . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

^ Gimenes, Livia (July 29, 2020).

"Brown to fully fund $10 million endowment for Providence Public Schools" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

^ Berry, Deborah Barfield (December 17, 2019).

"The US is grappling with its history of slavery. The blueprint for dealing with it? Some say Brown University" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2021 .

^ Cellini, Richard (January 20, 2019).

"How Universities Can Respond to Their Slavery Ties" .

www.chronicle.com .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2020 . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

^ "Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Secures Major Settlement with Brown University" . The White House . Retrieved August 1, 2025 .

^ "Brown 'functionally inaccessible' for trans students after Trump deal" .

www.advocate.com . Retrieved August 6, 2025 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Seal" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

^ Levitz, Jennifer (February 13, 2012).

"Providence Urges Brown to Pay Up" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2012 . Retrieved November 15, 2022 .

^ Chafee, Louisa (September 9, 2013).

" 'Starchitects' design cutting-edge buildings" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ a b R. M. Kliment & Frances Halsband Architects (February 2006).

"Campus Heritage at Brown University" (PDF) . Brown University.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved December 6, 2007 .

^ Rasmussen, Amy (September 19, 2012).

"From swamp to Simmons: Lincoln, the legacy" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

^ Mitchell, Martha. (1993). " Van Wickle Gates Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ." Encyclopedia Brunoniana ^ Ok, Katherine (March 21, 2019).

"Hay Library's Special Collections offer more than a human skin-bound book" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

^ "From Martha Mitchell's Encyclopedia Brunoniana : John Hay Library" . Brown.edu.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2012 . Retrieved April 1, 2012 .

^ "The Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection :: Brown University Library" . Dl.lib.brown.edu.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2010 . Retrieved February 22, 2010 .

^ "Anne S.K. Brown Military Collection – Brown University Library" .

library.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2021 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

^ Johnson, M.L. (January 7, 2006).

"Some of nation's best libraries have books bound in human skin" . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on December 31, 2015 . Retrieved June 6, 2012 .

^ "EBSCO Publishing and the John Carter Brown Library Join Forces to Offer Free Historical Database" .

PRWeb . Archived from the original on September 20, 2010 . Retrieved May 1, 2021 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | John Carter Brown Library" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2019 . Retrieved April 11, 2021 .

^ BBC News, "Bay Psalm Book is most expensive printed work at $14.2m," BBC Archived July 20, 2018, at the Wayback Machine ; Sothebys.com Archived September 24, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ "64 Mexican incunables and counting | John Carter Brown Library" .

jcblibrary.org .

Archived from the original on August 12, 2021 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

^ Goldberg, Daniel (March 7, 2019).

"Haffenreffer Museum begins complete inventory of one million objects" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2019 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Annmary Brown Memorial" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on January 23, 2019 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ Corey, Patrick (February 1, 2008).

"Straight Path on Walk opens to public" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Geller, Sarah (December 8, 2006).

"Plans for the Walk begin to take shape" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ Rubinton, Noel (October 20, 2017).

"Where to See (Really See) the Art of Maya Lin" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2018 . Retrieved December 5, 2018 .

^ Wrenn, John (March 18, 2021).

"Wrenn GS: College Hill's Grim Reaper" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on March 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ Geh, Victoria; Li, Evan; Puma, Patrick; Du, Hong Sen.

"The 'inescapable' effect of off-campus athletics: How the distance to Baker has shaped Columbia's recruiting, performance, and sports culture" .

Columbia Daily Spectator .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ Elizabeth Abbott (December 13, 2011).

"Providence Puts Focus on Making a Home for Knowledge" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2024 . Retrieved June 12, 2012 .

^ Bai, Corrine (January 30, 2019).

"South Street Landing move improves staff experience" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ "Department of Facilities Management, Energy and Environmental Advisory Committee" . Brown University. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008 . Retrieved May 28, 2008 .

^ Raymond, Mark (November 12, 2010).

"U. moves toward greener campus" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ Reed, Allie (September 13, 2018).

"University on track to meet sustainability goals" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ Pender, Caelyn (March 4, 2020).

"Brown sells 90 percent of fossil fuel investments" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ Pender, Caelyn (March 5, 2021).

"University launches strategic sustainability plan" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ name="Leadership Through Partnership"> "Leadership Through Partnership" . Yale Sustainability . Retrieved November 17, 2023 .

^ "U.S. Potential Natural Vegetation, Original Kuchler Types, v2.0 (Spatially Adjusted to Correct Geometric Distortions)" .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2019 . Retrieved August 14, 2019 .

^ "Degrees and Completions Factbook" .

Brown University Office of Institutional Research .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2021 .

^ Aratani, Lauren (April 6, 2015).

"Independent concentrations reflect students' interdisciplinary interests" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Brown University.

"Brown University Office of Admission facts and figures" . Brown.edu. Archived from the original on June 6, 2012 . Retrieved April 1, 2012 .

^ a b "Undergraduate Alumni Outcomes" .

Office of Institutional Research | Brown University .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ University, Brown (1900).

Annual Report of the President to the Corporation of Brown University .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2021 .

^ "07-013 (Brown/RISD Joint Degree)" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2007 . Retrieved July 6, 2018 .

^ Kubzansky, Will (March 26, 2020).

"Brown admits 6.9 percent of applicants amid COVID-19 crisis" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

^ Li, Aubrey (November 4, 2020).

"Brown collaborates with RISD to create new joint master's program" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2021 .

^ Abramovitch, Seth (June 10, 2019).

"Top 25 Graduate Schools for an Acting Degree, Ranked" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2021 . Retrieved April 1, 2021 .

^ "The Best 25 College Drama Programs Around the World" .

The Hollywood Reporter . June 8, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 10, 2021 . Retrieved April 1, 2021 .

^ Roberts, Bella (April 27, 2017).

"Pulitzer winners discuss MFA Program at University" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on June 6, 2017 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

^ Kathy Borchers, "Brown University turning out one exceptional playwright after another," Associated Press ( Providence Journal ), December 18, 2009; "Most-Produced Plays - Playbill.com" . Archived from the original on September 3, 2014 . Retrieved 2014-08-28 .

^ "Brown alumna, emeritus faculty member capture Pulitzers for drama, poetry | Brown University" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2019 . Retrieved April 16, 2019 .

^ Molly Lederer, "Trinity Rep is still shining after 50 years," East Side Monthly , Oct. 2013, p. 17 ^ "Brown, Trinity indefinitely pause admissions to MFA program" .

The Brown Daily Herald . Retrieved April 21, 2025 .

^ Lutts, Chloe (July 16, 2006).

"Four Brown alums win 2006 Pulitzers" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2021 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

^ Ryan, Cate (April 16, 2019).

"University alums win four Pulitzer Prizes" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2020 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

^ "Brown, IBM Unveil Multimillion-Dollar Supercomputer – News from Brown" .

brown.edu .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2015 . Retrieved July 24, 2015 .

^ Hess, Abigail Johnson (November 21, 2019).

"Former Apple CEO John Sculley: 'The way we are educated is going to radically change' " .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on May 19, 2021 . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ Myers, Marc (December 17, 2019).

"Masi Oka Found a Hollywood Solution to His Math Problem" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2021 . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ "Aneel Bhusri" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2021 . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ McCormick, Jango (December 6, 2018).

"Computer science department plans expansion" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ Wang, Sarah (September 14, 2017).

"Computer science surpasses economics as most popular concentration" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ Greenberg, John L.; Goodstein, Judith R. (December 23, 1983).

"Theodore von Kármán and Applied Mathematics in America" (PDF) .

Science .

222 (4630): 1300– 1304.

Bibcode : 1983Sci...222.1300G .

doi : 10.1126/science.222.4630.1300 .

PMID 17773321 .

S2CID 19738034 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 24, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2021 .

^ "Best Applied Math Programs – Top Science Schools – US News Rankings" . October 10, 2021. Archived from the original on October 10, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2021 .

^ Lader, Mary-Catherine (November 18, 2004).

"University plans interdisciplinary approach for new archaeology institute" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2021 .

^ Lutts, Chloe (November 9, 2005).

"Nation's only Egyptology dept. set to expand, but details not set in stone" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2022 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

^ Brown.edu Archived September 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Brown.edu" . Archived from the original on February 22, 2019 . Retrieved September 11, 2016 .

^ Brown.edu Archived April 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Social Fabric: Global Migration, Local Exclusions, and the New Iberoamerican Agenda" . Watson Institute. April 6, 2011.

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 9, 2015 .

^ Brown.edu Archived September 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Meera and Vikram Gandhi Fellows" . Brown University. Archived from the original on March 9, 2015 . Retrieved March 9, 2015 .

^ "Brown University community mourns loss of Richard C. Holbrooke, alumnus and career diplomat" . Brown University.

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 9, 2015 .

^ "Sergei Khrushchev Recalls the Cuban Missile Crisis on BBC" . Watson Institute. October 15, 2012.

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 9, 2015 .

^ Ismay, John (September 8, 2020).

"At Least 37 Million People Have Been Displaced by America's War on Terror" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2021 . Retrieved April 1, 2021 .

^ Defusto, Lydia (October 23, 2017).

"Engineering Research Center opens early" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2018 . Retrieved April 1, 2021 .

^ Ember, Sydney (July 26, 2010).

"Corporation approves engineering school at May meeting" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2022 . Retrieved April 1, 2021 .

^ Schornstein, Benjamin.

"Student-built satellite returns after two and a half years in space" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2022 . Retrieved August 5, 2022 .

^ Sandlow, Haley.

"Student-led team delays launch of satellite to June 2022" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2022 . Retrieved August 5, 2022 .

^ Brown's website (October 2014).

"IE Brown Executive MBA" . Brown University News Service. Archived from the original on November 7, 2014.

^ Clark, Patrick (May 23, 2014).

"Brown University Gets Into the MBA Game" .

Bloomberg.com . Bloomberg L.P.

Archived from the original on March 8, 2016 . Retrieved March 9, 2015 .

^ "IE Brown Executive MBA – Faqs – IE Brown Executive MBA" .

iebrown.com . Archived from the original on December 17, 2014 . Retrieved July 24, 2015 .

^ Hinds, Katherine (1985).

"Joan Wallach Scott: Breaking New Ground for Women" .

Change .

17 (4): 48– 53.

doi : 10.1080/00091383.1985.9940534 .

ISSN 0009-1383 .

JSTOR 40164355 .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2022 . Retrieved April 1, 2021 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Graduate School" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2021 .

^ Weissmann, Elena (September 16, 2015).

"Fifth-year master's programs see rise in enrollment, expand to new depts" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2016 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

^ Miller, G. Wayne.

"Brown University gets $100M gift for neuroscience institute" .

providencejournal.com .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Renken, Elena (May 24, 2019).

"Brain science blooms at Brown" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ "History of the Brown Medical School" . Med.brown.edu.

Archived from the original on May 4, 2013 . Retrieved June 6, 2012 .

^ Smith-Barrow, Delece (March 27, 2014).

"10 Medical Schools With the Lowest Acceptance Rates" . U.S. News & World Report LP. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015 . Retrieved August 25, 2017 .

^ "Best Medical Schools (Primary Care) Ranked in 2019 – US News Rankings" . Grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com.

Archived from the original on August 8, 2017 . Retrieved December 15, 2017 .

^ Kubzansky, Will (April 6, 2021).

"Brown admits record-low 5.4 percent of applicants to the class of 2025" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2021 . Retrieved April 11, 2021 .

^ February 14; Orenstein 401-863-1862, 2013 Media contact: David.

"Brown creates School of Public Health" .

news.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2021 . Retrieved February 5, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Miller, Rhonda (July 13, 2013).

"Brown launches public-health school" .

Providence Business News .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2022 . Retrieved March 1, 2021 .

^ Wren, Kayli (September 28, 2016).

"Brown becomes first in country to offer four-year joint MD-MPA program" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2016 . Retrieved April 1, 2021 .

^ Brown School of Professional Studies , archived from the original on April 13, 2018 , retrieved May 13, 2018 ^ "Brown launches two free online courses" .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2018 . Retrieved May 13, 2018 .

^ BrownX , archived from the original on May 14, 2018 , retrieved May 13, 2018 ^ "Brown University Common Data Set 2020–2021" (PDF) . 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 8, 2021.

^ "Brown University Common Data Set 2014–2015" (PDF) . 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 5, 2020.

^ "Brown University" .

U.S. News & World Report . 2021.

Archived from the original on December 5, 2017 . Retrieved December 5, 2017 .

^ "Brown admits record-low 5% of applicants to class of 2026" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

^ Kubzansky, Will (July 26, 2021).

"A 'waiting game': life on Brown's waitlist during an uncertain admissions season" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2021 . Retrieved July 27, 2021 .

^ "Common Data Set 2019–2020" (PDF) .

brown.edu .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 23, 2021 . Retrieved February 3, 2021 .

^ "Need Blind Admission | Financial Aid" .

www.brown.edu . Brown University . Retrieved November 2, 2019 .

^ "Financial Aid for International Applicants" .

www.brown.edu . Brown University . Retrieved February 17, 2024 .

^ "Brown to eliminate loans from University undergraduate aid packages in 2018–19" . Brown University. December 7, 2017. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018 . Retrieved January 9, 2018 .

^ "Home – Financial Aid" . Brown University.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2014 . Retrieved October 8, 2014 .

^ "Facts About Brown" . Brown University.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2014 . Retrieved October 8, 2014 .

^ "As public health dominates public conversation, Brown receives record number of MPH applications" . March 10, 2021.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2021.

^ "10 Medical Schools With the Lowest Acceptance Rates" .

U.S. News & World Report . Archived from the original on March 16, 2017 . Retrieved August 27, 2017 .

^ "America's Top Colleges 2024" .

Forbes . September 6, 2024 . Retrieved September 10, 2024 .

^ "2024-2025 Best National Universities Rankings" .

U.S. News & World Report . September 23, 2024 . Retrieved November 22, 2024 .

^ "2024 National University Rankings" .

Washington Monthly . August 25, 2024 . Retrieved August 29, 2024 .

^ "2025 Best Colleges in the U.S." The Wall Street Journal /College Pulse . September 4, 2024 . Retrieved September 6, 2024 .

^ "2024 Academic Ranking of World Universities" . ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. August 15, 2024 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 .

^ "QS World University Rankings 2026" .

Quacquarelli Symonds . June 19, 2025 . Retrieved June 19, 2025 .

^ "World University Rankings 2025" .

Times Higher Education . October 9, 2024 . Retrieved June 19, 2025 .

^ "2025-2026 Best Global Universities Rankings" .

U.S. News & World Report . June 17, 2025 . Retrieved June 17, 2025 .

^ a b "Brown University Graduate Programs" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2022 . Retrieved March 29, 2022 .

^ Rhode Island Institutions – NECHE , New England Commission of Higher Education , archived from the original on May 12, 2021 , retrieved May 26, 2021 ^ "Best Colleges 2021: Explore the Full WSJ/THE College Ranking List" .

The Wall Street Journal . September 17, 2020.

ISSN 0099-9660 .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2021 . Retrieved September 21, 2020 .

^ "Brown University" .

Forbes . August 15, 2019.

Archived from the original on April 22, 2016 . Retrieved September 12, 2019 .

^ "2021 Best National University Rankings" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2017 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

^ "Brown University Overall Rankings" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2021 . Retrieved March 1, 2021 .

^ "2024 National University Rankings" .

Washington Monthly . Retrieved February 28, 2025 .

^ Liyan Chen.

"Startup Schools: America's Most Entrepreneurial Universities" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2015 . Retrieved July 24, 2015 .

^ "LinkedIn.com" .

^ "Top Producers of Fulbright U.S. Scholars and Students, 2020–21" .

www.chronicle.com . February 15, 2021.

Archived from the original on April 5, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2021 .

^ "Brown ranked nation's No. 2 producer of Fulbright winners for 2019–20" .

Brown University .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2021 .

^ "Brown is nation's top Fulbright-producing university, U.S. State Department data shows" .

Brown University .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2022 . Retrieved March 2, 2022 .

^ "Universities by Number of Rhodes Scholars" .

WorldAtlas . November 26, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 7, 2022 . Retrieved December 7, 2022 .

^ "Free Speech Rankings" .

rankings.thefire.org . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

^ "2024 College Free Speech Rankings | The Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression" .

www.thefire.org . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

^ "2022-2023 College Free Speech Rankings | The Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression" .

www.thefire.org . Retrieved February 16, 2025 .

^ "Brown University" .

www.aau.edu . Association of American Universities (AAU).

Archived from the original on July 18, 2020 . Retrieved July 18, 2020 .

^ "Carnegie Classifications Institution Lookup" .

carnegieclassifications.iu.edu . Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.

Archived from the original on July 18, 2020 . Retrieved July 18, 2020 .

^ "Rankings by total R&D expenditures" .

nsf.gov . National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics.

Archived from the original on January 13, 2017 . Retrieved July 18, 2020 .

^ "NSF – NCSES Academic Institution Profiles – Brown University" .

ncsesdata.nsf.gov . National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics.

Archived from the original on July 18, 2020 . Retrieved July 18, 2020 .

^ Nietzel, Michael T.

"Johns Hopkins Tops List Of Leading Universities For NIH Funding In 2021" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2022 . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

^ "College Scorecard: Brown University" .

College Scorecard .

United States Department of Education . Retrieved July 15, 2025 .

^ Sullivan, Connor (March 20, 2018).

"Anderson .Paak, NAO to headline Spring Weekend" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Spring Weekend" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2019 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

^ Michael, Katherine Ok, Nicholas (April 23, 2020).

"The ghosts of Spring Weekends past" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Brown Concert Agency announces 2019 Spring Weekend lineup" .

The Brown Daily Herald . Retrieved February 4, 2023 .

^ "The ghosts of Spring Weekends past" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on December 31, 2021 . Retrieved December 31, 2021 .

^ Teng, Spencer Schultz, Emily (April 6, 2020).

"Spring 2020 Herald poll reflects student perspectives, experiences" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Fraternities" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2021 . Retrieved March 29, 2021 .

^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Franklin Society" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ a b "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Philermenian Society" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ a b c Barnett, Sofia; Doherty, Ryan (June 24, 2023).

"LGBTQ+ student self-identification has doubled at Brown since 2010, according to Herald polling data" . The Brown Daily Herald . Retrieved July 10, 2023 .

^ "Frequently Asked Questions" .

Brown Center for Students of Color . Brown University.

Archived from the original on November 23, 2014 . Retrieved November 17, 2014 .

^ "Welcome to the Sarah Doyle Women's Center" .

Sarah Doyle Women's Center . Brown University.

Archived from the original on December 2, 2014 . Retrieved November 26, 2014 .

^ "Guiding Philosophies" .

Sarah Doyle Women's Center . Brown University.

Archived from the original on October 12, 2014 . Retrieved November 26, 2014 .

^ "Undocumented, First-Generation College, and Low-Income Student Center" .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2020 . Retrieved August 3, 2020 .

^ "TWC History at Brown | Brown Center for Students of Color" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2020 . Retrieved September 8, 2020 .

^ Podugu, Trisha Thacker, Katherine Bennett, Priyanka (December 7, 2018).

"Students commemorate legacy, impact of 1968 walkout" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on June 10, 2021 . Retrieved September 8, 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "The Big Issue: Monetary Morality," Brown Alumni Monthly , Sept.-Oct. 2021, p. 16-17 ^ "In a Polarized Climate, Free-Speech Warriors Seize the Spotlight" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . March 19, 2017 . Retrieved March 3, 2025 .

^ Patinkin, Mark.

"Brown gets a lesson on political correctness" .

The Providence Journal . Retrieved March 3, 2025 .

^ "Forty-One Brown Students Arrested during Anti-Israel Sit-In on Campus — National Review" .

apple.news . Retrieved December 12, 2023 .

^ Robert Siegel, "Black Baseball Pioneer William White's 1879 Game," National Public Radio, broadcast January 30, 2004 (audio at npr.org) ^ Stefan Fatsis, "Mystery of Baseball: Was William White Game's First Black?" Wall Street Journal , January 30, 2004 (online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB107541676333815810) ^ Peter Morris and Stefan Fatsis, "Baseball's Secret Pioneer: William Edward White, the first black player in major-league history," Slate , February 4, 2014 ^ Rick Harris, Brown University Baseball: A Legacy of the game (Charleston: The History Press, 2012), pp. 41–3 ^ "Brown University Athletics – Official Athletics Website" .

Brown University Athletics .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2021 . Retrieved March 12, 2021 .

^ "National Champions (Teams)" .

Brown . Archived from the original on May 17, 2018 . Retrieved May 16, 2018 .

^ "Brown Men's College Soccer | News | Scores | Standings | Rankings" .

TopDrawerSoccer.com .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2021 . Retrieved July 2, 2021 .

^ "ICSA | Inter-collegiate Sailing Association" .

collegesailing.org .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved May 27, 2019 .

^ "ICSA | Inter-collegiate Sailing Association" .

collegesailing.org .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved May 27, 2019 .

^ "ICSA | Inter-collegiate Sailing Association" .

collegesailing.org .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2020 . Retrieved May 27, 2019 .

^ "Harvard 1897–98 Men's Ice Hockey Schedule" .

Harvard University .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2012 . Retrieved August 6, 2011 .

^ Robert B. Johnson, A History of Rowing in America (1871), pp. 60–1 ^ "2000 College" .

USAultimate.org .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2015 . Retrieved March 9, 2015 .

^ "Symington, W. Stuart" . U.S. Department of State.

^ Hansell, Saul (August 8, 2005).

"Spinoff of Expedia Comes at Tough Time for Its Sector" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2014 . Retrieved August 28, 2017 .

(subscription required) ^ "Dara Khosrowshahi: Executive Profile & Biography" , BusinessWeek ^ Rosenberg, Jerry Martin (1982).

Inside the Wall Street Journal: The History and the Power of Dow Jones & Company and America's Most Influential Newspaper . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-02-604860-6 .

^ "Out Of China" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

^ Mac, Ryan (January 6, 2014).

"Tech Exec Aneel Bhusri Becomes A Billionaire As Workday Shares Soar" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 19, 2021 .

^ Albert-Deitch, Cameron (January 2, 2018).

"Why These Casper Co-Founders Swear by Their Morning Routine (Hint: It's Not Just Sleep)" .

Inc.com .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 20, 2021 .

^ Heft-Luthy, Sam (October 17, 2012).

"Two alums develop risque card game" .

Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on January 30, 2021 . Retrieved January 24, 2021 .

^ "Something Great" .

Brown Alumni Magazine . August 31, 2015.

Archived from the original on January 1, 2018 . Retrieved June 9, 2017 .

^ Shapira, Ian (February 9, 1998).

"Vanity Fair names Brown most elite, explores stereotypes of Ivy League" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 1, 2015 .

^ Driver, Ben (April 26, 2012).

"The Not-So-Far-Fetched Fictitious Alumni and Attendees of the Ivy League, Part I of II" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2015 . Retrieved March 5, 2015 .

^ Alvarez, Ana (April 19, 2010).

"Is Brown's popularity a passing trend or here to stay?" .

The Brown Daily Herald .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 5, 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brown University .

Official website Brown University Athletics – Official Athletics Website v t e Brown University Schools College Graduate School Medical Engineering Public Health Centers Annenberg Institute Arts Institute Carney Institute ICERM Joukowsky Institute Pembroke Center Political Theory Project Watson Institute Athletics Teams Football Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Sailing Men's rowing Venues Gouse Field Marvel Gymnasium Meehan Auditorium Murray Stadium Pizzitola Sports Center Stevenson Field Campus Buildings Statues Angell Street Andrews House Annmary Brown Memorial Bell Gallery Computing Laboratory Corliss–Brackett House Granoff Center Haffenreffer Museum Hay Library Joseph Haile House John Carter Brown Library Ladd Observatory Lindemann Performing Arts Center Nightingale–Brown House Jerimoth Hill Rockefeller Library Sayles Hall Sciences Library Slavery Memorial South Street Landing Thayer Street University Hall Van Wickle Gates Wickenden Street History History Open Curriculum In popular culture Alumni Faculty Presidents Coat of Arms Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection Josiah S. Carberry Student Life Alma Mater WBRU Brown Student & Community Radio Program in Liberal Medical Education International Mentoring Program Spring Weekend Publications Brown Daily Herald Brown Journal of World Affairs The Brown Jug The Brown Noser The College Hill Independent Cardinal Points Critical Review Encyclopedia Brunoniana Modernist Journals Project Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Brown Political Review The Brown Spectator Studies in Comparative International Development Women Writers Project Organizations Band Bear Necessities Bootstrap Brownbrokers Center for Students of Color Debating Union Derbies Ivy Film Festival Jabberwocks Orchestra Production Workshop Rhode Island Innovative Policy Lab Rites and Reason Theatre Sarah Doyle Women's Center Societas Domi Pacificae Zeta Delta Xi Category Links to related articles v t e Presidents of Brown University Manning (1765–1791) Fobes # (1786) Howell # (1791–1792) Maxcy (1792–1802) Messer (1802–1826) Wayland (1827–1855) Sears (1855–1867) Caswell (1868–1872) Robinson (1872–1889) Andrews (1889–1898) Faunce (1899–1929) Barbour (1929–1937) Wriston (1937–1955) Keeney (1955–1966) Heffner (1966–1969) Hornig (1970–1976) Swearer (1977–1988) Gregorian (1989–1997) Gee (1998–2000) Blumstein # (2000–2001) Simmons (2001–2012) Paxson (2012–present) # denotes interim president v t e City of Providence Areas Downtown Smith Hill Education Providence Public School District Time Squared Academy Moses Brown School La Salle Academy Lincoln School Providence Hebrew Day School Brown University Providence College Transportation Crawford Street Bridge Rhode Island T. F. Green International Airport (near Providence) Media The Providence Journal Providence Business News Landmarks Fox Point Hurricane Barrier Rhode Island State House Roger Williams Medical Center This list is incomplete.

v t e Colleges and universities in Rhode Island Public institutions Community College of Rhode Island Naval War College Rhode Island College University of Rhode Island Private institutions Brown University Bryant University Johnson & Wales University New England Institute of Technology Providence College Rhode Island School of Design Roger Williams University Salve Regina University Professional schools Alpert Medical School Roger Williams University School of Law v t e Colonial colleges Brown Columbia Dartmouth Harvard Penn Princeton Rutgers William & Mary Yale v t e Ivy League Institutions Brown University Columbia University Cornell University Dartmouth College Harvard University University of Pennsylvania Princeton University Yale University Teams Brown Bears Columbia Lions Cornell Big Red Dartmouth Big Green Harvard Crimson Penn Quakers Princeton Tigers Yale Bulldogs Competitions Baseball Basketball (men's) Basketball (women's) Fencing Rugby Soccer (men's) Soccer (women's) Schools Business schools Law schools Medical schools Public policy schools Related topics Big Three Ivy Council Nude posture photos Public Ivy Southern Ivy Take Ivy Defunct Digital Network v t e Association of American Universities Public Arizona Arizona State California Berkeley Davis Irvine Riverside Los Angeles San Diego Santa Barbara Santa Cruz Colorado Florida Georgia Tech Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Maryland McGill Michigan Michigan State Minnesota Missouri New York Buffalo Stony Brook North Carolina Ohio State Oregon Pennsylvania State Pittsburgh Purdue Rutgers South Florida Texas Texas A&M Toronto Utah Virginia Washington Wisconsin Private Boston U Brandeis Brown Caltech Carnegie Mellon Case Western Reserve Chicago Columbia Cornell Dartmouth Duke Emory George Washington Harvard Johns Hopkins Miami MIT Northwestern Notre Dame NYU Penn Princeton Rice Rochester Southern California Stanford Tufts Tulane Vanderbilt Washington St. Louis Yale v t e Laidlaw Scholars Network Universities Brown Cambridge Columbia Cornell Duke Durham EPFL Georgetown Hong Kong Imperial Leeds LSE Oxford St Andrews TCD Toronto Tufts UCL Business Schools Columbia HEC Paris IE London Saïd v t e QuestBridge partner institutions Amherst Barnard Boston C Boston U Bowdoin Brown Caltech Carleton Case Western Reserve Chicago Claremont McKenna Colby Colgate Colorado Columbia Cornell Dartmouth Davidson Denison Duke Emory Grinnell Hamilton Haverford Holy Cross Johns Hopkins Macalester MIT Middlebury Northwestern Notre Dame Oberlin Pennsylvania Pomona Princeton Rice Scripps Skidmore Smith Southern California Stanford Swarthmore Tufts Vanderbilt Virginia Vassar Washington and Lee Washington St. Louis Wellesley Wesleyan Williams Yale v t e Coalition of Urban and Metropolitan Universities American University Arizona State University Augsburg University Barnard College Baylor University Brown University Buffalo State University California State University, Dominguez Hills California State University, Los Angeles California State University, Northridge California State University, Sacramento California State University, San Bernardino California State University, San Marcos Case Western Reserve University Central Connecticut State University Clayton State University Community College of Philadelphia Coppin State University Dallas College DePaul University Drexel University Duquesne University Fairleigh Dickinson University Florida Atlantic University Florida International University George Washington University Georgetown University Georgia Tech Guilford College Hunter College Indiana University Northwest Indiana University Indianapolis Indiana University South Bend Johns Hopkins University Kean University Leeds Beckett University Lone Star College Loyola University Chicago Loyola University Maryland Macalester College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Medgar Evers College Medical College of Wisconsin Metropolitan Community College Metropolitan State University Michigan State University Montclair State University Morgan State University The New School New York University Northeastern Illinois University Northeastern University Oakland University Ohio State University Pace University Portland State University Purdue University Fort Wayne Purdue University Northwest Rochester Institute of Technology Rollins College Rutgers University–Camden Rutgers University–Newark Saint Louis University Saint Paul College San Diego State University Stanford University Stockton University Swarthmore College Syracuse University Temple University Towson University Tulane University University of Akron University of Arkansas at Little Rock University of Baltimore University of Central Florida University of Central Oklahoma University of Chicago University of Colorado Denver University of Connecticut University of Dayton University of Denver University of Houston University of Houston–Downtown University of Kansas Medical Center University of Louisville University of Maryland, Baltimore University of Maryland Baltimore County University of Massachusetts Boston University of Massachusetts Lowell University of Michigan–Dearborn University of Michigan–Flint University of Minnesota University of Missouri Extension and Engagement University of Missouri–Kansas City University of Missouri–St. Louis University of Nebraska at Omaha University of Nevada-Las Vegas University of North Carolina at Charlotte University of North Carolina at Greensboro University of North Texas at Dallas University of Pennsylvania University of Pittsburgh University of San Diego University of South Carolina Upstate University of Tennessee at Chattanooga University of Texas at Dallas University of Texas at El Paso University of Texas Rio Grande Valley University of Utah University of the District of Columbia University of the Western Cape Vanderbilt University Virginia Commonwealth University Wagner College Washington State University Tri-Cities Washington University in St. Louis Weber State University West Chester University Xavier University of Louisiana v t e ECAC Hockey Teams Brown Bears men women Clarkson Golden Knights men women Colgate Raiders men women Cornell Big Red men women Dartmouth Big Green men women Harvard Crimson men women Princeton Tigers men women Quinnipiac Bobcats men women Rensselaer Engineers men women St. Lawrence Saints men women Union Garnet Chargers men women Yale Bulldogs men women Venues Meehan Auditorium (Brown) Cheel Arena (Clarkson) Class of 1965 Arena (Colgate) Lynah Rink (Cornell) Thompson Arena (Dartmouth) Bright Hockey Center (Harvard) Hobey Baker Memorial Rink (Princeton) M&T Bank Arena (Quinnipiac) Houston Field House (Rensselaer) Appleton Arena (St. Lawrence) Achilles Rink (Union) Ingalls Rink (Yale) Herb Brooks Arena (Men's tournament) Men's awards All-ECAC Hockey Team Player of the Year Rookie of the Year Tim Taylor Award (Coach of the Year) Best Defensive Defenseman Best Defensive Forward Ken Dryden Award (Best Goaltender) Student-Athlete of the Year Wayne Dean Sportsmanship Award Most Outstanding Player in Tournament All-Tournament Team Women's awards Women's champions Men's seasons 1961–62 1962–63 1963–64 1964–65 1965–66 1966–67 1967–68 1968–69 1969–70 1970–71 1971–72 1972–73 1973–74 1974–75 1975–76 1976–77 1977–78 1978–79 1979–80 1980–81 1981–82 1982–83 1983–84 1984–85 1985–86 1986–87 1987–88 1988–89 1989–90 1990–91 1991–92 1992–93 1993–94 1994–95 1995–96 1996–97 1997–98 1998–99 1999–00 2000–01 2001–02 2002–03 2003–04 2004–05 2005–06 2006–07 2007–08 2008–09 2009–10 2010–11 2011–12 2012–13 2013–14 2014–15 2015–16 2016–17 2017–18 2018–19 2019–20 2020–21 2021–22 2022–23 2023–24 2024–25 v t e Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges BU Terriers Brown Bears Columbia Lions Cornell Big Red Dartmouth Big Green Georgetown Hoyas Harvard Crimson Holy Cross Crusaders MIT Engineers Navy Midshipmen Northeastern Huskies Penn Quakers Princeton Tigers Rutgers Scarlet Knights Syracuse Orange Wisconsin Badgers Yale Bulldogs v t e National Intercollegiate Rugby Association Division 1 Army Black Knights Brown Bears Dartmouth Big Green Harvard Crimson Long Island Sharks Mount St. Mary's Mountaineers Navy Midshipmen Princeton Tigers Quinnipiac Bobcats Sacred Heart Pioneers Division 2 American International Yellow Jackets Molloy Lions New Haven Chargers Notre Dame College Falcons Post Eagles Queens Royals West Chester Golden Rams Division 3 Bowdoin Polar Bears Colby–Sawyer Chargers Guilford Quakers Manhattanville Valiants New England College Pilgrims Norwich Cadets University of New England Nor'easters Vermont State Castleton Spartans Future teams Adrian Bulldogs Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Portugal Israel Catalonia Geographic MusicBrainz place Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7cf4n
Cached time: 20250817043602
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.494 seconds
Real time usage: 2.840 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18031/1000000
Revision size: 189910/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 799305/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 110172/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 59/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 979398/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.476/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22928890/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2254.969      1 -total
 54.31% 1224.570      2 Template:Reflist
 37.62%  848.259    172 Template:Cite_web
 14.99%  337.980      3 Template:Infobox
 13.27%  299.165      1 Template:Infobox_university
  5.69%  128.218     14 Template:Navbox
  4.73%  106.742     23 Template:Cite_news
  3.67%   82.795      1 Template:Langx
  3.64%   82.083     15 Template:Cite_book
  3.51%   79.070      1 Template:Brown_University Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4157:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043602 and revision id 1304614586. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brown_University&oldid=1304614586 " Categories : Brown University 1764 establishments in Rhode Island Colonial architecture in Rhode Island Colonial colleges Educational institutions established in 1764 Georgian architecture in Rhode Island Need-blind educational institutions Private universities and colleges in Rhode Island Rhode Island in the American Revolution Universities and colleges established in the 18th century Universities and colleges in Providence, Rhode Island Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: others Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2014 Articles containing Latin-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2022 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles to be expanded from May 2025 All articles to be expanded Vague or ambiguous time from October 2014 Articles needing cleanup from April 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with too many examples from April 2025 All articles with too many examples Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 03:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brown University 69 languages Add topic

