Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 English translations 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Eudemian Ethics 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Íslenska Italiano 日本語 Português Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aristotle's lesser known work on philosophy concerning right and wrong conduct The Eudemian Ethics ( Greek : Ἠθικὰ Εὐδήμεια ; Latin : Ethica Eudemia [ 1 ] or De moribus ad Eudemum ) is a work of philosophy by Aristotle .  Its primary focus is on ethics , making it one of the primary sources available for study of Aristotelian ethics .  It is named for Eudemus of Rhodes , a pupil of Aristotle who may also have had a hand in editing the final work.

[ 2 ] It is commonly believed to have been written before the Nicomachean Ethics , although this is controversial.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] The Eudemian Ethics is less well known than Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics , and, when scholars refer simply to the Ethics of Aristotle, the latter is generally intended.  The Eudemian Ethics is shorter than the Nicomachean Ethics , eight books as opposed to ten, and some of its most interesting passages are mirrored in the latter.  Books IV, V, and VI of the Eudemian Ethics , for example, are identical to Books V, VI, and VII of the Nicomachean Ethics , and as a result some critical editions of the former include only Books I–III and VII–VIII (the omitted books being included in the publisher's critical edition of the latter).

The translator for the Loeb edition, Harris Rackham, states in the Introduction to that edition that "in some places The Eudemian Ethics is fuller in expression or more discursive than The Nicomachean Ethics ." Compared to the Nicomachean Ethics , Rackham mentions, for example in Book III, which discusses the virtues and some minor graces of character: It "inserts the virtue of Mildness between Temperance and Liberality". Temperance is discussed at the end of Book III of the Nicomachean Ethics , and Liberality immediately afterwards in the beginning of Book IV .

It "adds to the minor Graces of Character Nemesis (righteous indignation at another's undeserved good or bad fortune), Friendliness and Dignity, while it omits Gentleness and Agreeableness". The Nicomachean Ethics actually states in Book II that Nemesis will be discussed within that work, but never does so.

Book VII is concerning friendship, discussed in greater length and detail in the Nicomachean Ethics than it is here. Book VIII discusses the epistemological aspect of virtue, which as Rackham notes is treated in Book I section 9 of Nicomachean Ethics , and also discusses good luck. Then there is a section concerning kalokagathia , the beautiful and good nobility of a gentleman, a virtue which implies all the moral virtues as well as good fortune. This has no parallel in the Nicomachean Ethics . And then finally there is some discussion of speculative wisdom or " theoria ".

Although Nicomachean Ethics is better known than Eudemian Ethics today, German philologist Dieter Harlfinger suggested that in fact Eudemian Ethics were the common book transmitted in early days.

[ 4 ] This opinion is also supported by British philosopher Anthony Kenny , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] that the complete eight-book of Eudemian Ethics was the standard text on Aristotelian ethics for over four hundred years until the time of Aspasius, Aristotle commentator in the first half of second century AD.

[ 6 ] English translations [ edit ] The Eudemian Ethics by Anthony Kenny , Oxford, 2011.

Aristotle: Eudemian Ethics , edited by Brad Inwood and Raphael Woolf , Cambridge University Press, 2013.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Aristotelis Opera by August Immanuel Bekker (1837).

^ a b Rackham, Harris (1935), "Introduction", Athenian Constitution. Eudemian Ethics. Virtues and Vices , Harvard University Press ^ M. Woods, Aristotle's Eudemian Ethics: Books I, II, and VIII , Clarendon Press, 1982, p. xii.

^ Untersuchungen zur Eudemischen Ethik: Akten des 5. Symposium Aristotelicum (Oosterbeek, Niederlande, 21.-29. August 1969) (in German). De Gruyter. 2012-05-07.

doi : 10.1515/9783110853872 .

ISBN 978-3-11-085387-2 .

^ Kenny, Anthony (2016).

The Aristotelian ethics: a study of the relationship between the Eudemian and Nicomachean ethics of Aristotle (Second ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-879093-8 .

OCLC 966969470 .

^ a b Inwood, Brad; Woolf, Raphael, eds. (2012), "Introduction" , Aristotle: Eudemian Ethics , Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

vii– xxiv, doi : 10.1017/cbo9781139043281.001 , ISBN 978-0-521-19848-6 , retrieved 2024-12-04 External links [ edit ] Works related to Eudemian Ethics at Wikisource Aristotle's Eudemian Ethics by the Perseus Project "Ethica Eudemia" translated by J. Solomon (Internet Archive, 1915) Ethics public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Latvia Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eudemian_Ethics&oldid=1291969953 " Categories : Ethics books Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 13:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eudemian Ethics 10 languages Add topic

