Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Background 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Early empiricism 3.2 Islamic Golden Age and Pre-Renaissance (5th to 15th centuries CE) 3.3 Renaissance Italy 3.4 British empiricism 3.5 Phenomenalism 3.6 Logical empiricism 3.7 Pragmatism 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Empiricism 87 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Luganda Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Kadazandusun Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Empiricists ) Idea that knowledge comes only/mainly from sensory experience This article is about the field of philosophy. For the music album, see Empiricism (album) .

Francis Bacon John Locke David Hume G. Berkeley Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e In philosophy , empiricism is an epistemological view which holds that true knowledge or justification comes only or primarily from sensory experience and empirical evidence .

[ 1 ] It is one of several competing views within epistemology, along with rationalism and skepticism . Empiricists argue that empiricism is a more reliable method of finding the truth than purely using logical reasoning , because humans have cognitive biases and limitations which lead to errors of judgement.

[ 2 ] Empiricism emphasizes the central role of empirical evidence in the formation of ideas, rather than innate ideas or traditions .

[ 3 ] Empiricists may argue that traditions (or customs) arise due to relations of previous sensory experiences.

[ 4 ] Historically, empiricism was associated with the " blank slate " concept ( tabula rasa ), according to which the human mind is "blank" at birth and develops its thoughts only through later experience.

[ 5 ] Empiricism in the philosophy of science emphasizes evidence, especially as discovered in experiments . It is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on a priori reasoning, intuition , or revelation .

Empiricism, often used by natural scientists , believes that "knowledge is based on experience" and that "knowledge is tentative and probabilistic, subject to continued revision and falsification ".

[ 6 ] Empirical research, including experiments and validated measurement tools, guides the scientific method.

Etymology [ edit ] The English term empirical derives from the Ancient Greek word ἐμπειρία, empeiria , which is cognate with and translates to the Latin experientia , from which the words experience and experiment are derived.

[ 7 ] Background [ edit ] Main article: Empirical method A central concept in science and the scientific method is that conclusions must be empirically based on the evidence of the senses. Both natural and social sciences use working hypotheses that are testable by observation and experiment . The term semi-empirical is sometimes used to describe theoretical methods that make use of basic axioms , established scientific laws, and previous experimental results to engage in reasoned model building and theoretical inquiry.

Philosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one's sense-based experience.

[ 8 ] In epistemology (theory of knowledge) empiricism is typically contrasted with rationalism , which holds that knowledge may be derived from reason independently of the senses, and in the philosophy of mind it is often contrasted with innatism , which holds that some knowledge and ideas are already present in the mind at birth. However, many Enlightenment rationalists and empiricists still made concessions to each other. For example, the empiricist John Locke admitted that some knowledge (e.g. knowledge of God's existence) could be arrived at through intuition and reasoning alone. Similarly, Robert Boyle , a prominent advocate of the experimental method, held that we also have innate ideas.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] At the same time, the main continental rationalists ( Descartes , Spinoza , and Leibniz ) were also advocates of the empirical "scientific method".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] History [ edit ] Early empiricism [ edit ] Aristotle Between 600 and 200 BCE, the Vaisheshika school of Hindu philosophy , founded by the ancient Indian philosopher Kanada , accepted perception and inference as the only two reliable sources of knowledge.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] This is enumerated in his work Vaiśeṣika Sūtra . The Charvaka school held similar beliefs, asserting that perception is the only reliable source of knowledge while inference obtains knowledge with uncertainty.

The earliest Western proto-empiricists were the empiric school of ancient Greek medical practitioners, founded in 330 BCE.

[ 16 ] Its members rejected the doctrines of the dogmatic school , preferring to rely on the observation of phantasiai (i.e., phenomena, the appearances).

[ 17 ] The Empiric school was closely allied with the Pyrrhonist school of philosophy, which made the philosophical case for their proto-empiricism.

The notion of tabula rasa ("clean slate" or "blank tablet") connotes a view of the mind as an originally blank or empty recorder (Locke used the words "white paper") on which experience leaves marks. This denies that humans have innate ideas . The notion dates back to Aristotle , c.

350 BC : What the mind ( nous ) thinks must be in it in the same sense as letters are on a tablet ( grammateion ) which bears no actual writing ( grammenon );  this is just what happens in the case of the mind.  (Aristotle, On the Soul , 3.4.430 a 1).

Aristotle's explanation of how this was possible was not strictly empiricist in a modern sense, but rather based on his theory of potentiality and actuality , and experience of sense perceptions still requires the help of the active nous . These notions contrasted with Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth (see Plato's Phaedo and Apology , as well as others).  Aristotle was considered to give a more important position to sense perception than Plato , and commentators in the Middle Ages summarized one of his positions as " nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu " (Latin for "nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses").

This idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school, from about 330 BCE. Stoic epistemology generally emphasizes that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it.

[ 18 ] The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as "When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon." [ 19 ] A drawing of Ibn Sina (Avicenna) from 1271 Islamic Golden Age and Pre-Renaissance (5th to 15th centuries CE) [ edit ] See also: Islamic philosophy During the Middle Ages (from the 5th to the 15th century CE) Aristotle's theory of tabula rasa was developed by Islamic philosophers starting with Al Farabi ( c.

872 – c.

951 CE ), developing into an elaborate theory by Avicenna (c.  980 – 1037 CE) [ 20 ] and demonstrated as a thought experiment by Ibn Tufail .

[ 21 ] For Avicenna ( Ibn Sina ), for example, the tabula rasa is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education , and knowledge is attained through "empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts" developed through a " syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts". The intellect itself develops from a material intellect ( al-'aql al-hayulani ), which is a potentiality "that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect ( al- 'aql al-fa'il ), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge".

[ 20 ] So the immaterial "active intellect", separate from any individual person, is still essential for understanding to occur.

In the 12th century CE, the Andalusian Muslim philosopher and novelist Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (known as "Abubacer" or "Ebu Tophail" in the West) included the theory of tabula rasa as a thought experiment in his Arabic philosophical novel , Hayy ibn Yaqdhan in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child "from a tabula rasa to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society" on a desert island , through experience alone. The Latin translation of his philosophical novel , entitled Philosophus Autodidactus , published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke 's formulation of tabula rasa in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding .

[ 21 ] A similar Islamic theological novel, Theologus Autodidactus , was written by the Arab theologian and physician Ibn al-Nafis in the 13th century. It also dealt with the theme of empiricism through the story of a feral child on a desert island, but departed from its predecessor by depicting the development of the protagonist's mind through contact with society rather than in isolation from society.

[ 22 ] During the 13th century Thomas Aquinas adopted into scholasticism the Aristotelian position that the senses are essential to the mind.

Bonaventure (1221–1274), one of Aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents, offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the Platonic idea of the mind.

Renaissance Italy [ edit ] See also: Italian Renaissance and Italian philosophy In the late renaissance various writers began to question the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition in a more fundamental way. In political and historical writing Niccolò Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing. Machiavelli in particular was scornful of writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals and demanded that people should study the "effectual truth" instead. Their contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) said, "If you find from your own experience that something is a fact and it contradicts what some authority has written down, then you must abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings." [ 23 ] Significantly, an empirical metaphysical system was developed by the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio which had an enormous impact on the development of later Italian thinkers, including Telesio's students Antonio Persio and Sertorio Quattromani , his contemporaries Thomas Campanella and Giordano Bruno , and later British philosophers such as Francis Bacon , who regarded Telesio as "the first of the moderns".

[ 24 ] Telesio's influence can also be seen on the French philosophers René Descartes and Pierre Gassendi .

[ 24 ] The decidedly anti-Aristotelian and anti-clerical music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520 – 1591), father of Galileo and the inventor of monody , made use of the method in successfully solving musical problems, firstly, of tuning such as the relationship of pitch to string tension and mass in stringed instruments, and to volume of air in wind instruments; and secondly to composition, by his various suggestions to composers in his Dialogo della musica antica e moderna (Florence, 1581). The Italian word he used for "experiment" was esperimento . It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo, his eldest son (cf. Coelho, ed.

Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei ), arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history. Vincenzo, through his tuning research, found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of ' Pythagoras' hammers ' (the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals, not the actual numbers, as believed), and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities, a radically empirical attitude developed, passed on to Galileo, which regarded "experience and demonstration" as the sine qua non of valid rational enquiry.

British empiricism [ edit ] Thomas Hobbes British empiricism , a retrospective characterization, emerged during the 17th century as an approach to early modern philosophy and modern science . Although both integral to this overarching transition, Francis Bacon , in England, first advocated for empiricism in 1620 , whereas René Descartes , in France, laid the main groundwork upholding rationalism around 1640. (Bacon's natural philosophy was influenced by Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio and by Swiss physician Paracelsus .) [ 24 ] Contributing later in the 17th century, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza are retrospectively identified likewise as an empiricist and a rationalist, respectively. In the Enlightenment of the late 17th century, John Locke in England, and in the 18th century, both George Berkeley in Ireland and David Hume in Scotland , all became leading exponents of empiricism, hence the dominance of empiricism in British philosophy. The distinction between rationalism and empiricism was not formally made until Immanuel Kant , in Germany, around 1780 , who sought to merge the two views.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In response to the early-to-mid-17th-century " continental rationalism ", John Locke (1632–1704) proposed in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1689) a very influential view wherein the only knowledge humans can have is a posteriori , i.e., based upon experience. Locke is famously attributed with holding the proposition that the human mind is a tabula rasa , a "blank tablet", in Locke's words "white paper", on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written.

There are two sources of our ideas: sensation and reflection. In both cases, a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas. The former are unanalysable, and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities. Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is. Without specific primary qualities, an object would not be what it is. For example, an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure. If an apple were structured differently, it would cease to be an apple. Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities. For example, an apple can be perceived in various colours, sizes, and textures but it is still identified as an apple. Therefore, its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is, while its secondary qualities define its attributes. Complex ideas combine simple ones, and divide into substances, modes, and relations. According to Locke, our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other, which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes .

[ citation needed ] George Berkeley A generation later, the Irish Anglican bishop George Berkeley (1685–1753) determined that Locke's view immediately opened a door that would lead to eventual atheism . In response to Locke, he put forth in his Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) an important challenge to empiricism in which things only exist either as a result of their being perceived, or by virtue of the fact that they are an entity doing the perceiving. (For Berkeley, God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it.) In his text Alciphron , Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God.

[ 27 ] Berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711–1776) responded to Berkeley's criticisms of Locke, as well as other differences between early modern philosophers, and moved empiricism to a new level of skepticism . Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience, but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers. He wrote for example, "Locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable. On this view, we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow, because neither of these can be demonstrated. But to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations, proofs, and probabilities—by ‘proofs’ meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition." [ 30 ] And, [ 31 ] I believe the most general and most popular explication of this matter, is to say [See Mr. Locke, chapter of power.], that finding from experience, that there are several new productions in matter, such as the motions and variations of body, and concluding that there must somewhere be a power capable of producing them, we arrive at last by this reasoning at the idea of power and efficacy. But to be convinced that this explication is more popular than philosophical, we need but reflect on two very obvious principles. First, That reason alone can never give rise to any original idea, and secondly, that reason, as distinguished from experience, can never make us conclude, that a cause or productive quality is absolutely requisite to every beginning of existence. Both these considerations have been sufficiently explained: and therefore shall not at present be any farther insisted on.

— Hume, Section XIV, "Of the idea of necessary connexion", in A Treatise of Human Nature Hume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: relations of ideas and matters of fact (see also Kant's analytic-synthetic distinction ). Mathematical and logical propositions (e.g. "that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides") are examples of the first, while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world (e.g. "the sun rises in the East") are examples of the second. All of people's "ideas", in turn, are derived from their "impressions". For Hume, an "impression" corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation. To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an "idea". Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations.

[ 4 ] David Hume 's empiricism led to numerous philosophical schools.

Hume maintained that no knowledge, even the most basic beliefs about the natural world, can be conclusively established by reason.  Rather, he maintained, our beliefs are more a result of accumulated habits , developed in response to accumulated sense experiences. Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method —that of the problem of induction .  Hume argued that it requires inductive reasoning to arrive at the premises for the principle of inductive reasoning, and therefore the justification for inductive reasoning is a circular argument.

[ 4 ] Among Hume's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past.  Thus, as a simple instance posed by Hume, we cannot know with certainty by inductive reasoning that the sun will continue to rise in the East, but instead come to expect it to do so because it has repeatedly done so in the past.

[ 4 ] Hume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable. According to Hume these beliefs were to be accepted nonetheless because of their profound basis in instinct and custom.  Hume's lasting legacy, however, was the doubt that his skeptical arguments cast on the legitimacy of inductive reasoning, allowing many skeptics who followed to cast similar doubt.

[ citation needed ] Phenomenalism [ edit ] Main article: Phenomenalism Most of Hume's followers have disagreed with his conclusion that belief in an external world is rationally unjustifiable, contending that Hume's own principles implicitly contained the rational justification for such a belief, that is, beyond being content to let the issue rest on human instinct, custom and habit.

[ 32 ] According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism , anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley, a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences.

[ 33 ] Phenomenalism is the view that physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events. Ultimately, only mental objects, properties, events, exist—hence the closely related term subjective idealism . By the phenomenalistic line of thinking, to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences.  This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations, for example, are a part. As John Stuart Mill put it in the mid-19th century, matter is the "permanent possibility of sensation".

[ 34 ] Mill's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect: in maintaining that induction is necessary for all meaningful knowledge including mathematics.  As summarized by D.W. Hamlin: [Mill] claimed that mathematical truths were merely very highly confirmed generalizations from experience; mathematical inference, generally conceived as deductive [and a priori ] in nature, Mill set down as founded on induction.  Thus, in Mill's philosophy there was no real place for knowledge based on relations of ideas.  In his view logical and mathematical necessity is psychological; we are merely unable to conceive any other possibilities than those that logical and mathematical propositions assert. This is perhaps the most extreme version of empiricism known, but it has not found many defenders.

[ 29 ] Mill's empiricism thus held that knowledge of any kind is not from direct experience but an inductive inference from direct experience.

[ 35 ] The problems other philosophers have had with Mill's position center around the following issues: Firstly, Mill's formulation encounters difficulty when it describes what direct experience is by differentiating only between actual and possible sensations.  This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such "groups of permanent possibilities of sensation" might exist in the first place.  Berkeley put God in that gap; the phenomenalists, including Mill, essentially left the question unanswered.

In the end, lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of "reality" that goes beyond mere "possibilities of sensation", such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism. Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved, how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands, etc., remain unanswered, and perhaps unanswerable in these terms.

[ 29 ] [ 36 ] Secondly, Mill's formulation leaves open the unsettling possibility that the "gap-filling entities are purely possibilities and not actualities at all".

[ 36 ] Thirdly, Mill's position, by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference, misapprehends mathematics.  It fails to fully consider the structure and method of mathematical science , the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures which do not, either today or at the time Mill wrote, fall under the agreed meaning of induction .

[ 29 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The phenomenalist phase of post-Humean empiricism ended by the 1940s, for by that time it had become obvious that statements about physical things could not be translated into statements about actual and possible sense data.

[ 38 ] If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement, the former must be at least deducible from the latter. But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement.  The translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation.

There is, however, no finite set of statements that are couched in purely sensory terms and can express the satisfaction of the condition of the presence of a normal observer. According to phenomenalism, to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer, the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal.  But, of course, the doctor himself must be a normal observer. If we are to specify this doctor's normality in sensory terms, we must make reference to a second doctor who, when inspecting the sense organs of the first doctor, would himself have to have the sense data a normal observer has when inspecting the sense organs of a subject who is a normal observer. And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer, we must refer to a third doctor, and so on (also see the third man ).

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Logical empiricism [ edit ] Main article: Logical positivism Logical empiricism (also logical positivism or neopositivism ) was an early 20th-century attempt to synthesize the essential ideas of British empiricism (e.g. a strong emphasis on sensory experience as the basis for knowledge) with certain insights from mathematical logic that had been developed by Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein . Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath , Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle , along with A. J. Ayer , Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach .

The neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods, insights and discoveries of the sciences. They saw in the logical symbolism elaborated by Frege (1848–1925) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) a powerful instrument that could rationally reconstruct all scientific discourse into an ideal, logically perfect, language that would be free of the ambiguities and deformations of natural language. This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions. By combining Frege's thesis that all mathematical truths are logical with the early Wittgenstein's idea that all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies , they arrived at a twofold classification of all propositions: the "analytic" ( a priori ) and the "synthetic" ( a posteriori ).

[ 41 ] On this basis, they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not: the so-called " verification principle ". Any sentence that is not purely logical, or is unverifiable, is devoid of meaning. As a result, most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems came to be considered pseudoproblems.

[ 42 ] In the extreme empiricism of the neopositivists—at least before the 1930s—any genuinely synthetic assertion must be reducible to an ultimate assertion (or set of ultimate assertions) that expresses direct observations or perceptions. In later years, Carnap and Neurath abandoned this sort of phenomenalism in favor of a rational reconstruction of knowledge into the language of an objective spatio-temporal physics.  That is, instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data, such sentences were to be translated into so-called protocol sentences , for example, " X at location Y and at time T observes such and such".

[ 43 ] The central theses of logical positivism (verificationism, the analytic–synthetic distinction, reductionism, etc.) came under sharp attack after World War II by thinkers such as Nelson Goodman , W. V. Quine , Hilary Putnam , Karl Popper , and Richard Rorty . By the late 1960s, it had become evident to most [ who?

] philosophers that the movement had pretty much run its course, though its influence is still significant among contemporary analytic philosophers such as Michael Dummett and other anti-realists .

Pragmatism [ edit ] In the late 19th and early 20th century, several forms of pragmatic philosophy arose.  The ideas of pragmatism, in its various forms, developed mainly from discussions between Charles Sanders Peirce and William James when both men were at Harvard in the 1870s.  James popularized the term "pragmatism", giving Peirce full credit for its patrimony, but Peirce later demurred from the tangents that the movement was taking, and redubbed what he regarded as the original idea with the name of "pragmaticism".  Along with its pragmatic theory of truth , this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical (experience-based) and rational (concept-based) thinking.

Charles Sanders Peirce Charles Peirce (1839–1914) was highly influential in laying the groundwork for today's empirical scientific method .

[ 44 ] Although Peirce severely criticized many elements of Descartes' peculiar brand of rationalism, he did not reject rationalism outright.  Indeed, he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism, most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation.  In later years he even emphasized the concept-driven side of the then ongoing debate between strict empiricism and strict rationalism, in part to counterbalance the excesses to which some of his cohorts had taken pragmatism under the "data-driven" strict-empiricist view.

Among Peirce's major contributions was to place inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning in a complementary rather than competitive mode, the latter of which had been the primary trend among the educated since David Hume wrote a century before.  To this, Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning .  The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today.  Peirce's approach "presupposes that (1) the objects of knowledge are real things, (2) the characters (properties) of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them, and (3) everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them.  According to Peirce's doctrine of fallibilism , the conclusions of science are always tentative. The rationality of the scientific method does not depend on the certainty of its conclusions, but on its self-corrective character: by continued application of the method science can detect and correct its own mistakes, and thus eventually lead to the discovery of truth".

[ 45 ] William James In his Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" (1903), Peirce enumerated what he called the "three cotary propositions of pragmatism" ( L: cos, cotis whetstone), saying that they "put the edge on the maxim of pragmatism ".  First among these, he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above, but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street.  That is, it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses.  Hence, if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses, and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference , its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique—in a word, incorrigible.  This in no way conflicts with the fallibility and revisability of scientific concepts, since it is only the immediate percept in its unique individuality or "thisness"—what the Scholastics called its haecceity —that stands beyond control and correction.  Scientific concepts, on the other hand, are general in nature, and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them.  This notion of perception as abduction has received periodic revivals in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research, most recently for instance with the work of Irvin Rock on indirect perception .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Around the beginning of the 20th century, William James (1842–1910) coined the term " radical empiricism " to describe an offshoot of his form of pragmatism, which he argued could be dealt with separately from his pragmatism—though in fact the two concepts are intertwined in James's published lectures. James maintained that the empirically observed "directly apprehended universe needs ... no extraneous trans-empirical connective support", [ 48 ] by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural phenomena .  James' "radical empiricism" is thus not radical in the context of the term "empiricism", but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term " empirical ". His method of argument in arriving at this view, however, still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today.

John Dewey (1859–1952) modified James' pragmatism to form a theory known as instrumentalism .  The role of sense experience in Dewey's theory is crucial, in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated.  Dewey's basic thought, in accordance with empiricism, was that reality is determined by past experience.  Therefore, humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience.  The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically, and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation, [ 49 ] in physical sciences as in ethics.

[ 50 ] Thus, ideas in Dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known a posteriori .

See also [ edit ] Abstract empiricism – 1959 book by C. Wright Mills Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Constructive empiricism – Form of empiricism in philosophy of science Empirical idealism – Philosophy that only minds and ideas are real Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Empirical realism Empirical relationship – Mathematical relationship or correlation based solely on observation rather than theory Empirical research – Research using empirical evidence Empirical sociology Feminist empiricism – Perspective within feminist research Ground truth – Information provided by direct observation History of scientific method Inquiry – Any process that has the aim of augmenting knowledge, resolving doubt, or solving a problem Kantian empiricism – American philosopher (1912–1989) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Natural philosophy – Philosophical study of nature Naturalism – Belief that only natural laws and forces operate in the universe Objectivity – Basic distinction in philosophy Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Positivism – Empiricist philosophical theory Psychological nativism – View in psychology about the brain Quasi-empirical method Reformed empiricism Sensualism – Epistemological position Transcendental empiricism Notes [ edit ] ^ Psillos, Stathis; Curd, Martin (2010).

The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Science (1. publ. in paperback ed.). London: Routledge. pp.

129– 38.

ISBN 978-0415546133 .

^ "Francis Bacon and the Four Idols of the Mind" . 17 May 2016.

^ Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008).

From Plato to Derrida . Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-158591-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d Hume, D. "An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding", in Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals, 2nd edition, L.A. Selby-Bigge (ed.), Oxford University Press , Oxford, UK, 1902 [1748].

[ page needed ] ^ Scheibe, Erhard. (2001).

Between rationalism and empiricism : selected papers in the philosophy of physics . Springer.

ISBN 0-387-98520-4 .

OCLC 45888831 .

^ Shelley, M. (2006). Empiricism. In F. English (Ed.), Encyclopedia of educational leadership and administration. (pp. 338–39). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.

^ "Definition of EMPIRIC" .

www.merriam-webster.com . 20 January 2024.

^ Markie, P. (2004), "Rationalism vs. Empiricism" in Edward D. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Eprint .

^ Loeb, Luis E. (1981).

From Descartes to Hume: Continental Metaphysics and the Development of Modern Philosophy . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0801412897 .

[ page needed ] ^ Engfer, Hans-Jürgen (1996), Empirismus versus Rationalismus? Kritik eines philosophiegeschichtlichen Schemas , Paderborn: Schöningh.

[ page needed ] ^ Buckle, Stephen (1999), "British Sceptical Realism. A Fresh Look at the British Tradition", European Journal of Philosophy , 7, pp. 1–2.

^ Peter Anstey, " ESP is best Archived 2013-12-31 at the Wayback Machine ", Early Modern Experimental Philosophy , 2010.

^ DPS Bhawuk (2011), Spirituality and Indian Psychology (Editor: Anthony J. Marsella ), Springer, ISBN 978-1-4419-8109-7 , page 172 ^ Eliott Deutsche (2000), in Philosophy of Religion : Indian Philosophy Vol 4 (Editor: Roy Perrett), Routledge, ISBN 978-0815336112 , pages 245-248 ^ John A. Grimes, A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy: Sanskrit Terms Defined in English, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791430675 , page 238 ^ "Greek Medicine: Alexander the Great" .

www.greekmedicine.net .

^ Sini, Carlo (2004), "Empirismo", in Gianni Vattimo et al. (eds.), Enciclopedia Garzanti della Filosofia .

^ Bardzell, Jeffrey (June 11, 2014).

Speculative Grammar and Stoic Language Theory in Medieval Allegorical Narrative: From Prudentius to Alan of Lille . Routledge. pp.

18– 19.

^ Diels-Kranz 4.11 translated by Long, A. A.; Sedley, D. N. (1987).

The Hellenistic Philosophers: Vol. 1 . Cambridge, Ma: Cambridge. p. 238.

^ a b Sajjad H. Rizvi (2006), Avicenna/Ibn Sina (c. 980–1037) , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ a b G. A. Russell (1994), The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-Century England , pp. 224–62, Brill Publishers , ISBN 90-04-09459-8 ^ Dr. Abu Shadi Al-Roubi (1982), "Ibn Al-Nafis as a philosopher", Symposium on Ibn al-Nafis , Second International Conference on Islamic Medicine: Islamic Medical Organization, Kuwait ( cf.

Ibn al-Nafis As a Philosopher Archived February 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , Encyclopedia of Islamic World ) ^ "Seeing the Body: The Divergence of Ancient Chineseand Western Medical Illustration", Camillia Matuk, Journal of Biocommunication, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2006, [1] Archived 2017-01-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Boenke, Michaela, "Bernardino Telesio", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/entries/telesio/ .

^ Markie, Peter (August 19, 2004).

"Rationalism vs. Empiricism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved August 27, 2024 .

^ Vanzo, Alberto (January 2013).

"Kant on Empiricism and Rationalism" .

History of Philosophy Quarterly .

30 (1). University of Illinois Press: 53– 74.

JSTOR 43488058 . Retrieved August 27, 2024 .

^ Thornton, Stephen (1987) "Berkeley's Theory of Reality" in The Journal of the Limerick Philosophical Society , UL.ie Archived 2011-09-18 at the Wayback Machine ^ Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "George Berkeley", vol. 1, p. 297.

^ a b c d Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Empiricism", vol. 2, p. 503.

^ Hume.

"Of Probability" .

Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals .

^ Hume.

"Of the Idea of a Necessary Connexion" .

Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals .

^ Morick, H. (1980), Challenges to Empiricism, Hackett Publishing, Indianapolis, IN.

^ Marconi, Diego (2004), "Fenomenismo"', in Gianni Vattimo and Gaetano Chiurazzi (eds.), L'Enciclopedia Garzanti di Filosofia , 3rd edition, Garzanti, Milan, Italy.

^ Mill, J.S., "An Examination of Sir William Rowan Hamilton's Philosophy", in A.J. Ayer and Ramond Winch (eds.), British Empirical Philosophers, Simon and Schuster, New York, NY, 1968.

[ page needed ] ^ Wilson, Fred (2005), "John Stuart Mill", in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ a b c Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Phenomenalism", vol. 6, p. 131.

^ Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Axiomatic Method", vol. 5, pp. 188–89, 191ff.

^ Bolender, John (1998), "Factual Phenomenalism: A Supervenience Theory"', Sorites, no. 9, pp. 16–31.

^ Berlin, Isaiah (2004), The Refutation of Phenomenalism, Isaiah Berlin Virtual Library.

^ Chisholm, Roderick M. (September 9, 1948). "The Problem of Empiricism".

The Journal of Philosophy .

45 (19): 512– 17.

doi : 10.2307/2019108 .

JSTOR 2019108 .

^ Achinstein, Peter , and Barker, Stephen F.

(1969), The Legacy of Logical Positivism: Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.

[ page needed ] ^ Barone, Francesco (1986), Il neopositivismo logico, Laterza, Roma Bari.

[ page needed ] ^ Rescher, Nicholas (1985), The Heritage of Logical Positivism, University Press of America, Lanham, MD.

^ Burch, Robert (2017). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2017 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Ward, Teddy (n.d.), "Empiricism", Eprint Archived 2012-07-14 at archive.today .

^ Rock, Irvin (1983), The Logic of Perception, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

[ page needed ] ^ Rock, Irvin, (1997) Indirect Perception, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

[ page needed ] ^ James, William (1911), The Meaning of Truth.

^ Dewey, John (1906), Studies in Logical Theory.

[ page needed ] ^ Weber, Eric Thomas (2011). "What Experimentalism Means in Ethics".

The Journal of Speculative Philosophy .

25 (1): 98– 115.

doi : 10.1353/jsp.2011.0000 .

S2CID 144868257 .

References [ edit ] Achinstein, Peter, and Barker, Stephen F. (1969), The Legacy of Logical Positivism:  Studies in the Philosophy of Science , Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.

Aristotle , " On the Soul " ( De Anima ), W. S. Hett (trans.), pp. 1–203 in Aristotle, Volume 8 , Loeb Classical Library , William Heinemann , London, UK, 1936.

Aristotle, Posterior Analytics .

Barone, Francesco (1986), Il neopositivismo logico , Laterza, Roma Bari Berlin, Isaiah (2004), The Refutation of Phenomenalism , Isaiah Berlin Virtual Library.

Bolender, John (1998), "Factual Phenomenalism:  A Supervenience Theory"', Sorites , no. 9, pp. 16–31.

Chisolm, R. (1948), "The Problem of Empiricism", Journal of Philosophy 45, 512–17.

Dewey, John (1906), Studies in Logical Theory .

Encyclopædia Britannica , "Empiricism", vol. 4, p. 480.

Hume, D.

, A Treatise of Human Nature , L.A. Selby-Bigge (ed.), Oxford University Press, London, UK, 1975.

Hume, David. "An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding", in Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals , 2nd edition, L.A. Selby-Bigge (ed.), Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1902.

Gutenberg press full-text James, William (1911), The Meaning of Truth .

Keeton, Morris T.

(1962), "Empiricism", pp. 89–90 in Dagobert D. Runes (ed.), Dictionary of Philosophy , Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ.

Leftow, Brian (ed., 2006), Aquinas: Summa Theologiae, Questions on God , pp. vii et seq .

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Development of Aristotle's Thought", vol. 1, pp. 153ff.

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "George Berkeley", vol. 1, p. 297.

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Empiricism", vol. 2, p. 503.

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Mathematics, Foundations of", vol. 5, pp. 188–89.

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Axiomatic Method", vol. 5, pp. 192ff.

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Epistemological Discussion", subsections on "A Priori Knowledge" and "Axioms".

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Phenomenalism", vol. 6, p. 131.

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1969), "Thomas Aquinas", subsection on "Theory of Knowledge", vol. 8, pp. 106–07.

Marconi, Diego (2004), "Fenomenismo"', in Gianni Vattimo and Gaetano Chiurazzi (eds.), L'Enciclopedia Garzanti di Filosofia , 3rd edition, Garzanti, Milan, Italy.

Markie, P. (2004), "Rationalism vs. Empiricism" in Edward D. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Eprint .

Maxwell, Nicholas (1998), The Comprehensibility of the Universe: A New Conception of Science , Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Mill, J.S., "An Examination of Sir William Rowan Hamilton's Philosophy", in A.J. Ayer and Ramond Winch (eds.), British Empirical Philosophers , Simon and Schuster, New York, NY, 1968.

Morick, H. (1980), Challenges to Empiricism , Hackett Publishing , Indianapolis, IN.

Peirce, C.S.

, "Lectures on Pragmatism", Cambridge, Massachusetts, March 26 – May 17, 1903.  Reprinted in part, Collected Papers , CP 5.14–212.  Published in full with editor's introduction and commentary, Patricia Ann Turisi (ed.), Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking:  The 1903 Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" , State University of New York Press, Albany, NY, 1997.  Reprinted, pp. 133–241, Peirce Edition Project (eds.), The Essential Peirce, Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 2 (1893–1913) , Indiana University Press , Bloomington, IN, 1998.

Rescher, Nicholas (1985), The Heritage of Logical Positivism , University Press of America, Lanham, MD.

Rock, Irvin (1983), The Logic of Perception , MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Rock, Irvin, (1997) Indirect Perception , MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Runes, D.D.

(ed., 1962), Dictionary of Philosophy , Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ.

Sini, Carlo (2004), "Empirismo", in Gianni Vattimo et al. (eds.), Enciclopedia Garzanti della Filosofia .

Solomon, Robert C., and Higgins, Kathleen M. (1996), A Short History of Philosophy , pp. 68–74.

Sorabji, Richard (1972), Aristotle on Memory .

Thornton, Stephen (1987), Berkeley's Theory of Reality , Eprint Archived 2011-09-18 at the Wayback Machine Vanzo, Alberto (2014), "From Empirics to Empiricists", Intellectual History Review , 2014, Eprint available here and here .

Ward, Teddy (n.d.), "Empiricism", Eprint .

Wilson, Fred (2005), "John Stuart Mill", in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Eprint .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Empiricism .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Empiricism .

Fasko, Manuel; West, Peter.

"British Empiricism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Rationalism vs. Empiricism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Rationalism vs. Empiricism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Empiricism on In Our Time at the BBC Empiricist Man v t e Logic History Major fields Computer science Formal semantics (natural language) Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics of logic Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Antecedent Consequent Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Dichotomy Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Premise Probability Proposition Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists Topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory Other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Category Outline Portal WikiProject changes v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐pkj79
Cached time: 20250817174034
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.350 seconds
Real time usage: 1.750 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10843/1000000
Revision size: 53793/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 454954/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13114/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 203340/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.690/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26222414/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1274.292      1 -total
 26.70%  340.222      1 Template:Reflist
 22.24%  283.436     18 Template:Annotated_link
 12.87%  163.940     24 Template:Navbox
 11.85%  150.956     13 Template:Fix
 10.01%  127.579      9 Template:Cite_book
  9.66%  123.160     10 Template:Page_needed
  8.45%  107.714     23 Template:Delink
  7.31%   93.109      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.15%   91.150      1 Template:Epistemology_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10174:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817174034 and revision id 1296733167. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Empiricism&oldid=1296733167 " Categories : Empiricism History of science Justification (epistemology) Philosophical methodology Internalism and externalism Philosophy of science Empirical laws Epistemological schools and traditions Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2013 Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2019 Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2021 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 22:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Empiricism 87 languages Add topic

