Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relation between heat and internal energy 2 Macroscopic thermal energy Toggle Macroscopic thermal energy subsection 2.1 Chemical internal energy 2.2 Potential energy of internal interactions 3 Microscopic thermal energy 4 Thermal current density 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Thermal energy 53 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Македонски मराठी 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Energy that is measured by temperature Thermal radiation in visible light can be seen on this hot metalwork, due to blackbody radiation .

The term " thermal energy " is often used ambiguously in physics and engineering.

[ 1 ] It can denote several different physical concepts, including: Internal energy : The energy contained within a body of matter or radiation, excluding the potential energy of the whole system.

Heat : Energy in transfer between a system and its surroundings by mechanisms other than thermodynamic work and transfer of matter.

The characteristic energy k B T , where T denotes temperature and k B denotes the Boltzmann constant ; it is twice that associated with each degree of freedom.

Mark Zemansky (1970) has argued that the term "thermal energy" is best avoided due to its ambiguity. He suggests using more precise terms such as "internal energy" and "heat" to avoid confusion.

[ 1 ] The term is, however, used in some textbooks.

[ 2 ] Relation between heat and internal energy [ edit ] In thermodynamics , heat is energy in transfer to or from a thermodynamic system by mechanisms other than thermodynamic work or transfer of matter, such as conduction, radiation, and friction.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Heat refers to a quantity in transfer between systems, not to a property of any one system, or "contained" within it; on the other hand, internal energy and enthalpy are properties of a single system. Heat and work depend on the way in which an energy transfer occurs. In contrast, internal energy is a property of the state of a system and can thus be understood without knowing how the energy got there.

[ 5 ] Macroscopic thermal energy [ edit ] In addition to the microscopic kinetic energies of its molecules, the internal energy of a body includes chemical energy belonging to distinct molecules, and the global joint potential energy involved in the interactions between molecules and suchlike.

[ 6 ] Thermal energy may be viewed as contributing to internal energy or to enthalpy.

Chemical internal energy [ edit ] The internal energy of a body can change in a process in which chemical potential energy is converted into  non-chemical energy. In such a process, the thermodynamic system can change its internal energy by doing work on its surroundings, or by gaining or losing energy as heat. It is not quite lucid to merely say that "the converted chemical potential energy has simply become internal energy". It is, however, sometimes convenient to say that "the chemical potential energy has been converted into thermal energy". This is expressed in ordinary traditional language by talking of 'heat of reaction' .

[ 7 ] Potential energy of internal interactions [ edit ] In a body of material, especially in condensed matter, such as a liquid or a solid, in which the constituent particles, such as molecules or ions, interact strongly with one another, the energies of such interactions contribute strongly to the internal energy of the body. Still, they are not immediately apparent in the kinetic energies of molecules, as manifest in temperature. Such energies of interaction may be thought of as contributions to the global internal microscopic potential energies of the body.

[ 8 ] Microscopic thermal energy [ edit ] In a statistical mechanical account of an ideal gas , in which the molecules move independently between instantaneous collisions, the internal energy is just the sum total of the gas's independent particles' kinetic energies , and it is this kinetic motion that is the source and the effect of the transfer of heat across a system's boundary. For a gas that does not have particle interactions except for instantaneous collisions, the term "thermal energy" is effectively synonymous with " internal energy ".

[ 9 ] In many statistical physics texts, "thermal energy" refers to k T {\displaystyle kT} , the product of the Boltzmann constant and the absolute temperature , also written as ⁠ k B T {\displaystyle k_{\text{B}}T} ⁠ .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Thermal current density [ edit ] When there is no accompanying flow of matter, the term "thermal energy" is also applied to the energy carried by a heat flow.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Geothermal energy Geothermal heating Geothermal power Heat transfer Ocean thermal energy conversion Orders of magnitude (temperature) Thermal energy storage References [ edit ] ^ a b Zemansky, Mark W. (1970-09-01). "The Use and Misuse of the Word "Heat" in Physics Teaching".

The Physics Teacher .

8 (6): 295– 300.

Bibcode : 1970PhTea...8..295Z .

doi : 10.1119/1.2351512 .

ISSN 0031-921X .

^ For example: Knight, Randall Dewey (2008).

Physics for Scientists and Engineers . San Francisco: Pearson Addison Wesley.

ISBN 978-0-8053-2736-6 .

OCLC 148732206 .

^ Bailyn, M. (1994).

A Survey of Thermodynamics , American Institute of Physics Press, New York, ISBN 0-88318-797-3 , p. 82.

^ Born, M.

(1949).

Natural Philosophy of Cause and Chance , Oxford University Press, London, p. 31.

^ Robert F. Speyer (2012).

Thermal Analysis of Materials . Materials Engineering. Marcel Dekker, Inc. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-8247-8963-3 .

^ Baierlein, R. (1999).

Thermal Physics . Cambridge University Press. pp. 8–.

ISBN 978-0-521-65838-6 .

^ Anderson, G.M. (2005), Thermodynamics of Natural Systems (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-84772-8 , page 7: "We also note that whatever kind of energy is being reduced (we call it 'chemical energy'), it is not simply heat energy." ^ Baierlein, R. (1999).

Thermal Physics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-65838-6 .

page 8: "intermolecular potential energy (primarily electrical in origin)".

^ Kittel, Charles (2012).

Elementary Statistical Physics .

Courier Corporation . p. 60.

ISBN 9780486138909 .

^ Reichl, Linda E.

(2016).

A Modern Course in Statistical Physics .

John Wiley and Sons . p. 154.

ISBN 9783527690466 .

^ Kardar, Mehran (2007).

Statistical Physics of Particles .

Cambridge University Press . p. 243.

ISBN 9781139464871 .

^ Feynman, Richard P.

(2000). "The Computing Machines in the Future".

Selected Papers of Richard Feynman: With Commentary .

World Scientific .

ISBN 9789810241315 .

^ Feynman, Richard P. (2018).

Statistical Mechanics: A Set of Lectures .

CRC Press . p. 265.

ISBN 9780429972669 .

^ Ashcroft, Neil ; Mermin, N. David (1976).

Solid State Physics .

Harcourt . p. 20.

ISBN 0-03-083993-9 .

We define the thermal current density j q {\displaystyle {\bf {j}}^{q}} to be a vector parallel to the direction of heat flow, whose magnitude gives the thermal energy per unit time crossing a unit area perpendicular to the flow.

v t e Energy History Index Outline Fundamental concepts Conservation of energy Energetics Energy Units Energy condition Energy level Energy system Energy transformation Energy transition Mass Negative mass Mass–energy equivalence Power Thermodynamics Enthalpy Entropic force Entropy Exergy Free entropy Heat capacity Heat transfer Irreversible process Isolated system Laws of thermodynamics Negentropy Quantum thermodynamics Thermal equilibrium Thermal reservoir Thermodynamic equilibrium Thermodynamic free energy Thermodynamic potential Thermodynamic state Thermodynamic system Thermodynamic temperature Volume (thermodynamics) Work Types Binding Nuclear Chemical Dark Elastic Electric potential energy Electrical Gravitational Binding Interatomic potential Internal Ionization Kinetic Magnetic Mechanical Negative Phantom Potential Quantum chromodynamics binding energy Quantum fluctuation Quantum potential Quintessence Radiant Rest Sound Surface Thermal Vacuum Zero-point Energy carriers Battery Capacitor Electricity Enthalpy Fuel Fossil Oil Heat Latent heat Hydrogen Hydrogen fuel Mechanical wave Radiation Sound wave Work Primary energy Bioenergy Fossil fuel Coal Natural gas Petroleum Geothermal Gravitational Hydropower Marine Nuclear fuel Natural uranium Radiant Solar Wind Energy system components Biomass Electric power Electricity delivery Energy engineering Fossil fuel power station Cogeneration Integrated gasification combined cycle Geothermal power Hydropower Hydroelectricity Tidal power Wave farm Nuclear power Nuclear power plant Radioisotope thermoelectric generator Oil refinery Solar power Concentrated solar power Photovoltaic system Solar thermal energy Solar furnace Solar power tower Wind power Airborne wind energy Wind farm Use and supply Efficient energy use Agriculture Computing Transport Energy conservation Energy consumption Energy policy Energy development Energy security Energy storage Renewable energy Sustainable energy World energy supply and consumption Africa Asia Australia Canada Europe Mexico South America United States Misc.

Energy in work Carbon footprint Energy democracy Energy recovery Energy recycling Jevons paradox Waste-to-energy Waste-to-energy plant Category Commons Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thermal_energy&oldid=1304583186 " Categories : Thermodynamic properties Forms of energy Physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 23:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thermal energy 53 languages Add topic

