Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Important dates in the HEC timeline 3 Notable guests 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hotel Ezra Cornell Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hotel Ezra Cornell Motto Showcasing Hospitality Education Through Student Leadership Type Undergraduate student organization Established 1925 Academic affiliation Cornell University School of Hotel Administration Location Ithaca , New York , U.S.

Website https://hotelezracornell.com/ Hotel Ezra Cornell (HEC) is an annual weekend-long educational conference put on by the students of the Cornell School of Hotel Administration for leaders of the hospitality industry. Composed of educational seminars, leisure activities, and food and beverage events, the program is currently in its 100th year, predating the School of Hotel Administration and making HEC one of the oldest organizations at Cornell University. The purpose of the weekend is for students to practice the skills they have learned in the classroom and to showcase their talents to industry professionals, many of whom are Cornell alumni.

HEC is planned, managed, and staffed entirely by students. Over the course of one academic year, the student Board of Directors, assistant directors, and managers plan all of the details of HEC, and during the weekend, over 300 students are involved with executing program events. All aspects of the program, including food preparation and service, program marketing, event design, and the turndown service at night, are handled by students, with faculty members acting only as advisers.

History [ edit ] HEC has its origins in 1925, when Professor Howard Meek, who would later serve as the first Dean of the School of Hotel Administration, took a group of students to New York City to manage the Hotel Astor for a day.

[ 1 ] Upon returning to Ithaca, the students decided to hold the grand opening of "The Only Hotel for a Day" to demonstrate that hospitality management could be taught in an academic setting, and organized an extravagant formal dinner party for hospitality industry leaders. Lacking an event space of its own, the inaugural Hotel Ezra Cornell was held on May 7, 1926 in Risley Hall on Cornell 's campus. The second year of HEC was a turning point in the history of Cornell's hospitality program, and featured one of the world's leading hoteliers, Ellsworth Milton Statler , as a guest of honor to assess the quality of Cornell's nascent hospitality program. At the main banquet, Statler commented, "I'm converted. Meek can have any damn thing he wants," an moment traditionally held to mark the founding of the School of Hotel Administration.

[ 2 ] As the School of Hotel Administration gained prominence, future HECs became more elaborate, with each year adopting a unique theme that informed program events. An example of this practice was HEC 60, which was themed "Diamond Robbery" and styled as a mystery theater. The whole weekend was centered on solving a fictitious diamond robbery, with each social event providing clues. Such themed events were gradually phased out with HEC 77, when the focus of the weekend shifted from socializing to learning and was modeled after existing hospitality industry conferences, with a greater emphasis on guest speakers and panelists.

Students coined the tag line "The Best Ever" to describe how their HEC would top all previous HECs.

[ 3 ] Important dates in the HEC timeline [ edit ] 1926: HEC 1 1927: E.M. Statler pledges support 1938: HEC is dedicated to Howard Meek, who will later serve as the first Dean of the School of Hotel Administration 1943: 20th Anniversary of hotel program, announcement that Statler Foundation would support new facility for school 1950: The cornerstone of Statler Hall is laid 1951: Meek is named director of hotel program; the new Statler Hall opens 1955: The Hotel School becomes an independent unit 1962: Meek’s last year, HEC is dedicated to him 1972: Educational focus introduced 1980: Formal dinner becomes multiple dinners—guests get to choose which dinner to attend 1988 & 1989: Statler Hotel undergoes renovation, so HEC is held all over campus 1990: Grand Opening of Statler Hotel and J. Willard Marriott Executive Education Center, with a record number of industry leaders in attendance 2005: First year with HEC to be held in the Robert A. and Jan M. Beck Center Notable guests [ edit ] Keith Barr , CEO, InterContinental Hotels Group Ken Blanchard , owner, Ken Blanchard Companies, author, One Minute Manager , and management consultant Chris Cahill , president and COO, Fairmont Hotels Matthew J. Hart , president and COO, Hilton Hotels Corporation Conrad Hilton , founder, Hilton Hotels Corporation Howard Deering Johnson , founder, Howard Johnson's Hotels Bill Marriott , executive chairman and former CEO, Marriott Hotels David Neeleman , CEO, JetBlue Drew Nieporent , president, Myriad Restaurant Group L. Timothy Ryan , president, Culinary Institute of America William Shaw , president and COO, Marriott International Barry Sternlicht , CEO, Starwood Capital Group Jonathan Tisch , president and CEO, Loews Hotels Steve Wynn , chairman, Wynn Resorts References [ edit ] ^ Brad Edmondson (1997).

Hospitality Leadership: The Cornell Hotel School . Cornell Society of Hotelmen. pp.

33– 34.

ISBN 0-9649921-0-8 .

^ Brad Edmondson (1997).

Hospitality Leadership: The Cornell Hotel School . Cornell Society of Hotelmen. p. 39.

ISBN 0-9649921-0-8 .

^ Sanders, Joy; Morris, Allison Jeanne Morris (1990).

The Best Ever! Memories of Hotel Ezra Cornell . The Grapevine Press.

External links [ edit ] The official Hotel Ezra Cornell website, with up-to-date information on the annual event https://www.facebook.com/HotelEzraCornell https://twitter.com/HtlEzraCornell v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hotel_Ezra_Cornell&oldid=1243193136 " Categories : Cornell University Hospitality schools in the United States Hidden category: Articles using infobox university This page was last edited on 31 August 2024, at 01:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hotel Ezra Cornell Add languages Add topic

