Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Monastic superiors Toggle Monastic superiors subsection 1.1 Compound and derived titles 2 Chivalric orders 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Prior (ecclesiastical) 28 languages Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Limburgs Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Prioress ) Ecclesiastical title This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Prior" ecclesiastical – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the Hierarchy of the Catholic Church Saint Peter Ecclesiastical titles ( order of precedence ) Pope Pope emeritus Cardinal Cardinal Vicar Crown Prince Protector Moderator of the curia Chaplain of His Holiness Papal legate Papal majordomo Apostolic nuncio Apostolic delegate Apostolic Syndic Apostolic visitor Vicar apostolic Apostolic exarch Apostolic prefect Assistant to the papal throne Eparch Metropolitan Patriarch Catholicos Bishop Archbishop Bishop emeritus Diocesan bishop Major archbishop Primate Suffragan bishop Titular bishop Coadjutor bishop Auxiliary bishop Prelate Provost Pontiff Territorial prelate Territorial abbot Liturgical titles Acolyte Consecrator Lector Subdeacon Administrative and pastoral titles Auditor Brother Chancellor Chaplain Military chaplain Military ordinary Coarb Confessor Consultor Curate Deacon Archdeacon Defender of the bond Definitor Devil's advocate Diocesan administrator Ecclesiastical judge Exorcist Laity Lay abbot Abthain Commendatory Lay cardinal Minister Major orders Minor orders Missionary Monsignor Officialis Ostiarius Pastor Assistant pastor Palatinus Personal prelate Preacher Prefect Presbyter Elder Priest Principal Protonotary apostolic Reverend Saint Servant of God Blessed Venerable Seminarian Vicar Judicial vicar Vicar general Vicar forane Sub-dean Consecrated and professed titles Abbess Abbot Consecrated virgin Corrector Custos Friar Dean Grand master Hermit Master of novices Monk Novice Nun Postulant Prior Provincial superior Rector Religious Superior general Additional titles Almoner Altar server Archimandrite Archpriest Archdeacon Canon Captain General of the Church Chorbishop Coarb Commissary Apostolic Conclavist Custos Datarius Gonfalonier of the Church Honorary prelate Minor canon Notarius Ostiarius Peritus Postulator Prebendary Precentor Prince-bishop Prince-abbot Prince-primate Prince-provost Promotor Fidei Protopriest Protodeacon Protosyncellus Regionarius Sacristan Sidewalk counselor Usher Associations and organization titles Third orders Oblates Confraternities Pious Unions Grand master Knights Hospitaller Order of the Holy Sepulchre Teutonic Knights Inquisitor Grand Inquisitor Preceptor Catholic Church portal v t e Prior (or prioress ) is an ecclesiastical title for a superior in some religious orders . The word is derived from the Latin for "earlier" or "first". The office may head a local house, a region of houses (prior provincial), or the entire order (prior general). Its earlier generic usage referred to any monastic superior. In abbeys , a prior would be lower in rank than the abbey's abbot or abbess .

Monastic superiors [ edit ] In the Rule of Saint Benedict , the term appears several times, referring to any superior, whether an abbot, provost , dean , etc. In other old monastic rules, the term is used in the same generic sense.

[ 1 ] With the Cluniac Reforms , the term prior received a specific meaning; it supplanted the provost or dean ( praepositus ), spoken of in the Rule of St. Benedict. The example of the Cluniac congregations was gradually followed by all Benedictine monasteries, as well as by the Camaldolese , Vallombrosians , Cistercians , Hirsau congregations , and other offshoots of the Benedictine Order.

[ 1 ] Monastic congregations of hermit origin generally do not use the title of abbot for the head of any of their houses, to avoid the involvement with the world, the office of an abbot would entail. As a result, it is not used by the congregation as a whole. Among them, the equivalent term of 'prior general' is used. This applies, e.g., to the Camaldolese and the Carthusians .

The term is also used by various mendicant orders , e.g., the Carmelites and the Dominicans . This applies both to the friars and the nuns of these orders. The term connotes the idea that the 'prior general' is simply the "first among equals".

[ 2 ] Compound and derived titles [ edit ] The Benedictine Order and its branches, the Premonstratensian Order , and the military orders have three kinds of priors: [ 1 ] the claustral prior the conventual prior the obedientiary prior The Claustral prior (Latin prior claustralis ), called dean in a few monasteries, holds the first place after the abbot (or grand-master in military orders), whom he assists in the government of the monastery, functioning effectively as the abbot's second-in-charge. He has no ordinary jurisdiction by virtue of his office, since he performs the duties of his office entirely according to the will and under the direction of the abbot. Therefore, his jurisdiction is delegated and extends just as far as the abbot desires, or the congregation's constitutions prescribe. He is appointed by the abbot, generally after a consultation in chapter with the professed monks of the monastery, and may be removed by him at any time.

[ 1 ] In many monasteries, especially larger ones, the claustral prior is assisted by a sub-prior , who holds the third place in the monastery. In former times, there were larger monasteries, besides the prior and the sub-prior, as well as a third, fourth, and sometimes even a fifth prior. Each of these was called circa (or circator ), because it was his duty to make the rounds of the monastery to see whether anything was amiss and whether the brethren were intent on the work allotted to them respectively. He had no authority to correct or punish the brethren, but was to report to the claustral prior whatever he found amiss or contrary to the rules. In the Congregation of Cluny and others of the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries there was also a greater prior ( prior major ) who preceded the claustral prior in dignity and, besides assisting the abbot in the government of the monastery, had some delegated jurisdiction over external dependencies of the abbey.

[ 1 ] In the high days of Cluny, the abbot was assisted by a coadjutor styled Grand-Prior ( Grand-prieur in French).

The Conventual prior (Latin prior conventualis ) is the independent superior of a monastery that is not an abbey (and which is therefore called a "priory").

[ 1 ] In some orders, like the Benedictines, a monastery remains a priory until it is considered stable enough and large enough to be elevated to the rank of an abbey. In other Orders, like the Camaldolese and Carthusians , conventual priors are the norm and there are no abbots. (The superior of the major houses of Camaldolese nuns, however, is called an abbess .) This title, in its feminine form prioress , is used for monasteries of nuns in the Dominican and Carmelite orders.

An Obedientiary Prior heads a monastery created as a satellite of an abbey. When an abbey becomes too large or when a monastery is needed in a new area, the abbot may appoint a group of monks under a prior to begin a new foundation. The foundation remains a dependency of the mother abbey until it is large and stable enough to become an independent abbey of its own.

A Prior Provincial and is the regional superior of certain Orders, such as the Order of Friars Preachers Dominicans or the Carmelite friars . In this last case, the head of the whole Order is called the Prior General .

Among communities of friars, the second superior is called the sub-prior, and his office is similar to that of the claustral prior in the Benedictine Order.

[ 1 ] Chivalric orders [ edit ] In the medieval order of St. John (also known as the Knights Hospitaller ), a Grand Prior acted as the administrator of an order province known as a Grand Priory. These Grand Priories were joined into larger administrative units known as "Langues", which roughly encompassed the order's properties within a single language sphere. The grand priories were sometimes subdivided into smaller priories and bailiwicks, and at the lowest level, into commanderies . While the subdivision into langues was abolished in 1798, the subdivision into grand priories still exists within the sovereign Order of Malta , the modern successor of the historical Order of St. John. Other chivalric orders, such as the military Order of Christ , the Knights of Santiago , or in general, the Orders founded in the context of the Reconquista , only had one Grand Prior who acted as the Orders' Chief-cleric. During the peak of the Order's influence, the chivalric Grand Priors were considered equal in rank to a bishop. Since 1953, the priories of the Spanish Chivalric Order have been held in personal union by the Bishop of Ciudad Real . Within the Order of the Holy Sepulcher , the title of Grand Prior is held in personal union by the Latin patriarch of Jerusalem .

See also [ edit ] Friar Catholic religious order Priory References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Prior ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Carmelite Friars. The British Province of Carmelites, 5 July 2017. Retrieved on 8 June 2018 from carmelite.org Bibliography [ edit ] O'Neill, Elizabeth (1911).

"Prior" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). pp.

359– 360.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Priors at Wikimedia Commons Look up prior in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Consecrated life in the Catholic Church Types Consecrated virgin Hermit Religious institute Orders Monastic Cenobitic Chapter Enclosed Idiorrhythmic Canons regular Mendicants Second orders Cleric regular Congregations Secular institute Society of apostolic life Vows Evangelical counsels Poverty Chastity Obedience Profession Solemn vow Vow of silence Vow of enclosure Monastery ( List ) Abbey Chapter house Cloister Convent Double Hermitage Priory Refectory Scriptorium Prayer Contemplation Liturgy of the Hours Mass Meditation Rosary Habit Clerical clothing Coif Cornette Scapular Vestment Members Superior General Provincial Abbot / Abbess Prior / Prioress Grand master Rector Brother Friar Monk Basilian Sister Nun Hermit Anchorite Novice Master Oblate Postulant Lay brother Porter Other Asceticism Foolishness for Christ Tonsure Vocational discernment Monastic cell List of religious institutes Catholicism portal v t e Phaleristics Auxiliary science of history and numismatics about orders , decorations , and medals Distinctions ( Lists ) By conferee Founts of honour * States and their national/public/official authorities Dynasties heads of currently or formerly sovereign royal families Private Ecclesiastical Organisations Commercial ( Self-styled order ) By type Orders Order of chivalry Military order Order of merit Royal family order Titles ( Styles , Post-nominal ) By function Grand master Chancellor Treasurer Assessor Bailiff Prior Chaplain Master of ceremonies Grand Cross / Grand Cordon Commander Officer Hospitaller Knight / Dame Postulant Squire Page Jurisdictions Charter Bailiwick Chapter Commandery Obedience Grand Lodge Lodge Others, by field Military ( List ) List of highest Campaign medal Law enforcement Civilian ( List ) Society Peace Intellectual freedom Human rights Law Humanitarianism Politics Volunteer Culture Architecture Art Film History Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Theatre Science Religion-related Ecclesiastical Sports Scouting Beauty By insignia ( Named after people ) For wearing (decorations) Formal Chelengk Collar Livery collar Grand Cross / Grand Cordon with sash Medal Necklet Medal bar Medal ribbon Robe of honour Tiraz Other Rosette Award pin Lapel pin Collar pin Tie pin Badge Heraldic Pilgrim Championship belt Embroidered patch Epaulette Ribbon Ring Championship ring Button Campaign Service Shoulder mark Tie clip Prizes Booby prize Wooden spoon Deal toy Plaquette Prize book Prize money Prize of war War trophy Human trophy Rosette Trophy Acrylic Participation Prizes known as the Nobel of a field Ceremonies and events Accolade Vigil Feoffment Passage fee Festival Vow Collar day Related organisations Family history society Fraternity Confraternity Fraternal order Fraternities and sororities Secret society Guild Syndicate Learned society Fellowship Honor society Hereditary society Club Gentlemen's club International Commission for Orders of Chivalry Magical organization Religious order Related concepts Chivalry Numismatics Heraldry Vexillology Service flag Battle honour Campaign streamer Nobility Order of precedence Taonga Honorary degree Devotional medal Awareness ribbon Code of conduct Code of honor High society * = Direct or indirect reference to fount of honour is the accepted criterion for official distinctions Category:Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Awards Authority control databases National Germany 2 Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prior_(ecclesiastical)&oldid=1300629001 " Categories : Priors Ecclesiastical titles Organisation of Catholic religious orders Religious leadership roles Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Articles needing additional references from June 2012 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 13:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prior (ecclesiastical) 28 languages Add topic

