Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Research 3 Development of atmospheric dispersion models 4 Storm naming 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute 10 languages العربية Basa Bali Deutsch Français Frysk Italiano Nederlands Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°06′05″N 5°10′42″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.10139°N 5.17833°E ﻿ / 52.10139; 5.17833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research institute Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute Dutch : Koninklijk Nederlands Meteorologisch Instituut KNMI headquarters in De Bilt Agency overview Formed 31 January 1854 ( 1854-01-31 ) Headquarters De Bilt , Netherlands Employees 534 (as of 2024 [update] ) [ 1 ] Deputy Minister responsible Barry Madlener Agency executive Maarten Krispijn van Aalst, Director Parent department Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management Website www .knmi .nl The Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute ( Dutch : Koninklijk Nederlands Meteorologisch Instituut , pronounced [ˈkoːnɪŋklək ˈneːdərlɑnts ˌmeːteːjoːroːˈloːɣis ɪnstiˈtyt] ; KNMI ) is the Dutch national weather forecasting service, which has its headquarters in De Bilt , in the province of Utrecht , central Netherlands.

The primary tasks of KNMI are weather forecasting, monitoring of  climate changes and monitoring seismic activity. KNMI is also the national research and information centre for climate , climate change and seismology .

History [ edit ] C. H. D. Buys Ballot , 1st director (from 1854 to 1890) KNMI was established by royal decree of King William III on 31 January 1854 [ 2 ] under the title "Royal Meteorological Observatory". Professor C. H. D. Buys Ballot was appointed as the first Director.

[ 3 ] The year before Professor Ballot had moved the Utrecht University Observatory to the decommissioned fort at Sonnenborgh . It was only later, in 1897, that the headquarters of the KNMI moved to the Koelenberg estate in De Bilt .

The "Royal Meteorological Observatory" originally had two divisions, the land branch under Dr. Frederik Wilhelm Christiaan Krecke and the marine branch under navy Lt.

Marin H. Jansen .

[ 3 ] Like Robert FitzRoy who founded the Meteorological Office in Britain the same year, Ballot was disenchanted with the non-scientific weather reports found in European newspapers at the time. Like the Met Office, the KNMI also pioneered daily weather predictions, which he called by a new combination "weervoorspelling" (weather prognostication).

Research [ edit ] Applied research at KNMI is focused on three areas: [ 4 ] Research aimed at improving the quality, usefulness and accessibility of meteorological and oceanographical data in support of operational weather forecasting and other applications of such data.

Climate-related research on oceanography; atmospheric boundary layer processes, clouds and radiation; the chemical composition of the atmosphere (e.g. ozone); climate variability research; the analysis of climate, climate variability and climatic change;  modelling support and policy support to the Dutch Government with respect to climate and climatic change.

Seismological research as well as monitoring of seismic activity ( earthquakes ).

Development of atmospheric dispersion models [ edit ] KNMI's applied research also encompasses the development and operational use of atmospheric dispersion models .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Whenever a disaster occurs within Europe which causes the emission of toxic gases or radioactive material into the atmosphere, it is of utmost importance to quickly determine where the atmospheric plume of toxic material is being transported by the prevailing winds and other meteorological factors. At such times, KNMI activates a special calamity service. For this purpose, a group of seven meteorologists is constantly on call day and night. KNMI's role in supplying information during emergencies is included in municipal and provincial disaster management plans. Civil services, fire departments and the police can be provided with weather and other relevant information directly by the meteorologist on duty, through dedicated telephone connections.

KNMI has available two atmospheric dispersion models for use by their calamity service: PUFF - In cooperation with the Netherlands National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (Dutch: Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieuhygiene or simply RIVM ), KNMI has developed the dispersion model PUFF. It has been designed to calculate the dispersion of air pollution on European scales.  The model was originally tested by using measurements of the dispersion of radioactivity caused by the accident in the nuclear power plant of Chernobyl in 1986. A few years later, in 1994, a dedicated dispersion experiment called ETEX (European Tracer EXperiment) was carried out, which also provided useful data for further testing of PUFF.

CALM - CALM is a CALamity Model designed for the calculation of air pollution dispersion on small spatial scales, within the Netherlands. The algorithms and parameters contained in the CALM model are practically identical to that of the PUFF model. However, the meteorological input can only be supplied manually in CALM. The user provides both observed and predicted values for wind velocity at the 10 meter height level, the atmospheric stability classification and the mixing height. After the model calculations have been performed, a map is created and displayed with the derived trajectories of the pollution plume and an indication of how and where the cloud will disperse.

Storm naming [ edit ] In 2019 KNMI decided to join the western storm naming group to help awareness of the danger of storms, the first named storm was Storm Ciara on 9 February 2020.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Maurits Snellen [ nl ] , 2nd director (from 1890 to 1902) Atmospheric dispersion modeling List of atmospheric dispersion models National Center for Atmospheric Research NERI, the National Environmental Research Institute of Denmark NILU, the Norwegian Institute for Air Research Roadway air dispersion modeling Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute TA Luft UK Atmospheric Dispersion Modelling Liaison Committee UK Dispersion Modelling Bureau University Corporation for Atmospheric Research References [ edit ] ^ "2024 in cijfers" (in Dutch). KNMI . Retrieved 2025-04-05 .

^ https://www.knmi.nl/over-het-knmi/over ^ a b Maury, Matthew Fontaine (1858). "Account of Lt. Van Gough".

Explanations and sailing directions to accompany the Wind and current charts . Washington D.C.: United States Naval Observatory. pp.

376–377 .

^ KNMI Research Programme, 2003-2007 Archived 2006-09-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ Turner, D.B. (1994).

Workbook of atmospheric dispersion estimates: an introduction to dispersion modeling (2nd ed.). CRC Press.

ISBN 1-56670-023-X .

www.crcpress.com Archived 2007-11-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Beychok, Milton R. (2005).

Fundamentals Of Stack Gas Dispersion (4th ed.). author-published.

ISBN 0-9644588-0-2 .

www.air-dispersion.com ^ "Naamgeving van stormen" . knmi . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

52°06′05″N 5°10′42″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.10139°N 5.17833°E ﻿ / 52.10139; 5.17833 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to KNMI .

KNMI website (in Dutch) KNMI website (in English) KNMI atmospheric dispersion models RIVM website (in English) v t e National meteorological organizations Africa Algeria Ghana Mozambique South Africa Americas Argentina Bermuda Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Ecuador Guatemala Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan China Hong Kong (PRC) India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan North Korea South Korea Macau (PRC) Malaysia Pakistan Palestine Philippines Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Vietnam Europe Austria Belgium Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Ukraine Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Réunion (France) Tonga Tuvalu Regional: Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts European Severe Storms Laboratory Global: World Meteorological Organization Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Netherlands_Meteorological_Institute&oldid=1292373424 " Categories : Atmospheric dispersion modeling Organisations based in De Bilt Governmental meteorological agencies in Europe Independent government agencies of the Netherlands Organisations based in the Netherlands with royal patronage Research institutes in the Netherlands Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages with Dutch IPA Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute 10 languages Add topic

