Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Muslims in medieval Christian kingdoms 3 Mudéjar style in architecture Toggle Mudéjar style in architecture subsection 3.1 Iberian Peninsula 3.2 Hispanic America 3.3 Gallery 4 Mudéjar style in other arts Toggle Mudéjar style in other arts subsection 4.1 Decorative arts 4.2 Ceramics 5 Neo-Mudéjar 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Mudéjar art 23 languages العربية Aragonés Башҡортса Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Հայերեն Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Polski Português Română Русский Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art style in post-Islamic Spain This article is about style in post-Islamic Iberia. For a group of people, see Mudéjar .

The bell tower of the church of San Salvador , Teruel , Aragon Mudéjar art , or Mudéjar style , was a type of ornamentation and decoration used in the Iberian Christian kingdoms, primarily between the 13th and 16th centuries. It was applied to Romanesque , Gothic and Renaissance architectural styles as constructive, ornamental and decorative motifs derived from those that had been brought to or developed in Al-Andalus .

[ 1 ] These motifs and techniques were also present in the art and crafts , especially Hispano-Moresque lustreware that was once widely exported across Europe from southern and eastern Spain at the time.

The term Mudejar art was coined by the art historian José Amador de los Ríos y Serrano in reference to the Mudéjars , who played a leading role in introducing Islamic derived decorative elements into the Iberian Christian kingdoms. The Mudéjars were the Muslims who remained in the former areas of Al-Andalus after the Christian Reconquista in the Middle Ages and were allowed to practice their religion to a limited degree. Mudéjar art is valuable in that it represents peaceful co-existence between Muslims and Christians during the medieval era, [ 2 ] although all Muslims and Jews in Spain eventually were forced to convert to Christianity or exiled between the late 15th century and the early-to-mid 16th century .

[ 3 ] The Mudéjar decorative elements were developed in Iberia specially in the context of historic architecture. There was a revival in the late-19th and the early-20th-century Spain and Portugal as Neo-Mudéjar style.

Etymology [ edit ] Façade of Parroquieta Chapel of La Seo de Zaragoza , Aragon , a gothic building with elaborate mudéjar masonry Mudéjar was originally the term used for Muslims of Al-Andalus who remained after the Christian reconquest of Muslim controlled territories in the later Middle Ages but were not initially converted to Christianity or exiled. It was a medieval Castilian borrowing of the Arabic word Mudajjan مدجن , meaning "tamed", referring to Muslims who submitted to the rule of Christian kings. The term likely originated as a taunt, as the word was usually applied to domesticated animals such as poultry.

[ 4 ] The term Mudéjar can also be translated from Arabic as "one permitted to remain", which references Christians allowing Muslims to remain in Christian Iberia. The concept "arte mudéjar" was coined and defined by the Spanish art historian José Amador de los Ríos y Serrano in his induction discourse El estilo mudéjar, en arquitectura at the Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando in 1859.

Muslims in medieval Christian kingdoms [ edit ] The Muslims living in the medieval Christian kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula , called Mudejars , were tolerated and could practice their religion with certain restrictions. However, soon after the last Muslim stronghold in the peninsula, the Granada , fell to the Christian Castile in 1492, Muslims were forced to choose between becoming Christians or to leave, first in Castile and soon after in Aragon . Those who chose to convert and stay were called Moriscos , and were often suspected of secretly practicing Islam, and were finally expelled from Spain after 1609.

[ 5 ] What allowed Mudejar culture to survive and flourish in the medieval Christian kingdoms depended upon whether the capture by Christians was accomplished through negotiated surrender or military defeat, the ratio of Muslim to Christian populations, the competing interests of the monarchy and the papacy, and economic exigencies.

[ citation needed ] With a balance of these things, Mudejar art was born.

[ 6 ] As a result of this local variation, the Islamic influences that were absorbed into the Christian architectural practices of the different regions in the Christian kingdoms differed greatly, but all come under the general umbrella term of Mudejar art .

[ 7 ] Mudéjar style in architecture [ edit ] Further information: Islamic geometric patterns Mudéjar style ceiling carpentry , Segorbe town hall (former ducal palace), Valencia Region Mudejar style in architecture refers to the application of decorative Islamic art styled motifs and patterning to Christian styles of architecture. It is thought to have begun with Muslim craftsmen who applied traditional constructive, ornamental, and decorative elements derived from the Islamic arts to Christian styles of architecture. These methods became part of local Christian building traditions and were applied  to Romanesque , Gothic , and Renaissance architectural styles in the expanding Christian kingdoms of Iberia.

[ 8 ] These decorative techniques included calligraphy, intricate geometry, and vegetal forms derived from Islamic art and architecture.

[ 9 ] Mudejar constructive systems were very simple and extremely effective. The materials used included brick, along with other artificial stone materials, and wood, which were not only entrusted with a constructive function but which were also decorative.

[ 7 ] Brick held great importance as a material of construction, its maneuverability and resistance, aesthetic characteristics and inexpensive nature, made it suitable for architecture that needed to be built in a timely fashion.

[ 10 ] The main sites of Mudéjar decorated buildings in Spain and Portugal: Early examples (grey) and regional subtypes: Aragon (yellow); Castile & León (red); Toledo (purple); Portugal (blue); Andalusia (olive green); other (white) Mudejar decoration and ornamentation includes stylized calligraphy and intricate geometric and vegetal forms. The classic Mudéjar elements include the horseshoe and multi-lobed arch, muqarna vaults, alfiz (molding around an arch), wooden roofing, fired bricks, glazed ceramic tiles, and ornamental stucco work.

[ 11 ] Mudejar plasterwork, sometimes called Yeseria , includes all the Islamic motifs, such as epigraphic, “atauriques,” or arabesque ornament, and geometrical motifs, although motifs of Christian art are also included, such as Gothic vegetables and shields, they are depicted in the rhythm of Islamic tradition, which plays an important role in chromatics. Mudéjar often makes use of girih geometric strapwork decoration, as used in Middle East architecture, where Maghreb buildings tended to use vegetal arabesques . Scholars have sometimes considered the geometric forms, both girih and the complex vaultings of muqarnas , as innovative, and arabesques as retardataire, but in Al-Andalus, both geometric and vegetal forms were freely used and combined.

[ citation needed ] Iberian Peninsula [ edit ] Further information: Mudéjar architecture of Aragon Nuestra Señora de Loreto, Algezares , city of Murcia: wooden ceiling on "diaphragm" arches Santa Eulalia Church in Totana , Murcia Region Geometric design : Royal Convent of Santa Clara in Tordesillas with girih-patterned artesonado ceiling With the re-establishment of Christian rule throughout the formerly Muslim controlled areas of Iberia came the different Mudéjar construction methods for creating a building using inexpensive materials like brick, wood, and stucco.

[ 12 ] It is generally accepted by scholars that Mudéjar art in architecture first appeared in the northern town of Sahagún in the 12th century Christian Kingdom of León .

[ 13 ] Mudéjar spread to other parts of the Kingdom of León: notable examples can be found in Toledo , Ávila , Segovia , Toro , Cuéllar , Arévalo and Madrigal de las Altas Torres . Later, Mudéjar was spread into southern Spain by the Kingdom of Castile . A particularly fine example of Mudéjar Renaissance is the Casa de Pilatos , built in the early 16th century at Seville . Seville includes many other examples of Mudéjar art. The Alcázar of Seville is considered one of the greatest surviving examples of Mudéjar Gothic and Mudéjar Renaissance architecture although its so-called Mudéjar Rooms are directly related to the Moorish Nasirid architecture of the Alhambra rather than to Mudéjar art techniques; the Christian king Pedro of Castile employed architects from the then Islamic Emirate of Granada to construct them.

Mudéjar art emerged in the north-eastern Christian Kingdom of Aragon in the 12th century and includes more than a hundred surviving examples, located predominantly in the valleys of the Ebro , Jalón and Jiloca . Its first manifestations have two origins: on the one hand, a palatial architecture linked to the Christian monarchy, which amended and extended the originally Moorish Aljafería Palace and maintained an Islamic ornamental tradition, and on the other hand, a tradition that developed Romanesque architecture using brickwork rather than stone construction and which often displays Hispanic ornamental tracery. Examples of the latter type of Mudéjar elements can be seen in churches in Daroca , which were started in stone and finished off in the 13th century with Mudéjar brick panels.

Wooden mudéjar roof of the chapel of the Royal Palace of Sintra (Portugal) with 4-, 6-, 8- and 12-point stars in girih strapwork Portugal commissioned fewer Mudéjar decorated buildings, which generally incorporated simpler Mudéjar elements. The Church of Castro de Avelãs in Braganza features classic Mudéjar art brick work. Mudéjar also tended to be applied to the gothic Manueline style in Portugal, which was very lavish and ornate.

[ 14 ] Portuguese use of Mudéjar art developed particularly in the 15th and 16th centuries, and structures such as the Palace of the Counts of Basto and the Royal Palace feature characteristic wooden Mudéjar roofs that are also to be found in some churches in towns such as Sintra and Lisbon . Since trade was an essential part of Portugal's culture in the 16th century, imported Mudéjar art decorated tiles from Seville appear in churches and palaces, such as the Royal Palace of Sintra.

[ 15 ] Hispanic America [ edit ] Christian builders and craftsmen carried Mudéjar style elements to the overseas territories of the Spanish empire, especially in the 16th century, complementing Renaissance architecture before the emergence of Baroque.

[ 16 ] The Mudéjar "style" in architecture is most accurately described as a “common visual language” rather than a cohesive structure with particular regulations. This led to Mudejar design themes in the New World to be considered purely a continuation of an architectural blend that was unique to Spain.

[ 17 ] The Church of San Miguel in Sucre , Bolivia, provides an example of Mudéjar in Hispanic America with its interior decorations and the open floor plan. Mudéjar geometric design can be seen through its octagonal patterned wood ceiling and in the underside of the supporting arches, which are carved with a vegetable motif based on the arabesque . San Miguel is a direct inheritor of the Mudéjar and tradition of the expansion and multiplication of an initial pattern. Around the octagonal dome, there are more wooden ceiling panels carved with the same pattern as the church's ceiling.

[ 18 ] Additionally, the white stucco walls demonstrate the Baroque influence on the church exemplifying the transculturation found in Spanish architecture.

Some other notable examples of Mudejar design in Hispanic America are: The Monastery of San Francisco in Lima , Peru also contains Mudéjar elements. The vaults of the central and two side naves are painted in Mudéjar style. The halls of the head cloister are inlaid with Sevillian glazed tiles, and the main altar is made entirely from carved wood.

[ citation needed ] The Iglesia del Espíritu Santo in Havana , Cuba.

[ citation needed ] Other examples of Mudéjar art can be found in Coro , a UNESCO World Heritage Site in Venezuela.

Gallery [ edit ] San Tirso in Sahagún , mudéjar or brick romanesque, ( León ), Spain Church of Castro de Avelãs , mudéjar romanesque, 13th and 14th centuries, Bragança, Portugal A mudéjar gothic cloister, La Iglesia de San Pedro, Teruel, Spain The Royal Alcázars of Seville , Spain, built in the 14th to the 18th centuries, with mudejar applied to gothic, renaissance and baroque structures Gallery of Dames, Royal Palace of Évora , 16th century, mudéjar manueline , Portugal Mudéjar art in the walls and bell tower of the Chapel of the Immaculate Conception in Cali , Colombia Mudéjar style in other arts [ edit ] Decorative arts [ edit ] Carpet probably made for Fadrique Enríquez , whose coat of arms — an upright lion beneath two triple-towered castles bordered by anchors and ropes — is repeated three times in the center field.

Philadelphia Museum of Art Detail of Mudéjar tile work from the palace garden of Charles V in Seville .

Mudejar artisans brought into the Christian kingdoms the elaborate geometric designs found in tilework , brickwork , wood carving , plasterwork , ceramics, and ornamental metals of Al-Andalus. Objects, as well as ceilings and walls, were often decorated with rich and complicated designs, as Mudéjar artists were not only interested in relaying wonder, a key feature of Islamic art and architectural traditions, but in conveying the sumptuousness of materials and ornament.

[ 19 ] Many decorative arts were applied to architecture, such as the tiling and ceramic work, as well as carving practices.

[ 20 ] To enliven the surfaces of wall and floor, Mudéjar art developed complicated tiling patterns. The motifs on tile work are often abstract, leaning more on vegetal designs and straying from figural images (which is common in Islamic work). The colors of tile work of the Mudéjar period are much brighter and more vibrant than other European styles. The production process was also typical of techniques that had been used in Islamic Iberia, the tile was fired before it was cut into smaller, more manageable pieces. This approach meant that the tiles and glaze work shrank less in the firing process, and retained their designs more clearly. This allowed the tiles to be laid closer together with less grout, making the compositions more intricate and cohesive.

[ 20 ] Ceramics [ edit ] Christian Hispano-Moresque ware : Mudéjar art luster ware with figurative animal motifs and pseudo calligraphy.

Ceramics had been a sophisticated art form during the period of Islamic rule in the Iberian Peninsula and  Mudéjar style ceramics were built on the techniques developed in the previous centuries of Islamic art.

[ 21 ] Pottery centers all over Spain - e.g.

Paterna , Toledo , Seville - focused on making a range of objects, from bowls and plates to candlesticks. Mudejar style ceramics were typically worked in three “styles:” green-purple ware (manganese green), ( cobalt ) blue ware, and gold-glazed ware ( lusterware ). Mudejar artisans introduced their perfected glazing techniques to Medieval Europe where Mudejar pottery from  Manises, Paterna, and Teruel were the most popular. A transparent glaze could be achieved through the mixing of lead and tin for an opaque, shiny white glaze, and mixtures of metal oxides were applied to the glazed and fired surfaces to create lustre decoration.

[ 22 ] This technique was carried on from the Nasrid period. Typically, artisans would apply a layer of opaque white glaze before the colors. On top of the white, cobalt blue, green copper, and purple manganese oxides were used to make vibrant, shimmering surfaces with the appearance of gold and other precious metals. Similarly to tile and stucco work, ceramic motifs included vegetal patterns, in addition to figurative motifs, calligraphy, and geometric patterns and images. There are also Christian influences in the imagery, such as boats, fern leaves, hearts, and castles.

[ 23 ] Neo-Mudéjar [ edit ] Main article: Neo-Mudéjar Neo-Mudéjar style in an office building in Madrid.

Mudéjar art has had modern revivals, the most important being Neo-Mudéjar, which appeared in Spain and Portugal in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It combined modern architecture and materials, including cast iron and glass with Mudéjar art styled arches, tiling, and brickwork.

[ 24 ] Neo-Mudéjar Pavillion in Seville Neo-Mudéjar was especially prominent in Seville during the 1929 Ibero-American Exposition, when buildings such as the Plaza de España, the Mudéjar Pavilion, and the Hotel Alfonso XIII were constructed.

[ 25 ] These buildings especially showcased the work of Aníbal González, the chief architect of the Exposition, whose signature style combined traditional Mudéjar motifs with contemporary influences.

Some Spanish architectural firms have turned their attention to building projects in the modern Arabic-speaking world, specifically Morocco , Algeria , and Eastern Arabia , where Mudéjar art influences are commissioned as a preferred style of housing. Mudéjar characteristics continue to act as a foundation for modernizing styles. Muslim architects are also currently making great strides in terms of modern architecture, reflecting the technical and engineering feats, as well as aesthetic expertise, reminiscent of the Mudéjar styles.

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] Artesonado Mudéjar Architecture of Aragon Moorish Revival architecture Walls of Cuéllar Azulejo References [ edit ] ^ López Guzmán, Rafael. Arquitectura mudéjar. Cátedra.

ISBN 84-376-1801-0 .

^ "Mudejar Architecture of Aragon" .

^ Harvey, L. P. (May 16, 2005).

Muslims in Spain, 1500 to 1614 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-31963-6 .

^ Harvey 1992 , p. 4.

^ Jones, L.G. (2009).

Encyclopedia of Islam . Facts on File. pp.

486– 487.

^ Jones, L.G. (2009).

Encyclopedia of World Religions. Encyclopedia of Islam . Facts on File. pp.

486– 487.

^ a b Sanz, A. (2018).

Historical and Structural Aspects of the Mudéjar Architecture of the Spanish City of Guadalajara. In 10th International Symposium on the Conservation of Monuments in the Mediterranean Basin . Springer International Publishing. pp.

415– 423.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-78093-1_44 .

^ Gualis, B (2006).

Mudejar: An Alternative Architectural System in the Castilian Urban Repopulation Model. Medieval Encounters . pp.

329– 340.

doi : 10.1163/157006706779166075 .

^ Cummins, F. (2017).

In A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture . John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp.

1023– 1050.

doi : 10.1002/9781119069218.ch39 .

^ Centre, U.

"Mudejar Architecture of Aragon" .

UNESCO . Retrieved November 30, 2020 .

^ Reputation garden guide: flower seeds, garden seeds, garden bulbs, grass seeds / . Duluth, Minnesota: Duluth Floral Co. 1930.

doi : 10.5962/bhl.title.147501 .

^ Chalmeta, P. (2012).

"Mudéjar", in: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

^ Garma, David de la.

"Arquitectura Mudejar (ARTEGUIAS)" .

www.arteguias.com .

Archived from the original on 2016-02-05.

^ "Manueline | architectural style" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2019-05-09 .

^ Makrickas, Augustas.

"Islamic influence on western Architecture" .

^ CUÉLLAR, IGNACIO HENARES; GUZMÁN, RAFAEL LÓPEZ; Suderman, Michelle; ALFARO, ALFONSO; Fox, Lorna Scott; LAHRECH, OUMAMA AOUAD; Shtromberg, Elena; SÁNCHEZ, ALBERTO RUY; ZAHAR, LEÓN R. (2001). "Mudejar: Variations".

Artes de México (55): 81– 96.

ISSN 0300-4953 .

JSTOR 24314027 .

^ Cummins, Thomas (20 June 2017). "Mudejar Americano".

A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture . pp.

1023– 1050.

doi : 10.1002/9781119069218.ch39 .

ISBN 9781119069218 .

^ Sheren, Ila Nicole (2011-06-01).

"Transcultured Architecture: Mudéjar's Epic Journey Reinterpreted" .

Contemporaneity: Historical Presence in Visual Culture .

1 : 137– 151.

doi : 10.5195/contemp.2011.5 .

ISSN 2153-5914 .

^ Saba, Matthew (2012). "Abbasid Lusterware and the Aesthetics of 'ajab".

Muqarnas: An Annual on the Visual Cultures of the Islamic World .

29 : 187– 212.

^ a b Sweetman, John; Gardner, A. R. (2003).

Moorish style . Oxford Art Online. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/gao/9781884446054.article.t059437 .

^ "Mudejar | Spanish Muslim community" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2019-03-09 .

^ "Discover Islamic Art Virtual Exhibitions: Mudéjar Art" .

Museum With No Frontiers . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

^ "La Cerámica Mudéjar" .

www.arteguias.com . Retrieved 2019-03-09 .

^ Time out Madrid (8th ed.). London: Time Out. 2010.

ISBN 9781846701207 .

OCLC 655671274 .

^ street?, What's down that (2025-06-29).

"Mudéjar architecture in Seville" .

whatsdownthatstreet.com . Retrieved 2025-07-04 .

^ Gonzalez, Elena. “Spanish Architecture in the Arab World.” Andalusi and Mudejar Art in Its International Scope: Legacy and Modernity, 9 Sept. 2015, pp. 197–211.

Bibliography [ edit ] ARTEHISTORIA, director.

El Arte Mudéjar .

YouTube , YouTube, 17 June 2008, www.YouTube.com/watch?v=xLuE7w1Zszo.

Boswell, John (1978).

Royal Treasure: Muslim Communities Under the Crown of Aragon in the Fourteenth Century . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-02090-2 Borrás Gualis, G. (2006). Mudéjar: An Alternative Architectural System in the Castilian Urban Repopulation Model. Medieval Encounters, 12(3), 329–340.

https://doi.org/10.1163/157006706779166075 Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia. "Manueline | architectural style".

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2019-05-09.

Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia. “Mudejar.” Encyclopædia Britannica , Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 20 July 1998, www.britannica.com/topic/Mudejar.

Centre, U. (n.d.). Mudejar Architecture of Aragon. Retrieved November 30, 2020, from https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/378/ Chalmeta, P., “Mudéjar”, in: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition, Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W.P. Heinrichs. Consulted online on 30 October 2020 < https://referenceworks-brillonline-com [ permanent dead link ] .

Cummins, F. (2017). Mudéjar Americano. In A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture (pp. 1023–1050). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119069218.ch39 Encyclopedia. "Art in Spain and Portugal | Encyclopedia.com".

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2019-05-09.

Garma, David de la. “Mudéjar Ceramics.” Arte Celta (ARTEGUIAS) , 2012, www.arteguias.com/ceramica-mudejar.htm.

Gonzalez, Elena. “Spanish Architecture in the Arab World.” Andalusi and Mudejar Art in Its International Scope: Legacy and Modernity, 9 Sept. 2015, pp. 197–211.

Harvey, L. P. (1 November 1992).

Islamic Spain, 1250 to 1500 . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-31962-9 .

Harvey, L. P. (16 May 2005).

Muslims in Spain, 1500 to 1614 . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-31963-6 .

King, Georgiana Goddard .

Mudejar . Longmans Ed, 1927.

Linehan, P. (Ed.), Nelson, J. (Ed.), Costambeys, M. (Ed.). (2018). The Medieval World. London:Routledge, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315102511 Jones, L. G. (2009). Mudejar. In J. E. Campo, J. G. Melton (Ed.), Facts on File Library of Religion and Mythology: Encyclopedia of World Religions. Encyclopedia of Islam (pp. 486–487). Facts on File.

https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/CX1692200398/GVRL?u=txshracd2598&sid=GVRL&xid=8772a220 Makrickas, Augustas.

“Islamic Influence on Western Architecture.” Academia.edu , 2013.

Menocal, Maria Rosa (2002). "Ornament of the World: How Muslims, Jews, and Christians Created a Culture of Tolerance in Medieval Spain". Little, Brown, & Co.

ISBN 0-316-16871-8 Museum With No Frontiers. (2004). Discover Islamic Art Virtual Exhibitions: Mudéjar Art. Retrieved November 16, 2020, from http://islamicart.museumwnf.org/exhibitions/ISL/mudejar_art/?lng=en Rubenstein, Richard (2003). "Aristotle's Children: How Christians, Muslims, and Jews Rediscovered Ancient Wisdom and Illuminated the Middle Ages." Harcourt Books.

ISBN 0-15-603009-8 Saba, Matthew. "Abbasid Lusterware and the Aesthetics of 'ajab." Muqarnas: An Annual on the Visual Cultures of the Islamic World 29 (2012): 187–212 Sanz, A. (2018). Historical and Structural Aspects of the Mudéjar Architecture of the Spanish City of Guadalajara. In 10th International Symposium on the Conservation of Monuments in the Mediterranean Basin (pp. 415–423). Springer International Publishing.

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-78093-1_44 “Scattering Seeds from the Garden of Allah.” Teposcolula Retablo , 2000, interamericaninstitute.org/work_in_progress.htm.

Sheren, I. (2011). Transcultural Architecture: Mudéjar's Epic Journey Reinterpreted. Contemporaneity (Pittsburgh, PA), 1, 137–151.

https://doi.org/10.5195/CONTEMP.2011.5 Time Out. “Architecture.” TimeOut Madrid , Time Out Guides, 2010, pp. 32–34.

Voigt. “Tile Style.” Moorish Tile History , 1 Jan. 1970, letstalktile.blogspot.com/2011/01/moorish-tile-history.html.

Wacks, David A.

Cultural Exchange in the Literatures and Languages of Medieval Iberia . 30 Oct. 2013, davidwacks.uoregon.edu/tag/aljamiado/.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mudéjar art .

Tower of El Salvador, Teruel. UNESCO World Heritage Mudéjar art in Spain and Portugal in the Museum with no Frontiers website Arte Mudejar en Jerez de la Frontera Casselman Archive of Islamic and Mudejar Architecture in Spain v t e Architecture of Spain Styles Megalithic Iberian Celtic Celtiberian Roman Visigothic Asturian Andalusi Mozarabic Repoblación Mudéjar First Romanesque Romanesque Gothic Catalan Gothic Isabelline Valencian Gothic Cisneros Plateresque Renaissance Purism Herrerian Baroque Churrigueresque Neoclassical Rococo Modernisme Valencian Art Nouveau Noucentisme Neo-Mudéjar Buildings and structures Roman sites Alcázars Alcazabas Cantabrian defensive towers Castles Castros Cathedrals Hórreos Lighthouses Llotjes Monasteries Royal sites Windmills Airports Indoor arenas Museums Stadiums Tallest buildings and structures Destroyed heritage Other Architects Andalusian patio Andalusian White Towns Aragonese Mudéjar Catalan vault Gaudí buildings Spanish Colonial architecture Alhóndiga Alqueria Artesonado Azulejo Baserri Cabaña pasiega Casa montañesa Casona montañesa Corral de comedias Cortijo Finca Estipite Hacienda Masia Mirador Palloza Pazo Real Spanish garden Yeseria Category v t e Portuguese architecture Styles Romanesque Gothic Manueline Renaissance Plain Baroque Rococo Pombaline Neo-Manueline Neo-Mudéjar Summer architecture Soft Portuguese style Structures Airports Bridges Castles Cathedrals Football stadiums Hospitals Reservoirs and dams Tallest buildings and structures Elements Azulejo Gilding Lioz Pavement Colonial Portuguese Colonial architecture Sino-Portuguese architecture Sobrado Seven Wonders of Portuguese Origin in the World Others Architects Monuments Housing IGESPAR Seven Wonders of Portugal Category Portuguese Renaissance v t e Islamic art Architecture Regional styles Abbasid Ayyubid Anatolian Seljuk Chinese Fatimid Great Seljuk Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Bahmani and Deccan Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Iranian Mamluk Moorish Ottoman Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Timurid Umayyad Yemeni Elements Ablaq Banna'i Iwan Jali Mashrabiya Mihrab Minaret Mocárabe Muqarnas Sitara Stucco decoration See also Decoration Arts Periods and regional styles Abbasid art Fatimid art Mudéjar Bangladeshi Persian ( Early , Qajar , Safavid ) Turkish ( Ottoman ) Carpets Gul Kilim Motifs Persian Turkish Prayer Pottery Fritware Hispano-Moresque Iznik Lustreware Mina'i ware Persian Chinese influence Textiles Batik Damask Ikat Embroidery Soumak Suzani Woodwork Khatam Minbar Other media Music Brass Damascus steel Enamelled glass Haft-rang Glass Hardstone carving Ivory carving Mo'araq Mosque lamp Stained glass Shabaka Arts of the book Miniatures Arabic Mughal Ottoman Persian Calligraphy Arabic Diwani Indo-Muslim Kufic Muhaqqaq Naskh Nastaliq Persian Sini Taliq Thuluth Tughra Other arts Muraqqa Hilya Ottoman illumination Decoration Arabesque Geometric patterns Girih ( tiles ) Zellij See also Calligraphy The garden Charbagh Mughal Ottoman Paradise Persian Museums, collections Berlin Cairo Doha Ghazni Istanbul ( Arts , Calligraphy Art ) Jerusalem ( Islamic Museum , Museum for Islamic Art, Jerusalem ) Kuala Lumpur London ( British Museum , V&A , Khalili Collection ) Los Angeles Marrakech ( Museum , Majorelle Garden ) Melbourne Paris ( Arab World Institute , Louvre ) Singapore Toronto (Aga Khan) Tripoli Exhibitions Empire of the Sultans Heaven on Earth: Art from Islamic Lands Hajj: Journey to the Heart of Islam Principles, influences Islamic Art: Mirror of the Invisible World Aniconism in Islam Indo-Saracenic Revival Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe Influences on Western art Grotesque Moresque Mathematics and architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Oriental carpets in Renaissance painting Pseudo-Kufic Stilfragen Topkapı Scroll v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases : National Spain NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pdhqr
Cached time: 20250814220805
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.738 seconds
Real time usage: 0.961 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3235/1000000
Revision size: 31148/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 229930/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4039/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 141887/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.435/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16527107/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  710.577      1 -total
 31.03%  220.518      1 Template:Reflist
 14.16%  100.641     10 Template:Navbox
 12.35%   87.757      1 Template:Lang
  9.79%   69.565      1 Template:Architecture_of_Spain
  9.20%   65.391     13 Template:Cite_book
  9.08%   64.494      4 Template:ISBN
  8.72%   61.983      1 Template:Short_description
  8.39%   59.642      4 Template:Citation_needed
  8.39%   59.604      5 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1559085:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220805 and revision id 1299579035. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mudéjar_art&oldid=1299579035 " Categories : Mudéjar architecture Architectural styles Architecture in Spain Vernacular architecture Christianity in Spain Islam in Spain Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 07:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mudéjar art 23 languages Add topic

