Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions of value and labor Toggle Definitions of value and labor subsection 1.1 Distinctions of economically pertinent labor 2 Relation between values and prices 3 Labor process 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Origins 4.2 Adam Smith and David Ricardo 4.3 Anarchism 4.4 Karl Marx 5 Criticism of the Marxist labor theory of value Toggle Criticism of the Marxist labor theory of value subsection 5.1 Analytical Marxism 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Labor theory of value 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic hypothesis Part of a series on Marxian economics Concepts Abstract labor and concrete labor Capital ( accumulation ) Capitalist mode of production Class process Commodity Constant capital Critique of political economy Exchange value Exploitation Labor power Labor theory of value Law of accumulation Law of value Means of production Mode of production Monopoly capitalism Organic composition of capital Productive forces Profit Prices of production Primitive accumulation Rate of exploitation Rate of profit Real prices and ideal prices Relations of production Reproduction Reserve army of labor Socially necessary labor time Socialist mode of production Socialization Simple commodity production Surplus value Surplus labor Surplus product Use value Wage labor Wage slavery Value-form Value product Variable capital Topics Capital controversy Crisis theory Economic determinism Immiseration thesis Imperialism Historical materialism Okishio's theorem Overaccumulation Overdetermination Overproduction Kondratiev wave Technological determinism Technological unemployment Temporal single-system interpretation Falling profit-rate tendency Transformation problem Underconsumption Value Variants Analytical Marxism Classical Marxism Orthodox Marxism Neo-Marxian economics Works A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 The Accumulation of Capital Monopoly Capital The Theory of Capitalist Development Finance Capital People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Vladimir Lenin Rosa Luxemburg Rudolf Hilferding Leon Trotsky Karl Kautsky Ernest Mandel Antonie Pannekoek János Kornai Andrew Kliman Richard D. Wolff Nikolai Kondratiev Paul Sweezy Nobuo Okishio Ian Steedman John Roemer David Laibman Paul A. Baran Stephen Resnick Michał Kalecki Journals Cambridge Journal of Economics International Journal of Political Economy Monthly Review New School Economic Review Real-World Economics Review Rethinking Marxism Science and Society Related topics Evolutionary economics Classical economics Marxism Marxist sociology Neoclassical economics Perspectives on capitalism Political economy Schools of economic thought Socialist economics Critiques of capitalism Communism portal Economics portal v t e The labor theory of value ( LTV ) is a theory of value that argues that the exchange value of a good or service is determined by the total amount of " socially necessary labor " required to produce it. The contrasting system is typically known as the subjective theory of value .

The LTV is usually associated with Marxian economics , although it originally appeared in the theories of earlier classical economists such as Adam Smith and David Ricardo , and later in anarchist economics . Smith saw the price of a commodity as a reflection of how much labor it can "save" the purchaser. The LTV is central to Marxist theory, which holds that capitalists' expropriation of the surplus value produced by the working class is exploitative . Modern mainstream economics rejects the LTV and uses a theory of value based on subjective preferences .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Definitions of value and labor [ edit ] According to the LTV, value refers to the amount of socially necessary labor to produce a marketable commodity; According to Ricardo and Marx, this includes the labor components necessary to develop any real capital (i.e., physical assets used to produce other assets).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Including these indirect labor components, sometimes described as "dead labor," [ 6 ] provides the "real price," or "natural price" of a commodity. However, Adam Smith 's version of labor value does not implicate the role of past labor in the commodity itself or in the tools (capital) required to produce it.

[ 7 ] Distinctions of economically pertinent labor [ edit ] "Value in use" is the usefulness or utility of a commodity. A classical paradox often comes up when considering this type of value.

In a passage of Adam Smith's An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , he discusses the concepts of value in use and value in exchange, and notices how they tend to differ: The word VALUE, it is to be observed, has two different meanings, and sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object, and sometimes the power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that object conveys. The one may be called " value in use ;" the other, " value in exchange ." The things which have the greatest value in use have frequently little or no value in exchange; on the contrary, those which have the greatest value in exchange have frequently little or no value in use. Nothing is more useful than water: but it will purchase scarcely anything; scarcely anything can be had in exchange for it. A diamond, on the contrary, has scarcely any use-value; but a very great quantity of other goods may frequently be had in exchange for it.

[ 8 ] Value "in exchange " is the relative proportion with which this commodity exchanges for another commodity (in other words, its price in the case of money ). It is relative to labor as explained by Adam Smith: The value of any commodity, [...] to the person who possesses it, and who means not to use or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other commodities, is equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or command. Labour, therefore, is the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities ( Wealth of Nations Book 1, chapter V).

According to the classical economists, value is the labor embodied in a commodity under a given structure of production. Marx called this the " socially necessary labor " but it is sometimes also called the "real cost" or "absolute value".

[ 9 ] Relation between values and prices [ edit ] While the LTV posits that value is primarily determined by labor, it recognizes that the actual price of a commodity is influenced in the short-term by the profit motive [ 10 ] and market conditions, including supply and demand [ 11 ] [ 12 ] and the extent of monopolization.

[ 13 ] Adherents to the LTV conceptualize value (i.e., socially necessary labor time) as a "center of gravity" for price over the long-term.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In Book 1, chapter VI, Adam Smith writes: The real value of all the different component parts of price, it must be observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour measures the value not only of that part of price which resolves itself into labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which resolves itself into profit.

The final sentence explains how Smith sees value of a product as relative to labor of buyer or consumer, as opposite to Marx who sees the value of a product being proportional to labor of laborer or producer. And we value things, price them, based on how much labor we can avoid or command, and we can command labor not only in a simple way but also by trading things for a profit.

The demonstration of the relation between commodities' unit values and their respective prices is known in Marxian terminology as the transformation problem or the transformation of values into prices of production. The transformation problem has probably generated the greatest bulk of debate about the LTV. The problem with transformation is to find an algorithm where the magnitude of value added by labor, in proportion to its duration and intensity, is sufficiently accounted for after this value is distributed through prices that reflect an equal rate of return on capital advanced. If there is an additional magnitude of value or a loss of value after transformation, then the relation between values (proportional to labor) and prices (proportional to total capital advanced) is incomplete. Various solutions and impossibility theorems have been offered for the transformation, but the debate has not reached any clear resolution.

LTV does not deny the role of supply and demand influencing price, but suggests that value and price are equivalent when supply-demand equilibrium is met. In Value, Price and Profit (1865), Karl Marx quotes Adam Smith : It suffices to say that if supply and demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will correspond with their natural prices, that is to say, with their values as determined by the respective quantities of labor required for their production.

[ 16 ] The LTV seeks to explain the level of this equilibrium. This could be explained by a cost of production argument—pointing out that all costs are ultimately labor costs, but this does not account for profit, and it is vulnerable to the charge of tautology in that it explains prices by prices.

[ 17 ] Marx later called this "Smith's adding up theory of value".

Smith argues that labor values are the natural measure of exchange for direct producers like hunters and fishermen.

[ 18 ] Marx, on the other hand, uses a measurement analogy, arguing that for commodities to be comparable they must have a common element or substance by which to measure them, [ 16 ] and that labor is a common substance of what Marx eventually calls commodity-values .

[ 15 ] Labor process [ edit ] Since the term "value" is understood in the LTV as denoting something created by labor, and its "magnitude" as something proportional to the quantity of labor performed, it is important to explain how the labor process both preserves value and adds new value in the commodities it creates.

[ note 1 ] The value of a commodity increases in proportion to the duration and intensity of labor performed on average for its production. Part of what the LTV means by "socially necessary" is that the value only increases in proportion to this labor as it is performed with average skill and average productivity. So though workers may labor with greater skill or more productivity than others, these more skillful and more productive workers thus produce more value through the production of greater quantities of the finished commodity. Each unit still bears the same value as all the others of the same class of commodity. By working sloppily, unskilled workers may drag down the average skill of labor, thus increasing the average labor time necessary for the production of each unit commodity. But these unskillful workers cannot hope to sell the result of their labor process at a higher price (as opposed to value) simply because they have spent more time than other workers producing the same kind of commodities.

However, production not only involves labor, but also certain means of labor: tools, materials, power plants and so on. These means of labor—also known as means of production —are often the product of another labor process as well. So the labor process inevitably involves these means of production that already enter the process with a certain amount of value. Labor also requires other means of production that are not produced with labor and therefore bear no value: such as sunlight, air, uncultivated land, unextracted minerals, etc. While useful, even crucial to the production process, these bring no value to that process. In terms of means of production resulting from another labor process, LTV treats the magnitude of value of these produced means of production as constant throughout the labor process. Due to the constancy of their value, these means of production are referred to, in this light, as constant capital.

Consider for example workers who take coffee beans, use a roaster to roast them, and then use a brewer to brew and dispense a fresh cup of coffee. In performing this labor, these workers add value to the coffee beans and water that compose the material ingredients of a cup of coffee. The worker also transfers the value of constant capital—the value of the beans; some specific depreciated value of the roaster and the brewer; and the value of the cup—to the value of the final cup of coffee. Again, on average, the worker can transfer no more than the value of these means of labor previously possessed to the finished cup of coffee.

[ note 2 ] So the value of coffee produced in a day equals the sum of both the value of the means of labor—this constant capital—and the value newly added by the worker in proportion to the duration and intensity of their work.

Often this is expressed mathematically as: c + L = W {\displaystyle c+L=W} , where c {\displaystyle c} is the constant capital of materials used in a period plus the depreciated portion of tools and plant used in the process. (A period is typically a day, week, year, or a single turnover: meaning the time required to complete one batch of coffee, for example.) L {\displaystyle L} is the quantity of labor time (average skill and productivity) performed in producing the finished commodities during the period W {\displaystyle W} is the value (or think "worth") of the product of the period ( w {\displaystyle w} comes from the German word for value: wert ) Note: if the product resulting from the labor process is homogeneous (all similar in quality and traits, for example, all cups of coffee) then the value of the period's product can be divided by the total number of items (use-values or v u {\displaystyle v_{u}} ) produced to derive the unit value of each item.

w i = W ∑ ∑ v u {\displaystyle {\begin{matrix}w_{i}={\frac {W}{\sum v_{u}}}\,\end{matrix}}} where ∑ ∑ v u {\displaystyle {\begin{matrix}\sum v_{u}\end{matrix}}} is the total items produced.

The LTV further divides the value added during the period of production, L {\displaystyle L} , into two parts. The first part is the portion of the process when the workers add value equivalent to the wages they are paid. For example, if the period in question is one week and these workers collectively are paid $1,000, then the time necessary to add $1,000 to—while preserving the value of—constant capital is considered the necessary labor portion of the period (or week): denoted N L {\displaystyle NL} . The remaining period is considered the surplus labor portion of the week: or S L {\displaystyle SL} . The value used to purchase labor-power, for example, the $1,000 paid in wages to these workers for the week, is called variable capital ( v {\displaystyle v} ). This is because in contrast to the constant capital expended on means of production, variable capital can add value in the labor process. The amount it adds depends on the duration, intensity, productivity and skill of the labor-power purchased: in this sense, the buyer of labor-power has purchased a commodity of variable use. Finally, the value added during the portion of the period when surplus labor is performed is called surplus value ( s {\displaystyle s} ). From the variables defined above, we find two other common expressions for the value produced during a given period: c + v + s = W {\displaystyle c+v+s=W} and c + N L + S L = W {\displaystyle c+NL+SL=W} The first form of the equation expresses the value resulting from production, focusing on the costs c + v {\displaystyle c+v} and the surplus value appropriated in the process of production, s {\displaystyle s} . The second form of the equation focuses on the value of production in terms of the values added by the labor performed during the process N L + S L {\displaystyle NL+SL} .

History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] The labor theory of value has developed over many centuries. It had no single originator, but rather many different thinkers arrived at the same conclusion independently. Aristotle is claimed to hold to this view.

[ 19 ] Some writers trace its origin to Thomas Aquinas .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In his Summa Theologiae (1265–1274) he expresses the view that "value can, does and should increase in relation to the amount of labor which has been expended in the improvement of commodities." [ 22 ] Scholars such as Joseph Schumpeter have cited Ibn Khaldun , who in his Muqaddimah (1377), described labor as the source of value, necessary for all earnings and capital accumulation . He argued that even if earning "results from something other than a craft, the value of the resulting profit and acquired (capital) must (also) include the value of the labor by which it was obtained. Without labor, it would not have been acquired." [ 23 ] Scholars have also pointed to Sir William Petty 's Treatise of Taxes of 1662 [ 24 ] and to John Locke 's labor theory of property , set out in the Second Treatise on Government (1689), which sees labor as the ultimate source of economic value.

Karl Marx himself credited Benjamin Franklin in his 1729 essay entitled "A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency" as being "one of the first" to advance the theory.

[ 25 ] Adam Smith accepted the theory for pre-capitalist societies but saw a flaw in its application to contemporary capitalism . He pointed out that if the "labor embodied" in a product equaled the "labor commanded" (i.e. the amount of labor that could be purchased by selling it), then profit was impossible.

David Ricardo (seconded by Marx ) responded to this paradox by arguing that Smith had confused labor with wages. "Labor commanded", he argued, would always be more than the labor needed to sustain itself (wages). The value of labor, in this view, covered not just the value of wages (what Marx called the value of labor power ), but the value of the entire product created by labor.

[ 18 ] Ricardo's theory was a predecessor of the modern theory that equilibrium prices are determined solely by production costs associated with Neo-Ricardianism .

[ 26 ] Based on the discrepancy between the wages of labor and the value of the product, the " Ricardian socialists "— Charles Hall , Thomas Hodgskin , John Gray , and John Francis Bray , and Percy Ravenstone [ 27 ] —applied Ricardo's theory to develop theories of exploitation .

Marx expanded on these ideas, arguing that workers work for a part of each day adding the value required to cover their wages, while the remainder of their labor is performed for the enrichment of the capitalist. The LTV and the accompanying theory of exploitation became central to his economic thought.

[ citation needed ] 19th century American individualist anarchists based their economics on the LTV, with their particular interpretation of it being called " Cost the limit of price ". They, as well as contemporary individualist anarchists in that tradition, hold that it is unethical to charge a higher price for a commodity than the amount of labor required to produce it. Hence, they propose that trade should be facilitated by using notes backed by labor.

[ citation needed ] Adam Smith and David Ricardo [ edit ] Adam Smith held that, in a primitive society , the amount of labor put into producing a good determined its exchange value, with exchange value meaning, in this case, the amount of labor a good can purchase. However, according to Smith, in a more advanced society the market price is no longer proportional to labor cost since the value of the good now includes compensation for the owner of the means of production: "The whole produce of labour does not always belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with the owner of the stock which employs him." [ 28 ] According to Whitaker, Smith is claiming that the 'real value' of such a commodity produced in advanced society is measured by the labor which that commodity will command in exchange but "[Smith] disowns what is naturally thought of as the genuine classical labor theory of value, that labor-cost regulates market-value. This theory was Ricardo's, and really his alone." [ 28 ] Classical economist David Ricardo's labor theory of value holds that the value of a good (how much of another good or service it exchanges for in the market) is proportional to how much labor was required to produce it, including the labor required to produce the raw materials and machinery used in the process.

David Ricardo stated it as, "The value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not on the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour." [ 29 ] In this connection Ricardo seeks to differentiate the quantity of labor necessary to produce a commodity from the wages paid to the laborers for its production. Therefore, wages did not always increase with the price of a commodity. However, Ricardo was troubled with some deviations in prices from proportionality with the labor required to produce them.

[ 30 ] For example, he said "I cannot get over the difficulty of the wine, which is kept in the cellar for three or four years [i.e., while constantly increasing in exchange value], or that of the oak tree, which perhaps originally had not 2 s. expended on it in the way of labour, and yet comes to be worth £100." (Quoted in Whitaker) Of course, a capitalist economy stabilizes this discrepancy until the value added to aged wine is equal to the cost of storage. If anyone can hold onto a bottle for four years and become rich, that would make it hard to find freshly corked wine. There is also the theory that adding to the price of a luxury product increases its exchange-value by mere prestige.

The labor theory as an explanation for value contrasts with the subjective theory of value , which says that value of a good is not determined by how much labor was put into it but by its usefulness in satisfying a want and its scarcity. Ricardo's labor theory of value is not a normative theory, as are some later forms of the labor theory, such as claims that it is immoral for an individual to be paid less for his labor than the total revenue that comes from the sales of all the goods he produces.

[ citation needed ] It is arguable to what extent these classical theorists held the labor theory of value as it is commonly defined.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] For instance, David Ricardo theorized that prices are determined by the amount of labor but found exceptions for which the labor theory could not account. In a letter, he wrote: "I am not satisfied with the explanation I have given of the principles which regulate value." Adam Smith theorized that the labor theory of value holds true only in the "early and rude state of society" but not in a modern economy where owners of capital are compensated by profit. As a result, "Smith ends up making little use of a labor theory of value." [ 34 ] Anarchism [ edit ] See also: Anarchist economics and Cost the limit of price Sample labor for labor note for the Cincinnati Time Store . Scanned from Equitable Commerce (1846) by Josiah Warren Pierre-Joseph Proudhon 's mutualism [ 35 ] and American individualist anarchists such as Josiah Warren , Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker [ 36 ] adopted the labor theory of value of classical economics and used it to criticize capitalism while favoring a non-capitalist market system.

[ 37 ] Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist , [ 38 ] [ 39 ] and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, The Peaceful Revolutionist , was the first anarchist periodical published.

[ 40 ] Cost the limit of price was a maxim coined by Warren, indicating a ( prescriptive ) version of the labor theory of value. Warren maintained that the just compensation for labor (or for its product) could only be an equivalent amount of labor (or a product embodying an equivalent amount).

[ 41 ] Thus, profit , rent , and interest were considered unjust economic arrangements.

[ 42 ] In keeping with the tradition of Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations , [ 43 ] the "cost" of labor is considered to be the subjective cost; i.e., the amount of suffering involved in it.

[ 41 ] He put his theories to the test by establishing an experimental "labor for labor store" called the Cincinnati Time Store at the corner of 5th and Elm Streets in what is now downtown Cincinnati, where trade was facilitated by notes backed by a promise to perform labor. "All the goods offered for sale in Warren's store were offered at the same price the merchant himself had paid for them, plus a small surcharge, in the neighborhood of 4 to 7 percent, to cover store overhead." [ 39 ] The store stayed open for three years; after it closed, Warren could pursue establishing colonies based on Mutualism. These included " Utopia " and " Modern Times ". Warren said that Stephen Pearl Andrews ' The Science of Society , published in 1852, was the most lucid and complete exposition of Warren's own theories.

[ 44 ] Mutualism is an economic theory and anarchist school of thought that advocates a society where each person might possess a means of production , either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market .

[ 45 ] Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank that would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate, just high enough to cover administration.

[ 46 ] Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value that holds that when labor or its product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying "the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility".

[ 47 ] Mutualism originated from the writings of philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon .

Collectivist anarchism as defended by Mikhail Bakunin defended a form of labor theory of value when it advocated a system where "all necessaries for production are owned in common by the labor groups and the free communes ... based on the distribution of goods according to the labor contributed".

[ 48 ] Karl Marx [ edit ] Contrary to popular belief, Marx never used the term "labor theory of value" in any of his works, but used the term law of value ; [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Marx opposed "ascribing a supernatural creative power to labor", arguing as such: Labor is not the source of all wealth. Nature is just as much a source of use values (and it is surely of such that material wealth consists!) as labor, which is itself only the manifestation of a force of nature, human labor power.

[ 52 ] Here, Marx was distinguishing between exchange value (the subject of the LTV) and use value . Marx used the concept of " socially necessary labor time " to introduce a social perspective distinct from his predecessors and neoclassical economics . Whereas most economists start with the individual's perspective, Marx started with the perspective of society as a whole . "Social production" involves a complicated and interconnected division of labor of a wide variety of people who depend on each other for their survival and prosperity.

"Abstract" labor refers to a characteristic of commodity -producing labor that is shared by all different kinds of heterogeneous (concrete) types of labor. That is, the concept abstracts from the particular characteristics of all of the labor and is akin to average labor.

"Socially necessary" labor refers to the quantity required to produce a commodity "in a given state of society, under certain social average conditions or production, with a given social average intensity, and average skill of the labor employed." [ 16 ] That is, the value of a product is determined more by societal standards than by individual conditions. This explains why technological breakthroughs lower the price of commodities and put less advanced producers out of business. Finally, it is not labor per se that creates value, but labor power sold by free wage workers to capitalists. Another distinction is between productive and unproductive labor . Only wage workers of productive sectors of the economy produce value.

[ note 3 ] According to Marx an increase in productiveness of the laborer does not affect the value of a commodity, but rather, increases the surplus value realized by the capitalist.

[ 53 ] Therefore, decreasing the cost of production does not decrease the value of a commodity, but allows the capitalist to produce more and increases the opportunity to earn a greater profit or surplus value, as long as there is demand for the additional units of production.

Criticism of the Marxist labor theory of value [ edit ] Main article: Criticisms of the labour theory of value The Marxist labor theory of value has been criticized on several counts. Some argue that it predicts that profits will be higher in labor-intensive industries than in capital-intensive industries, which would be contradicted by measured empirical data inherent in quantitative analysis. This is sometimes referred to as the "Great Contradiction".

[ 54 ] In volume 3 of Capital , Marx explains why profits are not distributed according to which industries are the most labor-intensive and why this is consistent with his theory. Whether or not this is consistent with the labor theory of value as presented in volume 1 has been a topic of debate.

[ 54 ] According to Marx, surplus value is extracted by the capitalist class as a whole and then distributed according to the amount of total capital, not just the variable component. In the example given earlier, of making a cup of coffee, the constant capital involved in production is the coffee beans themselves, and the variable capital is the value added by the coffee maker. The value added by the coffee maker is dependent on its technological capabilities, and the coffee maker can only add so much total value to cups of coffee over its lifespan. The amount of value added to the product is thus the amortization of the value of the coffeemaker. We can also note that not all products have equal proportions of value added by amortized capital. Capital intensive industries such as finance may have a large contribution of capital, while labor-intensive industries like traditional agriculture would have a relatively small one.

[ 55 ] Critics argue that this turns the LTV into a macroeconomic theory, when it was supposed to explain the exchange ratios of individual commodities in terms of their relation to their labor ratios (making it a microeconomic theory), yet Marx was now maintaining that these ratios must diverge from their labor ratios. Critics thus held that Marx's proposed solution to the "great contradiction" was not so much a solution as it was sidestepping the issue.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Steve Keen argues that Marx's idea that only labor can produce value rests on the idea that as capital depreciates over its use, then this is transferring its exchange-value to the product. Keen argues that it is not clear why the value of the machine should depreciate at the same rate it is lost. Keen uses an analogy with labor: If workers receive a subsistence wage and the working day exhausts the capacity to labor, it could be argued that the worker has "depreciated" by the amount equivalent to the subsistence wage. However this depreciation is not the limit of value a worker can add in a day (indeed this is critical to Marx's idea that labor is fundamentally exploited). If it were, then the production of a surplus would be impossible. According to Keen, a machine could have a use-value greater than its exchange-value, meaning it could, along with labor, be a source of surplus. Keen claims that Marx almost reached such a conclusion in the Grundrisse but never developed it any further. Keen further observes that while Marx insisted that the contribution of machines to production is solely their use-value and not their exchange-value, he routinely treated the use-value and exchange-value of a machine as identical, despite the fact that this would contradict his claim that the two were unrelated.

[ 58 ] Marxists respond by arguing that use-value and exchange-value are incommensurable magnitudes; to claim that a machine can add "more use-value" than it is worth in value-terms is a category error . According to Marx, a machine by definition cannot be a source of human labor.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Keen responds by arguing that the labor theory of value only works if the use-value and exchange-value of a machine are identical, as Marx argued that machines cannot create surplus value since as their use-value depreciates along with their exchange-value; they simply transfer it to the new product but create no new value in the process.

[ 61 ] Keen's machinery argument can also be applied to slavery based modes of production, which also profit from extracting more use value from the laborers than they return to laborers.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] In their work Capital as Power , Shimshon Bichler and Jonathan Nitzan argue that while Marxists have claimed to produce empirical evidence of the labor theory of value via numerous studies which show consistent correlations between values and prices, these studies [ note 4 ] do not actually provide evidence for it and are inadequate. According to the authors, these studies attempt to prove the LTV by showing that there is a positive correlation between market prices and labor values. However, the authors argue that these studies measure prices by looking at the price of total output (the unit price of a commodity multiplied by its total quantity) and do these for several sectors of the economy, estimate their total price and value from official statistics and measured for several years. However, Bichler and Nitzan argue that this method has statistical implications as correlations measured this way also reflect the co-variations of the associated quantities of unit values and prices. This means that the unit price and unit value of each sector are multiplied by the same value, which means that the greater the variability of output across different sectors, the tighter the correlation. This means that the overall correlation is substantially larger than the underlying correlation between unit values and unit prices; when sectors are controlled for their size, the correlations often drop to insignificant levels.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Furthermore, the authors argue that the studies do not seem to actually attempt to measure the correlation between value and price. The authors argue that, according to Marx, the value of a commodity indicates the abstract labor time required for its production; however Marxists have been unable to identify a way to measure a unit (elementary particle) of abstract labor (indeed the authors argue that most have given up and little progress has been made beyond Marx's original work) due to numerous difficulties. This means assumptions must be made and according to the authors, these involve circular reasoning : [ 64 ] [ 65 ] The most important of these assumptions are that the value of labour power is proportionate to the actual wage rate, that the ratio of variable capital to surplus value is given by the price ratio of wages to profit, and occasionally also that the value of the depreciated constant capital is equal to a fraction of the capital’s money price. In other words, the researcher assumes precisely what the labour theory of value is supposed to demonstrate .

[ 66 ] Bichler and Nitzan argue that this amounts to converting prices into values and then determining if they correlate, which the authors argue proves nothing since the studies are simply correlating prices with themselves.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Paul Cockshott disagreed with Bichler and Nitzan's arguments, arguing that it was possible to measure abstract labor time using wage bills and data on working hours, while also arguing Bichler and Nitzan's claims that the true value-price correlations should be much lower actually relied on poor statistical analysis itself.

[ 67 ] Most Marxists, however, reject Bichler and Nitzan's interpretation of Marx, arguing that their assertion that individual commodities can have values, rather than prices of production, misunderstands Marx's work.

[ 68 ] For example, Fred Moseley argues Marx understood "value" to be a "macro-monetary" variable (the total amount of labor added in a given year plus the depreciation of fixed capital in that year), which is then concretized at the level of individual prices of production , meaning that "individual values" of commodities do not exist.

[ 69 ] The theory can also be sometimes found in non-Marxist traditions.

[ note 5 ] For instance, mutualist theorist Kevin Carson 's Studies in Mutualist Political Economy opens with an attempt to integrate marginalist critiques into the labor theory of value.

[ 70 ] Additionally, economist Joseph Schumpeter pointed out a couple of issues he believed undermined the validity of the labor theory of value. Firstly he wrote that labor theory of value failed to take into account the intrinsic differences in labor quality between individuals (a difference that, he believed, could not be properly encapsulated through the use of a value multiplier). Furthermore, he claims that labor theory of value, both in its Marxist and Ricardian formulations, would entail that labor be the sole input in an economy alongside all labor being homogenous in nature, a thesis which Schumpeter dismisses as unrealistic and one that could be resolved by Marginalism anyway. Schumpeter goes on to divert his attention towards the supposed self-contradictory nature of how labor theory of value allows for the justification of the Marxian exploitation thesis, highlighting that labor itself could not be valued since it was not itself produced by any labor and that the accumulation of surplus value described by Marx could not occur in a static, perfectly competitive market. Thus, although giving Marx the credit for seeing the need for change inherent in capitalist markets, Schumpeter nonetheless concludes that labor theory of value and its consequences remain problematic theories.

[ 71 ] Some post-Keynesian economists have been highly critical of the labor theory of value.

Joan Robinson , who herself was considered an expert on the writings of Karl Marx, [ 72 ] wrote that the labor theory of value was largely a tautology and "a typical example of the way metaphysical ideas operate".

[ 73 ] In ecological economics , the labor theory of value has been criticized, where it is argued that labor is in fact energy over time.

[ 74 ] Such arguments generally fail to recognize that Marx is inquiring into social relations among human beings, which cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy, just as democracy cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy that a voter makes in getting to the polling place.

[ 75 ] However, echoing Joan Robinson, Alf Hornborg, an environmental historian, argues that both the reliance on "energy theory of value" and "labor theory of value" are problematic as they propose that use-values (or material wealth) are more "real" than exchange-values (or cultural wealth)—yet, use-values are culturally determined.

[ 76 ] For Hornborg, any Marxist argument that claims uneven wealth is due to the "exploitation" or "underpayment" of use-values is actually a tautological contradiction, since it must necessarily quantify "underpayment" in terms of exchange-value. The alternative would be to conceptualize unequal exchange as "an asymmetric net transfer of material inputs in production (e.g., embodied labor, energy, land, and water), rather than in terms of an underpayment of material inputs or an asymmetric transfer of 'value'".

[ 77 ] In other words, uneven exchange is characterized by incommensurability, namely: the unequal transfer of material inputs; competing value-judgements of the worth of labor, fuel, and raw materials; differing availability of industrial technologies; and the off-loading of environmental burdens on those with less resources.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Analytical Marxism [ edit ] Main article: Analytical Marxism Meanwhile, analytical Marxists argued that the core concepts of Marxian economics could be explained logically without relying on the labor theory of value.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] In the process of reinterpreting the key concepts of Marxian economics, they tend to apply theoretical frameworks from modern social sciences, such as neoclassical economics and game theory or rational choice theory , instead of the labor theory of value.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] See also [ edit ] Business and economics portal Abstract labor and concrete labor Cost the limit of price Division of labor Labor notes (currency) Law of value Prices of production Producerism Productive and unproductive labor Social division of labor Surplus labor Surplus product Surplus value Transformation problem Value-form Anarchy of Production Competing theories Anarcho-communism Entitlement theory Marginalism Neo-Ricardianism Subjective theory of value Notes [ edit ] ^ Unless otherwise noted, the description of the labor process and the role of the value of means of production in this section are drawn from chapter 7 of Capital vol1 ( Marx 1867 ).

^ In the case of instruments of labor, such as the roaster and the brewer (or even a ceramic cup), the value transferred to the cup of coffee is only a depreciated value calculated over the life of those instruments of labor according to some accounting convention.

^ For the difference between wage workers and working animals or slaves confer: John R. Bell: Capitalism and the Dialectic – The Uno-Sekine Approach to Marxian Political Economy, p. 45. London, Pluto Press 2009 ^ Examples of such studies include: Wolff, Edward N. 1975. "The Rate of Surplus Value in Puerto Rico".

Journal of Political Economy 83 (5, October): 935–950. Ochoa, E. 1989. "Values, Prices and Wage-Profit Curves in the U.S. Economy".

Cambridge Journal of Economics 13 (3, September): 413–430. Freeman, Alan. 1998. "The Transformation of Prices into Values: Comments on the Chapters by Simon Mohum and Anwar M. Shaikh". In Marxian Economics. A Reappraisal. Volume 2: Essays on Volume III of Capital: Profit, Prices and Dynamics, edited by R. Bellofiore. London: Mcmillan, pp. 270–275. Cockshott, Paul, and Allin Cottrell. 2005. "Robust Correlations Between Prices and Labour Values: A Comment".

Cambridge Journal of Economics 29 (2, March): 309–316.

^ Confer: von Weizsäcker, Carl Christian (August 2010). "A New Technical Progress Function (1962)".

German Economic Review .

11 (3): 248– 265.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0475.2010.00512.x .

; Weizsäcker, C. C.; Samuelson, P. A. (June 1971).

"A new labor theory of value for rational planning through use of the bourgeois profit rate" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

68 (6): 1192– 1194.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.68.6.1192 .

PMC 389151 .

PMID 16591926 .

References [ edit ] ^ Hansson, Sven Ove; Grüne-Yanoff, Till (November 14, 2017). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

"Preferences" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2018 Edition) . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Wicksteed, Philip H.

(1910).

The Common Sense of Political Economy, Including a Study of the Human Basis of Economic Law . London: Macmillan and Co.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2020.

^ Hunt, E. K.; Lautzenheiser, Mark (2011).

History of economic thought l: a critical perspective (3rd ed.). Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe .

ISBN 978-1-317-46859-2 .

OCLC 903283190 .

^ It is now interpreted that Ricardo's theory of value is not the labor theory of value, but the cost of production theory of value. See David Ricardo#Value theory ^ e.g. see - Junankar, P. N., Marx's economics , Oxford : Philip Allan, 1982, ISBN 0-86003-125-X or Peach, Terry "Interpreting Ricardo", Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1993, ISBN 0-521-26086-8 ^ Harman, Chris.

"5. The labour theory of value)" .

How Marxism Works . Retrieved February 4, 2024 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Everything people have used historically to create wealth – whether a Neolithic stone axe or a modern computer – once had to be made by human labour. Even if the axe was shaped with tools, the tools in turn were the product of previous labour. That is why Karl Marx used to refer to the means of production as 'dead labour'. When businessmen boast of the capital they possess, in reality they are boasting that they have gained control of a vast pool of the labour of previous generations – and that does not mean the labour of their ancestors, who laboured no more than they do now.

^ Smith, Adam .

"Wealth of Nations — Bk 1 Chpt 05" . Retrieved February 4, 2024 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it. What every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired it, and who wants to dispose of it or exchange it for something else, is the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and which it can impose upon other people.

^ Smith, Adam (1776). "Of the Origin and Use of Money".

An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations .

^ Ricardo, David (1823), 'Absolute Value and Exchange Value', in "The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo", Volume 4, Cambridge University Press, 1951 and Sraffa, Piero and Maurice Dobb (1951), 'Introduction', in "The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo", Volume 1, Cambridge University Press, 1951.

^ Taylor, Kit Sims (2001).

Human Society and the Global Economy (Report). SUNY-Oswego, Department of Economics.

Value lies at the core of the economic adjustment process. If the actual price of something were above the value, the extra profits to be made would attract more firms into that industry leading to a greater supply and – eventually – lower prices; conversely, if the actual price of something were below the value, the losses – or sub-normal profits – would drive firms out of that industry leading to a smaller supply and – eventually – higher prices.

^ Marx, Karl .

"Economic Manuscripts: Value, Price and Profit" . Retrieved January 28, 2024 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

You would be altogether mistaken in fancying that the value of labour or any other commodity whatever is ultimately fixed by supply and demand. Supply and demand regulate nothing but the temporary fluctuations of market prices. They will explain to you why the market price of a commodity rises above or sinks below its value, but they can never account for the value itself. Suppose supply and demand to equilibrate, or, as the economists call it, to cover each other. Why, the very moment these opposite forces become equal they paralyze each other, and cease to work in the one or other direction. At the moment when supply and demand equilibrate each other, and therefore cease to act, the market price of a commodity coincides with its real value, with the standard price round which its market prices oscillate. In inquiring into the nature of that VALUE, we have therefore nothing at all to do with the temporary effects on market prices of supply and demand. The same holds true of wages and of the prices of all other commodities.

^ Rubin, Isaak Ilyich (2020).

Essays on Marx's Theory of Value . Pattern Books.

ISBN 978-3-0340-0472-5 .

...even though the quantity of socially-necessary labor required for the production of one pair of shoes did not change, because of the excessive supply the shoes are sold according to a market price which is below the market-value determined by the socially-necessary labor. The interpreters of Marx ...establish... an 'economic' concept of necessary labor i.e., recognizing that socially-necessary labor changes not only in relation to changes in the productive power of labor but also in relation to changes in the balance between social supply and demand.

^ "Ernest Mandel: The Labor Theory of Value and "Monopoly Capitalism" (1967)" . Retrieved January 29, 2024 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

The labor theory of value implies that, in terms of value, the total mass of surplus value to be distributed every year is a given quantity. It depends on the value of variable capital and on the rate of surplus value. Price competition cannot change that given quantity (except when it influences the division of the newly created income between workers and capitalists, i.e. depresses or increases real wages, and thereby increases or depresses the rate of surplus value)...It means that the distribution of the given quantity of surplus value is changed, in favor of the monopolists and at the expense of the non-monopolized sectors....Under monopoly capitalism as under "competitive capitalism" the two basic forces explaining capital accumulation remain competition between capitalists (for appropriating bigger shares of surplus value) and competition between capitalists and workers (for increasing the rate of surplus value)." ^ Cogliano, Jonathan F.; Flaschel, Peter; Franke, Reiner; Fröhlich, Nils; Veneziani, Roberto (2018).

Value, Competition and Exploitation .

doi : 10.4337/9781786430649 .

ISBN 978-1-78643-064-9 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b Marx 1867 .

^ a b c Marx, Karl (1865). "Value and Labour".

Value, Price and Profit – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Sraffa, Piero; Dobb, Maurice H. (1951). "General Preface".

The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo . Vol. 1.

Cambridge University Press .

^ a b Ormazabal, Kepa M. (2006).

"Adam Smith on Labor and Value: Challenging the Standard Interpretation" (PDF) .

University of the Basque Country .

^ MacIntyre, A. (1988).

Whose Justice Which Rationality . Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame . p. 199.

ISBN 978-0-268-01942-6 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1946).

History of Western philosophy . p. 578.

^ Baeck, L. (1994).

The Mediterranean tradition in economic thought . New York: Routledge . p. 151.

ISBN 978-0-415-09301-9 .

^ Jaffe, Austin J.; Lusht, Kenneth M. (2003). "The History of the Value Theory: The Early Years".

Essays in honor of William N. Kinnard, Jr . Boston: Kluwer Academic . p. 11.

ISBN 978-1-4020-7516-2 .

^ Oweiss, I. M. (1988). "Ibn Khaldun, the Father of Economics".

Arab Civilization: Challenges and Responses .

New York University Press . p. 114.

ISBN 978-0-88706-698-6 .

^ Parrington, Vernon L. (1927).

Main Currents in American Thought, 1620-1800 . Vol. I. Book Two, Part One, Chapter III. Benjamin Franklin: Our First Ambassador. Archived from the original on October 24, 2019.

^ Marx, Karl (1865). "VI".

Value, Price and Profit .

^ "The Neo-Ricardians" .

New School University . Archived from the original on April 18, 2009 . Retrieved August 23, 2004 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Utopians and Socialists: Ricardian Socialists" . History of Economic Thought, New School University . Archived from the original on February 14, 2004 . Retrieved July 12, 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b Whitaker, Albert C. (1904).

History and Criticism of the Labor Theory of Value in English Political Economy . Columbia University Press. pp.

15– 16.

doi : 10.7312/whit91420 .

ISBN 978-0-231-88365-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Ricardo, David (1817).

On The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation . Retrieved August 19, 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Vianello, Fernando (2008). "Labour Theory of Value".

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics . London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp.

233– 246.

doi : 10.1057/978-1-349-95121-5_1054-2 .

ISBN 978-1-349-95121-5 .

^ Whitaker, Albert C. (1904).

History and Criticism of the Labor Theory of Value in English Political Economy . Columbia University Press.

doi : 10.7312/whit91420 .

ISBN 978-0-231-88365-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) [ page needed ] ^ Gordon, Donald F. (1959). "What Was the Labor Theory of Value?".

The American Economic Review .

49 (2): 462– 472.

JSTOR 1816138 .

^ King, Peter and Ripstein, Arthur.

"Did Marx Hold a Labor Theory of Value?" University of Toronto ^ Canterbery, E. Ray (2001).

Brief History Of Economics, A: Artful Approaches To The Dismal Science . World Scientific Publishing Company. pp.

52– 53.

ISBN 978-981-310-547-8 .

^ Fotopoulos, Takis .

"Beyond Marx and Proudhon" .

Thus, the classical solution of expressing the value of goods and services in terms of man hours, which was developed by the orthodox (political) economists of the time, was adopted by both Proudhon and Marx.

^ "The most basic difference is that the individualist anarchists rooted their ideas in the labour theory of value while the "anarcho"-capitalists favour mainstream marginalist theory." An Anarchist FAQ Archived 2013-03-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Like Proudhon, they desired a (libertarian) socialist system based on the market but without exploitation and which rested on possession rather than capitalist private property." An Anarchist FAQ Archived 2013-03-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ Palmer, Brian (2010-12-29) What do anarchists want from us?

, Slate.com ^ a b Riggenbach, Jeff (2011-02-25) Josiah Warren: The First American Anarchist , Mises Institute ^ William Bailie, "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 4, 2012 . Retrieved June 17, 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) Josiah Warren: The First American Anarchist – A Sociological Study , Boston: Small, Maynard & Co., 1906, p. 20 ^ a b In Equitable Commerce , Warren writes, "If a priest is required to get a soul out of purgatory, he sets his price according to the value which the relatives set upon his prayers, instead of their cost to the priest. This, again, is cannibalism. The same amount of labor equally disagreeable, with equal wear and tear, performed by his customers, would be a just remuneration ^ Wendy McElroy, " Individualist Anarchism vs. "Libertarianism" and Anarchocommunism Archived 1998-02-06 at the Wayback Machine ," in the New Libertarian , issue #12, October, 1984.

^ Smith writes: "The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it." Note, also, the sense of "labor" meaning "suffering".

^ Madison, Charles A. (1945). "Anarchism in the United States".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

6 (1): 46– 66.

doi : 10.2307/2707055 .

JSTOR 2707055 .

^ Carson, Kevin A.

"Introduction" .

Mutualist.org .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2025 . Retrieved June 11, 2025 .

^ Miller, David. 1987. "Mutualism." The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Political Thought. Blackwell Publishing. p. 11 ^ Tandy, Francis D., 1896, Voluntary Socialism , chapter 6, paragraph 15.

^ Darby Tillis.

"An Anarchist FAQ" . Infoshop.org. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010 . Retrieved September 20, 2010 .

^ cf E F Schumacher , Small Is Beautiful , Pt 1, ch 1. Mike Beggs, "Zombie Marx and Modern Economics, or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Forget the Transformation Problem." Journal of Australian Political Economy , issue 70, Summer 2012/13, p. 16 [1] Archived July 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ Mongiovi, Gary (September 2002). "Vulgar economy in Marxian garb: a critique of Temporal Single System Marxism".

Review of Radical Political Economics .

34 (4): 393– 416.

doi : 10.1016/S0486-6134(02)00176-6 .

^ Beggs, Mike (November 8, 2020).

"Zombie Marx and modern economics, or how i learned to stop worrying and forget the transformation problem" .

The Journal of Australian Political Economy (70): 11– 24.

Gale A318902338 ProQuest 1274649717 .

^ Marx, Karl (1875).

"1" .

Critique of the Gotha Program – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ If therefore, the capitalist who applies the new method, sells his commodity at its social value of one shilling, he sells it for threepence above its individual value, and thus realises an extra surplus-value of threepence. On the other hand, the working day of 12 hours is, as regards him, now represented by 24 articles instead of 12. Hence, in order to get rid of the product of one working day, the demand must be double what it was, i.e., the market must become twice as extensive. (Marx et al., 1974) ^ a b Böhm von Bawerk, "Karl Marx and the Close of His System" Karl Marx and the Close of His System ^ Ekelund, Robert B. Jr.; Hebert, Robert F. (1997).

A History of Economic Theory and Method (4th ed.). pp.

239– 241.

^ Temkin, Gabriel (1998). "Karl Marx and the economics of communism: anniversary recollections".

Communist and Post-Communist Studies .

31 (4): 303–328 (321–322).

doi : 10.1016/S0967-067X(98)00014-2 .

^ Sesardić, Neven (1985).

Marxian Utopia . Centre for Research into Communist Economies. pp.

14– 15.

ISBN 0948027010 .

^ Keen, Steve (Spring 1993).

"Use-Value, Exchange Value, and the Demise of Marx's Labor Theory of Value" (PDF) .

Journal of the History of Economic Thought .

15 (1): 107– 121.

doi : 10.1017/S1053837200005290 .

S2CID 18950248 .

^ Marx, Karl .

Capital . Vol. I (Penguin ed.). p. 141.

^ D'Arcy, Jim (1974).

"Socialist Economics 4: Do Machines Produce Surplus Value?" .

Socialist Standard – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Keen, Steve (2011).

Debunking Economics .

Zed Books . pp.

436– 438.

ISBN 978-1848139923 .

^ Kara, Siddharth (2008).

Sex Trafficking – Inside the Business of Modern Slavery .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-13960-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Slavery in the United States" .

eh.net . Retrieved January 30, 2020 .

^ a b c Cockshott, Paul, Shimshon Bichler, and Jonathan Nitzan.

"Testing the labour theory of value: An exchange." (2010): 1-15.

^ a b c Nitzan, Jonathan, and Shimshon Bichler.

Capital as power: A study of order and creorder . Routledge, 2009, pp. 93–97, 138–144 ^ Nitzan, Jonathan; Bichler, Shimshon (2009).

Capital as power: A study of order and reorder (PDF) .

Routledge . p. 96.

^ Cockshott, Paul; Cottrell, Allin; Valle Baeza, Alejandro (2014). "The Empirics of the Labour Theory of Value: Reply to Nitzan and Bichler".

Investigación Económica .

LXXIII (287): 115– 134.

hdl : 10419/157802 .

^ Hansen, Bue Rübner. "Review of Capital as Power , p. 151. "For Nitzan and Bichler, the concept 'abstract labour' is materialist in a way most Marxists
would consider vulgar, and a positive concept that can be understood in isolation from
monetary relation".

^ Moseley, Fred (2016).

Money and Totality . BRILL.

doi : 10.1163/9789004301931 .

ISBN 978-90-04-30193-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ Carson, Kevin A.

"1–3".

Studies in Mutualist Political Economy . Archived from the original on April 15, 2011.

^ Schumpeter, Joseph (1949).

Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (Third ed.). Harper Perennial Modern Thought. pp.

24– 30.

^ "Joan Robinson" .

Spartacus Educational . Retrieved July 1, 2020 .

^ Joan Robinson, "Economic Philosophy" p. 39 ^ Anson Rabinbach, " The human motor: Energy, fatigue, and the origins of modernity " ^ Rubin, Isaak Illich Essays on Marx's Theory of Value , Ch. 14 ^ Jean Baudrillard, " Pour une critique de l'économie politique du signe Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine " ^ a b Hornborg, Alf (2014). "Ecological economics, Marxism, and technological progress: Some explorations of the conceptual foundations of theories of ecologically unequal exchange".

Ecological Economics .

105 : 11– 18.

Bibcode : 2014EcoEc.105...11H .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.05.015 .

^ Martinez-Alier, Joan; Munda, Giuseppe; O'Neill, John (1998). "Weak comparability of values as a foundation for ecological economics".

Ecological Economics .

26 (3): 277– 286.

Bibcode : 1998EcoEc..26..277M .

doi : 10.1016/S0921-8009(97)00120-1 .

^ Cohen, G. A. (March 12, 2017) [1981].

"The Labour Theory of Value and the Concept of Exploitation" .

Verso .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2023 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 .

^ a b Roemer, John. (1985). Should marxists be interested in exploitation? Philosophy and Public Affairs 14 (1):30-65.

^ Farmelant, James (August 8, 2009).

"G. A. Cohen, 1941-2009" .

Monthly Review .

ISSN 0027-0520 .

OCLC 241373379 .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2025 . Retrieved July 13, 2025 .

^ "Analytical Marxism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . September 5, 2022 . Retrieved April 10, 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bhaduri, Amit (1969). "On the Significance of Recent Controversies on Capital Theory: A Marxian View".

The Economic Journal .

79 (315): 532– 539.

doi : 10.2307/2230380 .

JSTOR 2230380 .

von Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen Karl Marx and the Close of His System (Classic criticism of Marxist economic theory).

G.A. Cohen 'The Labour Theory of Value and the Concept of Exploitation', in his History Labour and Freedom .

Duncan, Colin A.M. 1996.

The Centrality of Agriculture: Between Humankind and The Rest of Nature.

McGill–Queen's University Press, Montreal.

——2000. The Centrality of Agriculture: History, Ecology and Feasible Socialism. Socialist Register, pp. 187–205.

——2004. Adam Smith's green vision and the future of global socialism. In Albritton, R; Shannon Bell; John R. Bell; and R. Westra [Eds.] New Socialisms: Futures Beyond Globalization.

New York/London, Routledge. pp. 90–104.

Dussel, Enrique (March 2001). "The Four Drafts of Capital: Toward a New Interpretation of the Dialectical Thought of Marx".

Rethinking Marxism .

13 (1): 10– 26.

doi : 10.1080/089356901101241569 .

Eldred, Michael (1984).

Critique of Competitive Freedom and the Bourgeois-Democratic State: Outline of a Form-analytic Extension of Marx's Uncompleted System . With an Appendix 'Value-form Analytic Reconstruction of the Capital-Analysis' by Michael Eldred, Marnie Hanlon, Lucia Kleiber and Mike Roth, Kurasje, Copenhagen. Emended, digitized edition 2010 with a new Preface, lxxiii + 466 pp.

ISBN 87-87437-40-6 , 978-87-87437-40-0 .

Ellerman, David P. (1992) Property & Contract in Economics: The Case for Economic Democracy. Blackwell. Chapters 4, 5, and 13 critiques of LTV in favor of the labor theory of property.

Engels, F. (1880).

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific .

Freeman, Alan: Price, value and profit – a continuous, general treatment . In: Alan Freeman, Guglielmo Carchedi (editors): Marx and Non-equilibrium Economics .

Edward Elgar Publishing . Cheltenham, UK, Brookfield, US 1996.

ISBN 978-1-85898-268-7 .

Hagendorf, Klaus: The Labour Theory of Value. A Historical-Logical Analysis . Paris: EURODOS; 2008.

Hagendorf, Klaus: Labour Values and the Theory of the Firm. Part I: The Competitive Firm . Paris: EURODOS; 2009.

Hansen, Bue Rübner. (2011). "Review of Capital as Power by Jonathan Nitzan and Shimson Bichler".

Historical Materialism 19, no. 2: 144–159.

Henderson, James M.; Quandt, Richard E. 1971: Microeconomic Theory – A Mathematical Approach. Second Edition/International Student Edition. McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.

Keen, Steven Use, Value, and Exchange: The Misinterpretation of Marx Archived July 8, 2006, at the Wayback Machine .

Mason, Paul (2015).

PostCapitalism: A Guide to our Future . Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-1-84614-738-8 .

Marx, Karl (1867), Engels, Friedrich (ed.), Capital , vol. 1, Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling, Vintage Books, ISBN 978-0-394-72657-1 , retrieved July 5, 2006 – via Marxists Internet Archive {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ([Internet edition: 1999] [1887 English edition]).

Marx, Karl (1976) [1867], Capital: A Critique of Political Economy , vol. 1, Ben Fowkes, Penguin Books Moseley, Fred . (2016).

Money and Totality Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.

Murray, Patrick (2016).

The Mismeasure of Wealth . BRILL.

doi : 10.1163/9789004326071 .

ISBN 978-90-04-32607-1 .

Ormazabal, Kepa M. (2004).

Smith On Labour Value Bilbo, Biscay, Spain: University of the Basque Country Working Paper.

Parrington, Vernon Louis.

The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin .

Pokrovskii, Vladimir N. (2012).

Econodynamics . New Economic Windows. Dordrecht: Springer.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-2096-1 .

ISBN 978-94-007-2095-4 .

Rubin, Isaak Illich (1928).

Essays on Marx's Theory of Value Shaikh, Anwar (1998). "The Empirical Strength of the Labour Theory of Value" in Conference Proceedings of Marxian Economics: A Centenary Appraisal , Riccardo Bellofiore (ed.), Macmillan, London.

Smith, Adam (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , AdamSmith.org, ISBN 978-1-4043-0998-2 , archived from the original on September 27, 2007 , retrieved August 3, 2006 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Wolff, Jonathan (2003).

" Karl Marx in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Wolff, Richard D.; Roberts, Bruce B.; Callari, Antonio (1982), "Marx's (not Ricardo's) 'Transformation Problem': A Radical Reconceptualization", History of Political Economy , 14 (4): 564– 582, doi : 10.1215/00182702-14-4-564 .

Ugalde, Elliot Goodell (2022).

"In Defense of Marx's Labour Theory of Value: Vancouver's Housing 'Crisis' " .

Cultural Logic .

26 : 69– 101.

Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Labor_theory_of_value&oldid=1305631286 " Categories : Labour economics Marxian economics Classical economics Theory of value (economics) Thomas Aquinas Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2025 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2025 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 05:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Labor theory of value 37 languages Add topic

