Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Thought Toggle Thought subsection 2.1 From the Cuban debate to the critique of "economism" 2.2 Chinese experience and analysis of the Soviet Union 2.3 Bettelheim's later works 3 Publications 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles Bettelheim 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Português Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Marxian economist and historian This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Charles Bettelheim" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Charles Bettelheim Bettelheim in 1972 Born ( 1913-11-20 ) 20 November 1913 Paris , France Died 20 June 2006 (2006-06-20) (aged 92) Paris , France Nationality French Academic work Institutions École Pratique des Hautes Études Notable students Arghiri Emmanuel Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series about Imperialism studies Theories Cultural imperialism Dependency theory Economic imperialism Expansionism Intercommunalism Irredentism Linguistic imperialism Neo-Gramscianism Neocolonialism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Ultra-imperialism World-systems theory Concepts Conquest Great power Hegemony North–South model Unequal exchange Balance of trade Global labor arbitrage Ecological Sphere of influence Superprofit Uneven and combined development War of aggression People Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Paul A. Baran Charles Bettelheim Nikolai Bukharin Arghiri Emmanuel John Bellamy Foster Andre Gunder Frank Michael Hardt Rudolf Hilferding Peter Gowan J. A. Hobson Vladimir Lenin Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Li Minqi Rosa Luxemburg Antonio Negri Kwame Nkrumah Huey P. Newton Walter Rodney Paul Sweezy Leon Trotsky Immanuel Wallerstein Works The Accumulation of Capital Empire How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Imperialism Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Monopoly Capital Multitude Naked Imperialism Related Banana republic Economic development Illicit financial flows List of irredentist claims or disputes Global North and Global South Neofunctionalism Prebisch–Singer hypothesis Third-worldism Category:Imperialism studies v t e Charles Bettelheim (20 November 1913 – 20 July 2006) was a French Marxian economist and historian , founder of the Center for the Study of Modes of Industrialization (CEMI: Centre pour l'étude des modes d'industrialisation ) at the EHESS , economic advisor to the governments of several developing countries during the period of decolonization . He was very influential in France's New Left , and considered one of "the most visible Marxists in the capitalist world" ( Le Monde , 4 April 1972), in France as well as in Spain , Italy , Latin America , and India .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Henri Bettelheim, the father of Charles Bettelheim, was a Viennese Austrian of Jewish origin, and a representative of a Swiss bank in Paris . The family had to leave France after the beginning of the First World War in 1914. The Bettelheims lived in Switzerland then in Egypt . In 1922, Charles Bettelheim returned to Paris with his French mother, during which time his father, who was living in Egypt, committed suicide.

After Adolf Hitler 's rise to power in 1933, Charles Bettelheim broke away from his familiar environment, first joining the " Young Communists " ( Jeunesses communistes ), and subsequently the French Communist Party . In addition to his studies in philosophy, sociology, law and psychology, he also learned Russian. In July 1936, he arrived in Moscow with a tourist visa. Thanks to his mastery of the language, he was able to get a resident permit for five months, during which time he worked as a tourist guide, and later on with the French edition of the Moscow Journal , and finally at Mosfilm , where he directed film dubbing. His experiences during his Moscow stay, in the anxious atmosphere at the beginning of the " purges " and the trials of the Bolshevik leaders who opposed Joseph Stalin , made him keep a critical distance from the Soviet Union , without actually abandoning his Communist convictions. He was excluded from the Communist Party for his "slanderous" remarks. In 1937, he married a young militant Communist, Lucette Beauvallet. During the German occupation , he cooperated with the French Trotskyists (the Internationalist Workers Party ).

His decision to choose economics as a profession was not an easy one, since at that time economics was considered a minor science; however, inasmuch as he had become so knowledgeable about the Soviet Union and about economic planning , Bettelheim was able to fill a gap. After World War II , he became an official in the Ministry of Labor. In 1948 he entered the "Sixth Section" [1] of the École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE).

In the Fifties, Bettelheim began his international activities as an advisor to the governments of Third World countries; he was the spokesperson for Gamal Abdel Nasser in Egypt, for Jawaharlal Nehru in India, and for Ahmed Ben Bella in Algeria. In 1958, he created an institutional base for his research by founding the CEMI. In 1963, Che Guevara invited him to Cuba , where he participated in a "grand debate" on socialist economics .

In 1966, Bettelheim was particularly interested in China. He helped the Union of Young Communists (Marxist–Leninist) with theoretical planning, without being directly affiliated with the organization. In his capacity as President of the Franco-Chinese Friendship Association (Association des amitiés Franco-Chinoises), he visited the People's Republic of China numerous times, in order to study new methods of industrial development created by the Cultural Revolution .

[ 2 ] Bettelheim was impressed by the implementation of the Angang Constitution in the factories he visited and the high levels of political consciousness among workers and cadre.

[ 2 ] From 1980 onward, Bettelheim fell more and more by the wayside as a result of the profound political changes in the Third World and, in Europe, of the decline (and eventual dissolution) of " actually existing socialism ". These developments rendered "obsolete" the paradigms of the debates to which Bettelheim had contributed so much, on the development of the countries of the South by means of planned economies independent of the world market.

Until his death, Bettelheim lived in Paris. He did not publish anything in his later years, but left an unfinished memoir. His student and long-time colleague Bernard Chavance is among the leading exponents of regulation theory .

[ citation needed ] Thought [ edit ] Despite his negative experiences in Moscow, Bettelheim retained a favorable attitude towards Soviet socialism until the Sixties, citing the economic accomplishments of the Soviet Union, which he appreciated from an independent point of view. In 1956, he endorsed the De-Stalinization inaugurated by Nikita Khrushchev at the Twentieth Congress of the Soviet Communist Party , as well as the 1965 economic reforms conceived by Soviet economist Evsei Liberman , suggesting a decentralization of decisions made within the planning leadership.

[ 3 ] From the Cuban debate to the critique of "economism" [ edit ] In the Cuban debate of 1963, Bettelheim was opposed to the voluntarist ideas of Che Guevara, who wanted to abolish free market and the production of merchandise through a very rapid and centralized industrialization, morally mobilizing "the new man." Bettelheim took a position against this plan, to which Fidel Castro had also subscribed: both Che Guevara and Castro preferred the monoculture of sugar as the basis of Cuban economy, rather than a strict analogy to the economy of the Soviet Union. In Cuba, Bettelheim recommended a diversified economy, based on agriculture, prudent industrialization, broad central planning, mixed forms of property ownership with market elements—a pragmatic strategy similar to the " New Economic Policy " begun in Russia by Vladimir Lenin in 1922. Opposing Guevara, Bettelheim argued (in line with the last writings of Stalin) that the " law of value " was the manifestation of objective social conditions which could not be overcome by willful decisions, but only by a process of long-term social transformation.

This debate demonstrated the profound differences which, from then on, separated Bettelheim from Marxist "orthodoxy" , which considered Socialism as the result of "the development of maximum centralization of all forces of industrial production". For Bettelheim, socialism is rather an alternative voice in development; a process of transformation of social understandings. Inspired by the Chinese Cultural Revolution and the thought of Mao Zedong , and in cooperation with the Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser , Bettelheim was opposed to " economism " and to the "primacy of the means of production" of traditional Marxism : against the idea that socialist transformation of social bonds was a necessary effect of the development of the forces of production (liberating those bonds from them, according to Marxist orthodoxy, since private property dominates them in "bourgeois" society), he affirmed the necessity for actively and politically transforming social connections. In his book Economic Calculations and Forms of Ownership ( Calcul économique et formes de proprieté ), Bettelheim re-thinks the problems of transition to socialism, while criticizing the supposition that nationalization and state ownership of the means of production was already "socialist"—it is not the legal form of property, but true socialization of the web of production, which characterizes such a transition; the crucial problem in socialist planning is the replacement of the form of "value" with the development of a method of measurement which takes into account the social utility of production.

Chinese experience and analysis of the Soviet Union [ edit ] In China, Bettelheim had the impression that he was in the process of witnessing just such a process of transformation. More specifically, he noted that the Cultural Revolution—a revolution of the political, ideological and cultural superstructure—changed the industrial organization accompanying it by a general participation by the workers in all decisions, and overcoming the division of "manual" and "intellectual" labor. During these years, China was the benchmark for the Neo-Marxist "radical school of economics", represented by Bettelheim, Paul Sweezy , Andre Gunder Frank , Samir Amin and others who, by fighting against theories of "modernization," affirmed that at the periphery of the worldwide capitalist system, in "under-developed" countries, "development" is only possible under conditions where these countries pry themselves free from their unequal and asymmetrical connections with the world market, dominated by imperialist countries, in order to choose a different and autonomous path: a development of production neither for profit, nor for an accumulation of abstract wealth, but for the needs of the people.

Under the banner of a "Maoist" approach, Bettelheim began his voluminous work on the history of the Soviet Union: Les luttes de classes en URSS (1974–1982) ( Class Struggle in the USSR (1974–1982) ), where he examines the reasons for the distortions of soviet socialism, which, according to Bettelheim, is nothing more than a "State Capitalism." Bettelheim showed that after the October Revolution , the Bolsheviks had not succeeded in any long-term stabilization of the alliance between workers and poor peasants which had earlier been conceived by Lenin. During the 1920s, this alliance was replaced by an alliance of elite workers and technological intellectuals against the peasants, culminating in the forced collectivization of agriculture in 1928. "Economistic" ideology (the "primacy of the forces of production"), born in social-democracy and fed by the interests of the "worker aristocracy" and progressivist intellectuals, was resurrected by the enablement of the Bolshevik Party, acting as a legitimization of new technocratic elites which established the same divisions of labor and social differentiations, as had capitalism. However, the "legal" mirage, according to which the property of the State is defined as "socialist," hides the actual exploitation.

Finally, Bettelheim called into doubt the socialist character of the October Revolution , interpreting it as a seizing of power by a radical branch of the Russian intelligentsia, which "confiscated" a popular revolution.

[ 3 ] Bettelheim was a leading proponent of the thesis that "development" in the countries of the "Third World" necessitates a political break with imperialism and a distantanglement from the bonds of dependency on the unequal international division of labor of the world market. This position also includes a sharp criticism of the international role of the Soviet Union whose politics of development Bettelheim saw as just another variant of capitalist accumulation models. This theory saw a chance for a disentanglement of the political groundwork in order to practice an alternative development model, one that was not oriented towards accumulation and profit, but rather towards an economy for the everyday needs of the people, with a balanced proportion allowed between agriculture and industry.

Bettelheim's later works [ edit ] When, in 1978, the People's Republic of China , under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping , put paid to the "Maoist" strategy of autarkic (tr. note: independent and self-sustaining) development, guided by political priorities, in order to reaffirm the primacy of the economy and to introduce itself into the world market, the theoreticians' paradigm of autonomous development lost the force of its convictions. In 1982, he published the two volumes of the third part of Class Struggle in the USSR .

Publications [ edit ] La planification soviétique . Rivière, 1945 ( Soviet planning ) L'économie allemande sous le nazisme, un aspect de la décadence du capitalisme . Rivière, 1946 (Bibliothèque générale d'économie politique) ( The German economy under Nazism, an Aspect of the Decadence of Capitalism ) Les Problèmes théoriques et pratiques de la planification . 1946.

[ 4 ] Bilan de l'économie française (1919–1946).

PUF, 1947 ( Balance-sheet for the French Economy ) Esquisse d'un tableau économique de l'Europe.

Domat, 1948 ( Draft of an economic picture of Europe ) L'économie soviétique.

Sirey, 1950 ( The Soviet Economy ) Une ville française moyenne.

Auxerre en 1950. Étude de structure sociale et urbaine (avec Suzanne Frère). Colin, 1950 ( Cahiers de la fondation nationale des sciences politiques ) ( An Average French City.

Auxerre in 1950. Study of the Social and Urban Structure.

Modèles de croissance et développement économique.

Tiers-Monde, tome I, nos. 1-2, 1960 ( Models of Economic Growth and Development ) L'Inde indépendante.

Colin, 1962 ( Independent India ) Planification et croissance accélérée.

Maspero, 1965 (Collection Économie et socialisme) ( Planning and Accelerated Growth ) La transition vers l'économie socialiste.

Maspero, 1968 ( Transition to a Socialist Economy ) Problèmes théoriques et pratiques de la planification.

Maspero, 1970 ( Theoretical and Practical Problems with Planning ) Calcul économique et formes de propriété.

Maspero, 1971 ( Economic Calculus and Forms of Ownership ) Révolution culturelle et organisation industrielle en Chine.

Maspero, 1973 ( Cultural Revolution and Industrial Organization in China ) Les luttes de classes en URSS – Première période, 1917-1923.

Seuil/Maspero, 1974 ( Class Conflict in the USSR—First period, 1917-1923 ) Les luttes de classes en URSS – Deuxième période, 1923-1930.

Seuil/Maspero, 1977 ( Class Conflict in the USSR—Second period, 1923-1930 ) Questions sur la Chine, après la mort de Mao Tsé-toung.

Maspero, 1978 (Collection Économie et socialisme) ( Questions about China after the Death of Mao Tse-tung ) Les luttes de classes en URSS – Troisième période, 1930-1941.

Tome I: Les dominés , tome II: Les dominants . Seuil/Maspero, 1982 ("Class Conflict in the USSR -- Third Period, 1930-1941. Vol. I: "The Dominated," Vol II: "The Dominators.") La pensée marxienne à l'épreuve de l'histoire , interview in Les Temps modernes , nº 472, 1985 ( Marxist Thinking About the Experience of History ) La pertinence des concepts marxiens de classe et lutte de classes pour analyser la société soviétique , dans Marx en perspective , Éditions de l'EHESS, 1985 ( The Relevance of Marxist Concepts of Class Conflict to the Analysis of Soviet Society ) See also [ edit ] Arghiri Emmanuel Notes [ edit ] ^ The "Sixth Section" of the École Pratique des Hautes Études was the "School of Economic and Social Sciences" (Sciences Économiques et Sociales.) In 1975, it became autonomous as the School of Graduate Studies in the Social Sciences (École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales.) The above article is a translation of the French Wikipedia article on Charles Bettelheim.

References [ edit ] ^ Allisson, François (2024).

"Charles Bettelheim and World War II, or The Making of a Planning Doctor" .

History of Political Economy .

56 : 283– 304.

doi : 10.1215/00182702-11470271 .

ISSN 0018-2702 .

^ a b Ching, Pao-Yu (2021).

Revolution and counterrevolution : China's continuing class struggle since liberation (2nd ed.). Paris: Foreign languages press. p. 132.

ISBN 978-2-491182-89-2 .

OCLC 1325647379 .

^ a b "Contributions Of Charles Bettelheim| Countercurrents" .

countercurrents.org . 2023-04-14 . Retrieved 2023-07-29 .

^ Bunzel, Joseph H. (1948).

"Review of Les Problèmes théoriques et pratiques de la planification" .

American Journal of Sociology .

53 (4): 306– 307.

doi : 10.1086/220181 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

JSTOR 2771228 .

External links [ edit ] Works by Charles Bettelheim v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Bettelheim&oldid=1303944442 " Categories : French Marxists French economists Marxian economists Imperialism studies Marxist theorists University of Paris alumni 20th-century French Jews Jewish socialists French people of Austrian-Jewish descent French expatriates in Switzerland Academic staff of the University of Paris Winners of the Prix Broquette-Gonin (literature) Writers from Paris 1913 births 2006 deaths French male writers 20th-century French historians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles Bettelheim 10 languages Add topic

