Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Recent years 2 Exhibits and attractions Toggle Exhibits and attractions subsection 2.1 Free exhibits and attractions 2.1.1 Astor Court 2.1.2 African Plains 2.1.3 Big Bears 2.1.4 Gelada Reserve 2.1.5 Himalayan Highlands 2.1.6 Madagascar!

2.1.7 Mouse House 2.1.8 Aquatic Bird House 2.1.9 Russell B. Aitken Sea Bird Aviary 2.1.10 Tiger Mountain 2.1.11 World of Birds 2.1.12 World of Darkness 2.1.13 World of Reptiles 2.1.14 Pheasant Aviary 2.1.15 Birds of Prey 2.1.16 Zoo Center 2.1.17 Bison Range 2.1.18 Northern Ponds 2.1.19 Mitsubishi Riverwalk 2.2 Paid exhibits and attractions 2.2.1 Budgie Landing 2.2.2 Bug Carousel 2.2.3 Butterfly Garden 2.2.4 Children's Zoo 2.2.5 Congo Gorilla Forest 2.2.6 JungleWorld 2.2.7 Wild Asia Monorail 2.2.8 Nature Trek 2.2.9 Bronx Zoo Treetop Adventure 2.2.10 Dinosaur Safari 2.3 Former exhibits 2.3.1 Rare Animal Range 2.3.2 Skyfari 2.3.3 Monkey House 2.3.4 Amazing Amphibians 2.3.5 4-D Theater 2.3.6 The Most Dangerous Animal in the World 2.4 WCS's Run for the Wild 3 Conservation 4 Incidents Toggle Incidents subsection 4.1 Human fatality 4.2 Non-human deaths 4.3 Animal escapes 4.4 Happy the Elephant 4.5 Ota Benga 5 Entrances (gates) 6 In popular culture 7 Notable people 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Bronx Zoo 38 languages العربية Basa Bali Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°51′01″N 73°52′42″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.85028°N 73.87833°W ﻿ / 40.85028; -73.87833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metropolitan zoo in the Bronx, New York For other uses, see The Bronx Zoo (disambiguation) .

Bronx Zoo Bronx Zoo logo Asia Gate Entrance 40°51′01″N 73°52′42″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.85028°N 73.87833°W ﻿ / 40.85028; -73.87833 Date opened November 8, 1899 [ 1 ] Location 2300 Southern Boulevard , Bronx Park , Bronx , New York 10460, U.S.

Land area 265 acres (107 ha) [ 2 ] No.

of animals 4,000 (2010) [ 3 ] No.

of species 650 (2010) [ 3 ] Annual visitors 2+ million Memberships AZA [ 4 ] Major exhibits African Plains Congo Gorilla Forest JungleWorld Madagascar!

Tiger Mountain Wild Asia Monorail World of Birds World of Darkness World of Reptiles Zoo Center Management Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) Public transit access Subway : ​ at West Farms Square–East Tremont Avenue ​ at East 180th Street ​ at Pelham Parkway Bus: New York City Bus : Bx9 , Bx12 , Bx12 SBS , Bx19 , Bx21 , Bx22 , Bx36 , Bx39 , Bx40 , Bx42 , Q44 SBS Bee-Line Bus : BL60, BL61, and BL62 Metro-North Railroad : Fordham Website bronxzoo .com The Bronx Zoo (also historically the Bronx Zoological Park and the Bronx Zoological Gardens ) is a zoo within Bronx Park in the Bronx , New York City. It is one of the largest zoos in the United States by area and the largest metropolitan zoo, [ 5 ] comprising 265 acres (107 ha) of park lands and naturalistic habitats separated by the Bronx River . The zoo has 2.1 million average yearly visitors as of 2009 [update] .

[ 5 ] The zoo's original buildings, known as Astor Court, were designed as a series of Beaux-Arts pavilions grouped around the large circular sea lion pool.

[ 6 ] The Rainey Memorial Gates were designed by sculptor Paul Manship in 1934 and listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1972.

[ 7 ] The zoo opened on November 8, 1899, featuring 843 animals in 22 exhibits. Its first director was William Temple Hornaday , who served for 30 years. From its inception the zoo has played a vital role in animal conservation. In 1905, the American Bison Society was created in an attempt to save the American bison , which had been depleted from tens-of-millions of animals to only a few hundred, from extinction . Two years later they were successfully reintroduced into the wild. In 2007, the zoo successfully reintroduced three Chinese alligators into the wild. The breeding was a milestone in the zoo's 10-year effort to reintroduce the species to the Yangtze River in China.

The Bronx Zoo is world-renowned for its large and diverse animal collection, and its award-winning exhibitions.

[ 5 ] The zoo is part of an integrated system of four zoos and one aquarium managed by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), and it is accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA).

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Bronx Zoological Park, 1913 In 1895, a group made up largely of members of the Boone and Crockett Club founded the New York Zoological Society (later renamed the Wildlife Conservation Society ) for the purposes of founding a zoo, promoting the study of zoology , and preserving wildlife.

[ 9 ] Credit for this belonged chiefly to Club members Madison Grant and C. Grant LaFarge.

[ 10 ] The zoo (sometimes called the Bronx Zoological Park [ 11 ] and the Bronx Zoological Gardens [ 12 ] ) opened its doors to the public on November 8, 1899, featuring 843 animals in 22 exhibits. Its first director was William Temple Hornaday , who had 30 years of service at the zoo.

[ 13 ] Heins & LaFarge designed the original permanent buildings, known as Astor Court, as a series of Beaux-Arts pavilions grouped around the large circular sea lion pool.

[ 6 ] In 1934, the Rainey Memorial Gates , designed by sculptor Paul Manship , were dedicated as a memorial to noted big game hunter Paul James Rainey .

[ 14 ] The gates were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1972.

[ 7 ] The Rockefeller Fountain, which today adorns the gardens just inside the Fordham Road Gate, was once a landmark in Como , Italy. Originally built by Biagio Catella in 1872, it stood in the main square (Piazza Cavour ) by the lakeside.

[ 15 ] Bought by William Rockefeller in 1902 for lire 3,500 (the estimated equivalent then of $637, and today of around $17,600), it was installed at the zoo in 1903. In 1968, the fountain was designated an official New York City landmark , and is one of the few local monuments to be honored in this way.

[ 16 ] The New York Zoological Society's seal was designed by famed wildlife-artist Charles R. Knight . It depicted a ram's head and an eagle to reflect the society's interest in preserving North American wildlife.

[ 17 ] While no longer in use, the seal can still be found on the lawn in the center of Astor Court.

[ original research?

] Zoo Director William T. Hornaday feeding a greater kudu in 1920 On December 17, 1902, the zoo became one of the seven zoos outside of Australia , and one of only two in the United States, to ever hold the now-extinct thylacine . The first was a male obtained from German animal dealer Carl Hagenbeck . It died on August 15, 1908. The zoo received a second male on January 26, 1912, from the Beaumaris Zoo in Tasmania , who later died on November 20 of that year. The zoo received its final two animals from Sydney animal dealer Ellis S. Joseph . The first was an unsexed individual who arrived on November 7, 1916, in poor condition and died seven days later. The second and final animal was a female purchased from the Beaumaris Zoo by Joseph for £25 [ clarification needed ] (~$35) and then was resold to the zoo, arriving on July 14, 1917.

[ 18 ] On a visit, the director of the Melbourne Zoo , Mr. Le Souef , said upon seeing the animal: I advise you to take excellent care of that specimen; for when it is gone, you never will get another. The species soon will be extinct.

The thylacine died on September 13, 1919.

[ 18 ] In early 1903, the zoo was gifted a pair of Barbary lions , a subspecies which is extinct in the wild. The female was named Bedouin Maid and male Sultan, who went on to become one of the zoo's most popular animals. Displayed in the Lion House, Sultan was four years old at the time and described as being both "a perfect specimen" and "unusually good tempered". In May 1903, the pair produced three cubs, the first to be born at the zoo. On October 7, 1905, Charles R. Knight painted a portrait of Sultan and the animal went on to be the focus of many of the zoo's postcards . Sultan was also the model for the lion which sits atop the Rainey Memorial Gates.

[ 19 ] In 1906, the Bronx Zoo put Ota Benga , a young Mbuti man from the Congo, on display along with monkeys and a bow and arrow. He was never returned home and later died of suicide at age 33.

[ 20 ] In 1916, the zoo built the world's first animal hospital located at a zoo.

[ 5 ] In 1926, the Bronx Zoo and the Smithsonian Institution 's National Zoological Park simultaneously became the first in the country to exhibit shoebills .

[ 21 ] The same year, W. Douglas Burden , F. J. Defosse, and Emmett Reid Dunn collected two live adult Komodo dragons —the first in America—for the zoo.

[ 22 ] In 1937, the zoo became the first in North America to exhibit okapi .

[ 23 ] Recent years [ edit ] Historical Fordham Road Entrance to the Bronx Zoo featuring Rainey Memorial Gates In 1960, the zoo became the first in the world to keep a James's flamingo , a species which had been thought to be extinct until 1957. They were imported along with the similar Andean flamingo .

[ 24 ] The zoo was one of the few in the world to exhibit proboscis monkeys outside of Southeast Asia and, in the 1976 International Zoo Yearbook , the zoo reported having eight monkeys, seven of which were born at the zoo. As of March 1999, it only had two monkeys left, these two being the last members of their species kept in the United States.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In 2003, the pair were sent to the Singapore Zoo .

On June 6, 1990, the zoo received a female Sumatran rhinoceros named Rapunzel. At the time, the zoo was one of only three in North America to hold the critically endangered species, with the Cincinnati and San Diego Zoos being the others, holding one female each. The three institutions were a part of the Sumatran Rhino Trust's plan to start a captive breeding program for the species.

[ 27 ] Rapunzel was born in the wild in Sumatra and rescued from an area of rainforest that was slated to be cleared for a palm oil plantation in 1989. Though it's believed she bred in the wild, she never produced any calves in captivity. It was eventually determined that she was past reproductive age, at which point she was returned to the zoo in 2000, having been brought out for breeding purposes. She lived in the Zoo Center until her death in December 2005 in her 30s.

[ 28 ] In November 2006, the zoo opened up brand-new eco-friendly restrooms outside the Bronx River Gate. According to Clivus Multrum , which built the composting toilets chosen by the zoo, these facilities can serve 500,000 people and save 1,000,000 U.S. gal (3,800,000 L) of water a year.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In March 2007, the Wildlife Conservation Society and the Fordham University Graduate School of Education announced they would offer a joint program leading to a Master of Science degree in education and New York State initial teacher certification in adolescent science education (biology, grades 7–12). The program began the next year, and is the first joint degree program of its kind.

[ 31 ] Congressman George Miller with Bronx Zoo Education Instructor Kate Ma, 2011 In 2009, New York City [ who?

] cut funding for the state's 76 zoos, aquariums, and botanical gardens. The Wildlife Conservation Society as a whole suffered a $15-million deficit, and the zoo was forced to downsize its staff and animal collection. The budget cuts forced the buyouts of over 100 employees and layoffs of dozens more as well as the closure of four sections of the zoo: World of Darkness, Rare Animal Range, the Skyfari, and a small section of the overall still-open African Plains exhibit which featured endangered antelope .

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] In the end, 186 staff positions (15%) were cut within the WCS. In 2012, Mayor Michael Bloomberg passed another budget cut that took $4.7-million from the funding of the zoo and the New York Aquarium , also run by the WCS. This cut represented more than half of what the collections were receiving. However, Bloomberg also passed an energy subsidy that brought the cuts down to $3.7-million.

[ 34 ] In the summer of 2014, New York Representative Carolyn B. Maloney visited the Chengdu Panda Base in Sichuan, China and announced her plan to bring giant pandas to New York City. Initially, she aimed to exhibit them at the Central Park Zoo , though switched her attention to the Bronx after deciding the 6.5-acre zoo didn't have the resources to care for the animals. Maloney and her supporters, which included Maurice R. Greenberg , Newt Gingrich , and John A. Catsimatidis , were met with many obstacles throughout their campaign. Initially, the largest issues were the lack of support from Mayor Bill de Blasio and City Hall , and Chinese officials insisting that no more pandas be brought to the United States. However, in October 2015, Chinese Ambassador Cui Tiankai announced that his country was willing to enter preliminary talks with the city over the matter, and soon after de Blasio and City Hall signed a letter appealing to Chinese officials, drafted by Maloney in 2014. Despite her efforts, Maloney's campaign still has yet to overcome two critical steps in acquiring pandas: funding and the zoo's consent. Both de Blasio and the Wildlife Conservation Society refuse to fund the project, not wanting taxpayer or vital zoo money to go towards the highly expensive project. David Towne, chairman of the American-based Giant Panda Conservation Foundation, estimated that the cost of bringing pandas to the city would be around $50 million.

The foundation has also said that the cost of keeping just one such animal is about $1 million a year, including food, trainers, and habitat upkeep. Additionally, China loans out their pandas for a hefty fee. A study published by The Washington Post in 2005 found that the four U.S. zoos holding pandas—the Memphis Zoo , the San Diego Zoo , the National Zoological Park (located in Washington, D.C., and Front Royal, Virginia) and Zoo Atlanta —had spent $33 million more on their animals than revenue made off of them between 2000 and 2003. Despite the figures, Maloney believes pandas in her city will do better since the city has a higher population than those four cities combined, and received a record-breaking 56.4-million visitors in 2014. Still, the WCS continues to steer away from bringing in these pandas. In 2014, a senior official from the WCS said Maloney's campaign had reached "a new level of absurdity " when it was announced she intended to bring a Chinese delegation to the Central Park Zoo. In November 2015, Jim Breheny, WCS Executive Vice President and Bronx Zoo Director, released a statement saying: [ 35 ] [ 36 ] The concept of bringing Giant Pandas to New York which the Congresswoman is proposing is complex and would require that a number of complicated issues be considered and resolved before any such plan could be implemented.

Any decision to bring giant pandas to New York would need to be based on positively contributing to the conservation of giant pandas in the wild and a determination that all the requirements necessary to keep the animals well in New York could be met.

Very importantly, there is no funding for this initiative. Building and maintenance of such a exhibit would be an ongoing effort that would require tens of millions of dollars up front and annual support monies for pandas for however long they would be in the city. Any agreement to exhibit pandas would have to come with a guarantee of provision for the necessary funds.

Exhibits and attractions [ edit ] The zoo has two types of displays: free exhibits accessible with a General Admission ticket, and premium exhibits which require additional fees.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Free exhibits and attractions [ edit ] African Plains Aquatic Bird House and Sea Bird Aviary Big Bears Birds of Prey Bison Range Carter Giraffe Building Gelada Reserve Himalayan Highlands Madagascar!

Mitsubishi Riverwalk Mouse House Northern Ponds Pheasant Aviary Sea Lion Pool Tiger Mountain World of Birds World of Darkness World of Reptiles Zoo Center As of 2010 [update] , the Bronx Zoo is home to more than 4,000 animals of 650 species, many of which are endangered or threatened .

[ 3 ] Some of its exhibits, such as World of Birds and World of Reptiles, are arranged by taxonomy , while others, such as African Plains and the Wild Asian Monorail, are arranged geographically.

[ 39 ] The zoo also has Indian peafowl that roam freely.

Astor Court [ edit ] California sea lion ( Zalophus californianus ) with trainer Astor Court is an old section of the zoo that is home to many of the zoo's original buildings, designed by Heins & LaFarge . While most of the buildings are closed to the public, the former Lion House was reopened as the "Madagascar!" exhibit in 2008, [ 40 ] and the Zoo Center still exhibits various species. Astor Court includes the historic sea lion pool featuring California sea lions .

[ 41 ] Small aviaries featuring small bird species can be found nearby and white-headed capuchins can be seen behind the old Monkey House.

[ citation needed ] The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission designated Astor Court's buildings as a city landmark in 2000, [ 42 ] after a failed attempt to do so in 1966.

[ 43 ] African Plains [ edit ] Giraffes ( Giraffa camelopardalis ) at the zoo African Plains allows visitors to walk past lions , African wild dogs , Grévy's zebras , and spotted hyenas , and see herds of nyalas , Thomson’s gazelles , and slender-horned gazelles , It also includes hybrid giraffes ( Baringo × reticulated giraffe ) sharing their home with common ostriches . The exhibit originally opened in 1941 and was the first in the country to allow visitors to view predators and their prey in a naturalistic setting as well as allowing large predators such as lions to be exhibited cage-free.

[ 5 ] This success was achieved through the creation of a series of deep moats, a set-up which can still be found at the zoo today.

[ 15 ] The wild dogs, however, can be viewed close-up from a glass-fronted viewing pavilion.

[ 44 ] The zoo has bred their lions on multiple occasions, including one male and two females born in January 2010 and three males and one female born in August 2013. The zoo, in partnership with the New York Daily News , held a contest to name the 2010 cubs, which made their public debut in April 2010. The winning names were Shani, Nala, and Adamma.

[ 45 ] The 2013 cubs were named Thulani, Ime, Bahata, and Amara [ 46 ] and the three males can still be found on-exhibit at the zoo.

The Carter Giraffe Building , a section of African Plains, features indoor/outdoor viewing of the zoo's giraffes and South African ostriches , and is also home to common dwarf mongooses , Von der Decken's hornbills , and northern white-faced owls . In June 2009, two aardvarks imported from Tanzania joined the exhibit.

[ 5 ] [ 47 ] In September 2010, the pair gave birth to a male named Hoover, the first to ever be born at the zoo.

[ 48 ] Until 2009, the southwestern corner of African Plains was home to the endangered Arabian oryx and blesbok . Due to budget cuts and the unpopularity of the species with visitors, they were phased-out of the collection.

[ 33 ] This section of the exhibit is replaced by the Nature Trek. In 2017 they received two baby cheetahs from the San Diego Zoo . Cheetahs are now part of their animal encounter programs.

[ 49 ] They were replaced by the hyenas.

[ 50 ] Big Bears [ edit ] Big Bears features four bears, a male grizzly bear and three ABC Islands bears rescued as orphans from Baranof Island of Alaska .

[ 51 ] Until 2015, two female grizzly bears named Betty and Veronica also lived in this exhibit, but moved to the Central Park Zoo where they died in 2020 and 2021.

[ 52 ] The zoo also formerly housed polar bears until the last individual, a 26-year-old male named Tundra died in December 2017.

[ 53 ] Three dholes from the San Diego Zoo Safari Park were added to the habitat in 2019.

[ 54 ] Gelada Reserve [ edit ] Gelada in the reserve Gelada Reserve, originally called Baboon Reserve, opened in 1990. It is a two-acre recreation of the Ethiopian highlands which, at the time of its opening, was the largest primate exhibit in the United States.

[ 55 ] The exhibit's main features revolve around the zoo's troop of geladas such as artificial rocks and earthbanks, and displays about life in the highlands and the side-by-side evolution of humans and geladas. Visitors can watch the geladas from multiple viewpoints along with Nubian ibex and rock hyrax , all of which are mixed together in the hilly enclosure. An African village-styled café overlooks the exhibit. Baboon Reserve won the AZA Exhibit Award in 1991.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] In the fall of 2014, a male gelada was born at the zoo, the first in over 13 years, and was the only zoo in the US to display them until the San Diego Zoo in 2017 received their gelada troop for their Africa Rocks exhibit.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Before the late 1980s, this place replaced a lawn of aoudads .

Himalayan Highlands [ edit ] Snow leopard in the Himalayan Highlands exhibit Himalayan Highlands, which opened on June 27, 1986, [ 59 ] recreates the Himalayas region of Asia. The exhibit is known for its highly naturalistic look and use of the hilly and rocky terrain found in that portion of the zoo. The stars of the exhibit are the zoo's multiple snow leopards . The exhibit also is home to red pandas and white-naped cranes . In 2006, the zoo brought in a male snow leopard named Leo from Pakistan after he was orphaned at around two months old.

[ 60 ] Leo sired a male cub on April 9, 2013. The cub is one of more than 70 snow leopards born at the zoo, which was the first U.S. zoo to exhibit the species in 1903. Leo later became a grandfather when his son sired a female cub in 2017.

[ 61 ] Madagascar!

[ edit ] Lemur at the zoo Madagascar!, which opened on June 20, 2008, recreates various habitats found on the island of Madagascar and contains a variety of wildlife from the island, including lemurs , fossas , Nile crocodiles , radiated tortoises , greater vasa parrots and highly endangered cichlids .

[ 40 ] [ 62 ] Ring-tailed lemurs , collared lemurs , red ruffed lemurs , crowned lemurs , and Coquerel's sifakas are the lemur species held in the exhibit. Madagascar! holds the first two ring-tailed mongoose in the United States and is home to over 100,000 Madagascar hissing cockroaches that can be named for $10 around Valentine's Day .

[ 5 ] [ 63 ] The exhibit has multiple educational displays focusing on the many threats to the survival of these species as well as the WCS's conservation work in Madagascar. The building was converted from the former Lion House, which had opened in 1903 and closed by the late 1980s. The exhibit also has tomato frogs and Henkel's leaf-tailed geckos .

Mouse House [ edit ] The Mouse House is a small building home to various species of small mammals , particularly rodents . The building features both diurnal and nocturnal areas and a row of outdoor cages which, during the summer months, are home to a variety of small primates , many of which are former monkey house inhabitants. Species include black and rufous elephant shrews , eastern spiny mice , harvest mice , common degus , African pouched rats , northern Luzon giant cloud rats , lesser hedgehog tenrecs , Damaraland mole-rats , northern treeshrews , long-tailed chinchillas , and feathertail gliders .

Aquatic Bird House [ edit ] American flamingos ( Phoenicopterus ruber ) in the pond The current Aquatic Bird House opened on September 24, 1964, on the foundation of the original house, which was opened on November 8, 1899, with the rest of the zoo. The building features a multitude of mostly open-fronted enclosures mainly focusing on coastal and wetland habitats and the species that rely on them.

[ 64 ] Scarlet ibises , roseate spoonbills , anhingas , boat-billed herons and Madagascar crested ibises are among the residents here. The exhibit also features an outdoor pond home to a flock of American flamingos and a large aviary home for lesser adjutant storks .

The zoo is one of only three zoos in North America working with the endangered storks and has bred them several times, including the hatching of two chicks on June 27 and August 15, 2015.

[ 65 ] The Aquatic Bird House is also home to another endangered stork species: the Storm's stork . The zoo is one of only two in the United States working with this species; the other being the San Diego Zoo . In May 2014, the zoo opened a new nocturnal enclosure for a North Island brown kiwi in the building, [ 66 ] and in May 2015, a colony of Australian little penguins from the Taronga Zoo were added.

[ 67 ] Russell B. Aitken Sea Bird Aviary [ edit ] A guanay cormorant in the Sea Bird Aviary: The zoo is the last to hold the species outside of South America.

The Russell B. Aitken Sea Bird Aviary, which opened on May 17, 1997, is a huge walk-through aviary designed to resemble the Patagonian coast. The aviary stands at 60-feet high, occupies 615,000 cubic feet, is supported by five steel arches, and netted with a stainless steel mesh. The aviary was built to replace the original De Jur Aviary that opened with the zoo in 1899 and collapsed in a snowstorm in February 1995.

[ 68 ] The exhibit's height and open space allows the residents to soar around above visitor's heads and the fake sea cliff walls allows for more natural nesting and roosting behavior. The aviary is home to about 100 birds, most being Inca terns , but also a small colony of Magellanic penguins , grey gulls , and brown pelicans . The aviary was also home to the last guanay cormorant in captivity outside of South America. In April 2014, four Peruvian pelicans were added to the exhibit, [ 69 ] and in January 2015, a pair of ruddy-headed geese were added.

[ 70 ] Tiger Mountain [ edit ] A male Siberian tiger at the zoo Tiger Mountain, which opened on May 15, 2003, is a three-acre exhibit which features Amur tigers and occasionally Malayan tigers , who are usually kept off-exhibit. The exhibit has two enclosures with glass viewing, the second of which has a 10,000 gallon pool with underwater viewing. Outside of the tigers , the exhibit has multiple interactive displays designed to educate visitors on behavioral enrichment and on the zoo's/WCS' ex-situ and in-situ conservation .

The exhibit won the AZA Exhibit Award in 2004.

[ 71 ] The zoo has had good breeding successful with both subspecies of tiger, having bred both in 2010.

[ 72 ] Another set of Siberian tiger cubs were born in 2012, [ 73 ] and a pair of Malayan tiger cubs were born in 2016.

[ 74 ] One of the tiger cubs named Nadia tested positive for COVID-19 during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City , but have since recovered from the disease.

[ 75 ] Across from the entrance to Tiger Mountain, a large herd of Père David's deer and a pair of whooper swans can be found.

Before 2003, this part of the area was once Wolf Wood, and includes a pack of wolves .

World of Birds [ edit ] Maleo World of Birds, which originally opened in 1972, is an indoor bird house spanning two floors and featuring several walk-through aviaries . The building closed for repairs and upgrades in the summer of 2010, [ 76 ] and reopened the following year. The exhibit has multiple educational displays focusing on deforestation and the illegal wildlife trade and their affects on wild bird populations. The most prominent residents of the exhibit include the maleos , [ 77 ] great hornbills , knobbed hornbills , Andean cock-of-the-rocks , Nicobar pigeons , southern bald ibises , great argus pheasants , ocellated turkeys , hyacinth macaws , grey parrots , grey-winged trumpeters , lesser birds-of-paradise and white-throated bee-eaters . Some mammals like Bolivian gray titis and greater mouse deer also live here.

Emus can be found in an outdoor yard. In mid-2009, the zoo's hand-reared pair of great blue turacos successfully raised chicks, the first known instance of a hand-reared pair doing so.

[ 78 ] In March 2013, three maleo chicks hatched at the zoo, bringing their total number of birds to 12. The zoo, along with the WCS, works toward preserving this species in the wild as well.

[ 77 ] World of Darkness [ edit ] World of Darkness opened in 1969 and was the world's first major exhibit designed specifically to introduce the public to nocturnal animals such as aye-ayes , naked mole-rats , common vampire bats , Seba's short-tailed bats , ringtails , gray mouse lemurs , red-rumped agoutis , Egyptian fruit bats , broad-snouted caimans , fat-tailed dwarf lemurs , blood pythons , Mohol bushbabies , northern Luzon giant cloud rats , Hoffman's two-toed sloths , nine-banded armadillos , pygmy slow lorises , dourocoulis , sand cats , Guatemalan beaded lizards , Timor pythons , New Caledonian giant geckos , Texas blind salamanders , blind cave fish , emperor scorpions , and pinktoe tarantulas .

[ 79 ] Built by Morris Ketchum Jr. & Associates , the house was built where the zoo's Rocking Stone Restaurant stood until 1942. The exhibit used red-lights to dimly illuminate the enclosures within the windowless building. Like all nocturnal exhibits, the house ran on a reversed lighting schedule, which simulated night and day at opposite times to allow visitors to view nocturnal animals in a more naturalistic setting.

[ 80 ] Due to budget cuts and the high cost of running the exhibit, it was closed in 2009.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] On November 28, 2024, during the 98th Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade , the zoo ran a float that hinted at the return of the exhibit.

[ 81 ] This was later confirmed on December 4 when the zoo announced that the exhibit reopened on July 12, 2025. The exhibit used to have species including leopard cats , Rodrigues flying foxes , bay duikers , African brush-tailed porcupines , spotted skunks , rock cavies , common genets , Pallas's long-tongued bats , Jamaican fruit bats , lesser spear-nosed bats , short-tailed bats , sand boas , and marine toads until 2009.

World of Reptiles [ edit ] World of Reptiles has been an attraction at the zoo since it first opened. The building's first curator was Raymond Lee Ditmars , who had kept 45 snakes in his attic before being hired at the zoo.

[ 82 ] The exhibit is a long hall with various terrariums situated on both sides. The exhibit also features a nursery area, which exhibits newborn herptiles born at the zoo, as well as a window into the off-show breeding and caring facilities. In the building, the zoo breeds and exhibits a wide range of species, including Chinese alligators , blue iguanas , Cuban crocodiles , false gharials , dyeing poison dart frogs , eyelash vipers , Fly River turtles , giant musk turtles , green anacondas , hellbenders , Milos viper , king cobras and Philippine sailfin lizards . The building also is home to the zoo's breeding population of Kihansi spray toads , which the zoo saved from extinction.

[ 83 ] On March 25, 2011, an Egyptian cobra escaped from its off-show enclosure, during which time the exhibit was closed to the public. Six days later, the animal was found elsewhere in the building. The zoo named the cobra MIA (Missing In Action) and placed it on exhibit.

[ 84 ] Pheasant Aviary [ edit ] Male Palawan peacock-pheasant ( Polyplectron napoleonis ) at the aviary The Pheasant Aviary is a long row of cages home to a large variety of bird species, particularly pheasants. Exhibited species include Elliot's pheasant , Lady Amherst's pheasant , Cabot's tragopan , blue eared-pheasant , mountain peacock-pheasant , Mérida helmeted curassow , Swinhoe's pheasant , Java peafowl , eastern loggerhead shrike ( Lanius ludovicianus migrans ), white-throated ground-dove , Lord Derby's parakeet , Montezuma oropendola and yellow-crested cockatoo .

Birds of Prey [ edit ] Birds of Prey is a row of cages for multiple raptor species. The exhibit is home to bald eagles , golden eagles , burrowing owls , snowy owls , Andean condors , palm nut vultures and king vultures . In February 2011, the zoo received two bald eagles rescued in Wyoming .

[ 85 ] Nearby is a small pond for black-necked swans , American white pelicans and brown pelicans .

Zoo Center [ edit ] The Zoo Center The Zoo Center, built in 1908, is a one-story Beaux-Arts building located in Astor Court. The exhibit houses blue tree monitors , Mertens' water monitors and spiny-tailed monitors indoors and has both indoor and outdoor enclosures for Komodo dragons , Aldabra giant tortoises and southern white rhinoceros .

[ 86 ] The building's animal frieze was carved by A. P. Proctor .

[ 5 ] In 2000, the building was landmarked.

[ 87 ] The building is east of the Children's Zoo and south of Madagascar!.

[ 88 ] The building was originally designed as the zoo's Elephant House and has held all three elephant species over its history.

[ 89 ] The building has also been home to various rhinoceros species, hippopotamus , Bactrian camel , Malayan tapir and North Sulawesi babirusa . The building also held Rapunzel, one of the few Sumatran rhinos held in U.S. zoos, until her death in 2005.

[ 90 ] Bison Range [ edit ] The Bison Range is in the northeast corner of the zoo, [ 91 ] and has been a feature of the zoo since its opening, having been only renovated since 1971. The range initially served to breed Plains bison , who were in danger of becoming extinct in the United States. The exhibit is one of the few large herds of bison in U.S. zoos. In 1913, at the behest of the American Bison Society , fourteen bison were transported from the range to Montana 's National Bison Range , as well as to Wind Cave National Park in South Dakota .

[ 92 ] Northern Ponds [ edit ] Swan wading through one of the many ponds Northern Ponds is a series of naturalistic ponds home to a variety of waterfowl and other aquatic birds both wild and captive. Captive residents include red-crowned cranes , red-breasted geese , lesser white-fronted geese , ruddy ducks , barnacle geese , mute swans and trumpeter swans . A wide variety of wild bird species can also be found in the ponds, including several native ducks such as mallards and mergansers , as well as other birds such as black-capped night-herons .

[ 93 ] In June 2024, a red-crowned crane chick hatched in this exhibit.

[ 94 ] Mitsubishi Riverwalk [ edit ] The Mitsubishi Riverwalk is a path that curves around the Bronx River , on the opposite bank from the zoo. It opened in 2004 upon the completion of a cleanup project on the river. The walkway was funded by Mitsubishi International Corporation Foundation [ 95 ] and protects 15 acres (6.1 ha) of Bronx River watershed .

[ 96 ] Paid exhibits and attractions [ edit ] One admission to a premium exhibit costs between $12 and 14 per person per exhibit if paid separately. The fee for unlimited admission grants the ticket holder free access to all attractions for that day. Family memberships include full access.

[ 97 ] There are nine premium exhibit attractions: Budgie Landing Bug Carousel Butterfly Garden Children's Zoo Congo Gorilla Forest JungleWorld Nature Trek Wild Asia Monorail Zoo Shuttle The Treetop Adventure Climb and Zipline requires a different fee and is not part of the admission fee online.

[ 97 ] Thus, it is not included in the park ticket or in any membership.

Budgie Landing [ edit ] Budgie Landing is an exhibit featuring of 1,000 budgerigars which opened on May 27, 2023.

[ 98 ] Unlike premium attractions and exhibits, Budgie Landing requires all visitors pay a small entrance fee ($5 for regular guests and $3 for members). A complementary feeding stick is handed out with admission.

[ 99 ] Bug Carousel [ edit ] The Bug Carousel has seats shaped like insects . Installed in 2005, it has an annual ridership of 540,000 as of 2014.

[ 100 ] Butterfly Garden [ edit ] Butterfly Garden This permanent structure is an indoor butterfly conservatory which lets visitors walk through gardens and meadows and watch the butterflies up close.

[ 101 ] Built and inaugurated in mid-1996, the attraction is a 170-foot-long maze, where "visitors can walk through the stages of a monarch 's metamorphosis " with a greenhouse in the middle hosting 44 species and over 1,000 butterflies; the greenhouse is really "a plastic tent on an aluminum frame".

The structure, costing $500,000, is the precursor for a future permanent House of Invertebrates in the Monkey House near the Fordham Road entrance. Many species come from the New York metropolitan area , and all species of butterflies and moths are from around the continent.
If not successful, the Oklahoma City Zoo would have purchased it in September 1997.

[ 102 ] Before the Butterfly Garden opened, this was where the Great Ape House was located, and it was once home to gorillas , chimpanzees , orangutans , and gibbons through the exhibit’s history.

Children's Zoo [ edit ] The original Children's Zoo in the Bronx Zoo opened in 1941 with a nursery-rhyme theme; in 1981, a new Children's Zoo opened, and was instantly successful, seeing almost 250,000 visitors in two months. It closed for renovations in 2013; [ 103 ] it reopened on May 30, 2015, with new exhibits featuring giant anteaters , common degus , Patagonian maras , white-nosed coatis , Linnaeus's two-toed sloths , squirrel monkeys , American flamingos , Asian small-clawed otters , North American porcupines , great horned owls , striped skunks , prairie dogs , fennec foxes , African spurred tortoises , Nubian goats , zebus , alpacas , sheep , donkeys , chickens , ducks , pigs , geese , and domestic turkeys .

[ 104 ] Congo Gorilla Forest [ edit ] Okapi in the Congo Gorilla Forest exhibit An adult male silverback In the southwestern part of the zoo, Congo Gorilla Forest is a 6.5-acre (2.6 ha) rainforest that is home to the 20 or so western lowland gorillas in the zoo.

Angolan colobus , Wolf's guenons , pygmy marmosets , mandrills , okapis , red river hogs , an ornate monitor , and an African rock python also call this area home. It also includes a bird exhibit that houses white-crested hornbills , Congo peafowls , and African pygmy geese .

[ 105 ] The Congo Gorilla Forest was opened in 1999 and was visited 7,000,000 times as of 2009 [update] .

[ 106 ] In one of the largest breeding groups of western lowland gorillas in North America , the exhibit has two troops of gorillas, for a total of 19 gorillas. Since 1999, 14 gorillas , 23 red river hogs , 11 Wolf's guenons , and four okapis have been born in the exhibit.

[ 106 ] There is also an 8-minute film in the middle of the exhibit, as well as viewing points throughout. In total, there are about 400 animals from 55 species. Over $10.6 million for conservation of Central African habitats has been collected in donations since the exhibit's opening, [ 107 ] and the exhibit has netted $12.5 million in exhibit fees as of 2014 [update] .

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Before the Congo Gorilla Forest was constructed, this site was once South America, and it is known to house pygmy hippopotamuses , tapirs , giant anteaters , Patagonian maras , guanacos , greater rheas , babirusas , brocket deer , and peccaries .

JungleWorld [ edit ] This exhibit is an indoor tropical jungle and home to nearly 800 species [ 110 ] including Asian small-clawed otters , Javan lutungs , silvery lutungs , northern white-cheeked gibbons , Matschie's tree-kangaroos , gharials , common treeshrews , a carpet python , northern Luzon giant cloud rats , greater mouse deer , Malayan tapirs , and lesser adjutants living in mangroves and on the beaches. Visitors can watch the gibbons swinging or singing and watch the otters play. The exhibit includes species that are usually on the jungle floor including stag beetles , scorpions and fire-bellied toads , but behind glass. A pond with a waterfall lets visitors sit and observe gourami and Fly River turtles .

[ 111 ] Silvery lutungs ( Trachypithecus cristatus ), at JungleWorld Planning for JungleWorld, in the southeastern Wild Asia portion of the zoo, was started in 1977 and completed at a cost of $9.5 million in June 1985. $4.1 million in funds were donated by Enid A. Haupt , a member of the New York Zoological Society 's board of trustees.

[ 112 ] The building is the largest at the zoo with an area of 1 acre (4,000 m 2 ) and a height of 55 ft (17 m). There is a wooden path that meanders for 0.13 mi (210 m).

The building's design integrates its environment with the path, as no bars are present in the building; the walkway has no full-height barriers and short railings; and only by means of ravines, streams, or cliffs are most of the animals separated from people and each other. There is a volcanic scrub forest , a mangrove swamp , a lowland evergreen rain forest with giant trees which merges into a mountain rain forest and five museum -like galleries connecting and explaining the habitats.

[ 112 ] The building was built to emphasize the fact that 150 acres (61 ha) of rainforest is lost every minute.

[ 113 ] Wild Asia Monorail [ edit ] The Monorail The monorail was inaugurated in 1977 with the rest of the formerly underdeveloped Wild Asia section of the zoo. There are six 9-car monorails on this 1.6 mi (2.6 km) ride, originally built by Rohr ; the ride was refurbished in 2007.

[ 114 ] Some animals in the zoo can only be seen on this ride such as tigers , Przewalski's horses , greater one-horned rhinoceros , Asian elephants , red pandas , and a plethora of even-toed ungulates such as axis deer , barasingha , blackbuck , Bactrian deer , gaurs , brow-antlered deer , babirusas , sambar deer , nilgai , red muntjacs , Indian hog deer , Formosan sika deer , tufted deer , Himalayan tahrs , and markhors .

[ 3 ] This ride takes visitors through a 40-acre (16 ha) area that recreates the mud wallows and pastures, forests and riverbanks of Asia. Visitors will see tigers , Indian elephants , rhinos and wild horses in their natural habitats. As the monorail travels along the Bronx River, visitors can see native animals including egrets , turtles , and ducks . The monorail is accessible for wheelchairs up to 26 inches (66 cm) wide. Smaller chairs are available at the monorail platform for visitors with wider wheelchairs or motorized scooters.

[ 115 ] Nature Trek [ edit ] Nature Trek opened on July 1, 2017, in the southeast portion of the park near Wild Asia. It consists of twelve covered rope bridges [ 116 ] connecting small porches on the sides of towers.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] There are also elevated tunnels and a large overlook , as well as several small challenges resembling American Ninja Warrior obstacles.

[ 116 ] On the ground is a play area with a sandbox, water sprinklers and structures, and branches.

[ 120 ] [ 116 ] Nature Trek is partially wheelchair-accessible [ 116 ] and contains ramps of varying difficulties.

[ 117 ] This attraction discourages visitors who are wearing footwear such as flip-flops ; high heels are prohibited.

[ 120 ] As part of a push for environmental sustainability, some parts of the attraction are made of black locust , and the structures use existing trees within the forest.

[ 117 ] Bronx Zoo Treetop Adventure [ edit ] The Treetop Adventure section opened on July 7, 2017, in the northeast portion of the park near Bronx River Parking. It consists of seven different levels of rope courses: two each of beginner, intermediate, and advanced, and one expert course.

[ 116 ] There is also a 400 ft (120 m) zip-line course traversing 50 ft (15 m) the Bronx River in both directions.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] The attraction also contains rope and swinging bridges , ladders and rolling and swinging objects. Separate from the rest of the zoo, it charges its own entry fee; [ 121 ] [ 118 ] the fee is only applied to those who are climbing on the objects or using the zip-line.

[ 121 ] Open year-round, [ 116 ] the attraction prohibits riders who are less than 7 years old and less than 50 lb (23 kg), or more than 275 lb (125 kg).

[ 117 ] [ 116 ] Dinosaur Safari [ edit ] Dinosaur Safari takes visitors on a safari ride through a normally off-exhibit 2-acre wooded area and features animatronic dinosaurs from throughout time, starting at 300-million-years ago in the Permian Period and ending 235-million-years later in the Cretaceous Period . The ride lasts approximately 20 minutes. The "robo-saurs" are manufactured by Billings Productions, who lease them out to sites all over the world. The exhibit features more popular species such as the Tyrannosaurus rex , Triceratops , Stegosaurus , Velociraptor and Brachiosaurus , as well as less well-known species such as the Pachycephalosaurus , Carnotaurus and Spinosaurus . The ride's Dilophosaurus spit water at visitors as a nod to the species' acid-spitting abilities in Steven Spielberg 's Jurassic Park film and Michael Crichton 's novel , even though there is no reason to believe the living animal did so.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] The exhibit originally ran through the summers of 2013 [ 122 ] and 2014 [ 123 ] and returned for the 2019 season.

[ 124 ] It also returned for the 2022 season as a walking trail, and after a three year hiatus.

[ 125 ] On April 12, 2025, Dinosaur Safari opened once again. Visitors can get up-close to life-sized animatronics of dinosaurs and pterosaurs plus 11 new ones. Kids can dig up ancient fossils in a sandbox, and they can walk through a ribcage and enjoy photo ops with dinosaur eggs.

[ 126 ] Former exhibits [ edit ] Rare Animal Range [ edit ] Rare Animal Range was a trail which focused on highly endangered species.

[ 127 ] Featured species included guanaco , Formosan sika deer , pied ruffed lemurs and blue-eyed black lemurs .

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] The exhibit also had duplicate enclosures for the zoo's Arabian oryx , blesbok , Père David's deer and broad-snouted caiman as well as a large pond with a pair of small islands in the center which were home to a pair of golden-cheeked gibbons . They had the Big Birds exhibits, which were lawns for ostriches , emus , rheas , and cassowaries . Due to budget cuts and the unpopularity of many of the species, the zoo was forced to close the exhibit in 2009.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] While most of the species left the zoo when the exhibit closed, the Formosan sika deer were moved to the Wild Asia Monorail and the Père David's deer remained in their primary enclosure across from Tiger Mountain while the blue-eyed black lemurs were moved to Madagascar! where they are rotated with the Coquerel's sifakas. While no longer at the zoo, pied ruffed lemurs can still be seen at the zoo's partner institute, the Central Park Zoo .

[ 130 ] The zoo's popular Dinosaur Safari ran through a part of this area and the zoo's yearly Run for the Wild event runs through its entirety.

On April 20, 2024, the Animal Chronicles opened in honor of the 125th Anniversary of the Bronx Zoo. it features 13 scenes of 68 animal eco-sculptures that showcase key achievements in the zoo’s 125 year history of saving animal species and connecting visitors to wildlife.

Skyfari [ edit ] Skyfari gondolas The Skyfari was a popular gondola lift which transported visitors from the Zoo Center to the Asian Plaza, running over African Plains and several other popular exhibits at the zoo. The seasonal exhibit ran from April to October and rose 60 to 100 ft (18 to 30 m) feet in the air. With around 490,000 riders annually, the lift was the zoo's third most popular attraction after Congo Gorilla Forest and the Wild Asia Monorail. Despite its popularity, ticket sales for it were barely breaking-even and maintenance costs led to a loss of profit. On July 8, 2008, high winds and heat led to one of the cars derailing, which trapped thirty-six passengers for up to five hours.

[ 131 ] Due to this, along with heavy budget cuts, the ride was permanently closed in January 2009, after 35 years of operation.

[ 132 ] Monkey House [ edit ] The Monkey House, which first opened in 1901 and was originally named the Primate House, closed in late February 2012 after 111 years of operation.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] At the time of closing, it was home to cotton-top tamarins , white-faced sakis , Wied's marmosets , moustached tamarins , black-chinned emperor tamarins , Goeldi's monkeys and grey-handed night-monkeys , as well as Brazilian porcupines and Pallas's long-tongued bats . This was the building where Ota Benga spent most of his time during his stay at the zoo.

[ 134 ] Some of the primates that were in the now-closed exhibit have been moved to other parts of the zoo, such as the cotton-top tamarins now being found in World of Birds; others were sent to other New York City zoos, such as the sakis being moved to the Central Park Zoo .

White-headed capuchins can still be seen in an outdoor cage behind the building.

[ 134 ] Amazing Amphibians [ edit ] Amazing Amphibians was a short-lived exhibition which opened in the zoo's Zoo Center in June 2008 and only remained for a few years. The exhibit featured several educational displays on amphibian conservation as well as a few terrariums containing several amphibian species. Highlight species included Chacoan horned frog , Puerto Rican crested toad , smooth-sided toad and common mudpuppy .

[ 135 ] While none of these species are currently on-exhibit at the zoo, the Puerto Rican crested toads can be seen at the Central Park Zoo , which breeds this species for reintroduction back into Puerto Rico .

[ 136 ] 4-D Theater [ edit ] The 4-D Theater showed 4-D films with the help of 3-D film and built-in sensory effects, including moving seats, wind, mist, and scents.

[ 137 ] Produced by SimEx-Iwerks , the theater showed condensed versions of popular children's movies. The 4-D Theater previously showed Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs , one episode of Dora the Explorer , Rio and Storks . It closed in 2019 and was replaced with a giraffe encounter where guests can feed the giraffes for a fee.

The Most Dangerous Animal in the World [ edit ] The Most Dangerous Animal in the World exhibit at the Bronx Zoo, 1963 The Most Dangerous Animal in the World exhibit debuted at the Bronx Zoo on April 26, 1963.

[ 138 ] The exhibit was installed at the Great Apes House and it featured a statement about the danger humans pose.

[ 139 ] The words: "The Most Dangerous Animal in the World" were printed in red on top of a cage.

[ 140 ] Behind the bars of the cage there was a mirror. The exhibit was reportedly still at the zoo in 1981.

[ 141 ] WCS's Run for the Wild [ edit ] In April 2008, the zoo hosted the first Run for the Wild event. The event is a 5k run (5 km (3.1 mi) long) organized by the Wildlife Conservation Society with the goal of raising money and awareness for their conservation programs of endangered species. Each year, there is a set entry fee for participants with varying prices depending on age; child (3–15), adult, and senior (65+). WCS Members get a discounted fee. Along with the entry fee, there is a $35 minimum donation per adult/senior participant. The event offers free prizes for donors, based on donation size, ranging from a Run for the Wild T-shirt to a special animal experience at the zoo. All donations are tax-deductible . All participants are also offered free all-day entry to the zoo and its paid exhibits/attractions. The yearly event takes place at the end of April and originally began at 8 am for those wishing to actually run, and 8:45 for those who wish to simply walk or jog; the start times were changed to 7 am and 7:45 am in later years.

[ 142 ] The event takes participants through the zoo before opening hours, starting at the Bronx River Parkway Entrance, through the Asian Plaza and African Plains, and ending by the Rockefeller Fountain near Astor Court. The trail also takes runners through the now-closed section of the zoo where the Rare Animal Range once stood. Each year, the event focuses on a specific endangered species or animal group to help raise funds for: 2009's run was for gorillas , 2010 focused on tigers , 2011 helped raise funds to protect the Punta Tombo peninsula of Argentina for Magellanic penguins , 2012 focused on lions , both 2013 and 2014 focused on elephants , 2015 once again was for gorillas, and 2016's run will allow participants to run on behalf of their favorite animal.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] In 2011, another WCS institute, the New York Aquarium , held its own Run for the Wild event for sea turtles in early October. The 5k run began at the aquarium and led down the Riegelmann Boardwalk on Coney Island .

[ 144 ] The aquarium held a second run the following year for walruses .

[ 145 ] The event has not returned to the aquarium since.

Conservation [ edit ] In 1905, the zoo's first director, William T. Hornaday , along with President Theodore Roosevelt and other conservationists, created the American Bison Society (ABS) in an attempt to save the American bison from extinction . The bison had been depleted from tens-of-millions of animals to only a few hundred by the end of the 19th century due to westward expansion . The society worked to breed the species in captivity as well as raise public awareness, raise money to create protected reserves, and reintroduce bison back into the wild.

[ 15 ] On October 11, 1907, the first reintroduction of bison began when the zoo sent six males and nine females, by rail, to the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge in Oklahoma . Seven days later, the animals were successfully reintroduced to the park.

[ 146 ] By 1935, the society, who had successfully carried out several more reintroductions from bison kept in zoos and ranches, considered their work done and disbanded that year.

In 2005, the Wildlife Conservation Society resurrected and re-purposed the ABS to, "help build the social and scientific foundations for the ecological restoration of bison", and, "restore bison ecologically, not just animals in pens but actual functioning animals in the larger landscape", (Keith Aune, WCS bison coordinator).

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] According to a study published in 2012, virtually all wild and captive bison in the United States are hybrids with cattle genes, with the exception of the two distinct breeding populations within Yellowstone National Park and their descendants. The cattle genes entered the bison population due to private ranchers hybridizing their bison to make them more docile, with some of these animals being accidentally reintroduced by the ABS.

[ 149 ] In response, in the fall of 2011, the WCS arranged for a herd of female bison originating from the American Prairie Reserve to be sent to the Colorado State University's Animal Reproduction & Biotechnology Laboratory to be used as surrogates in an attempt to transfer the fertilized embryos of genetically pure bison. After an ultrasound showed one female to be pregnant, the herd was moved to the zoo where, on June 20, 2012, the calf was born. The herd is kept in an off-exhibit section of the zoo and the goal is to eventually create a breeding herd of genetically pure bison through embryo transfers with the surrogate hybrid bison.

[ 150 ] In 1981, the zoo successfully implanted a gaur embryo into a Holstein cow in an attempt to clone the endangered species.

[ 5 ] [ 151 ] In 1990, the zoo experienced a pest problem with the Canada goose . The park had become so over-crowded with the geese, that the zoo had to take action to decrease their numbers. Apart from their presence, the geese were very aggressive towards other birds and occasionally carried diseases into the park. To cope with the problem, the zoo hired a sharpshooter , who killed 19 geese. Zoo workers also destroyed 144 eggs found on the property. In 1991, the zoo employed a gentler method of sterilizing the birds.

[ 152 ] In 2005, the zoo sent the frozen sperm of a male Indian rhinoceros to the Cincinnati Zoo where, four years later in 2009, it was thawed out and used in the first successful artificial insemination of the species when a calf was born in late 2010.

[ 153 ] The calf did not survive long-term.

In August 2006, the zoo adopted an orphaned snow leopard cub, named Leo. The 13-month-old cub was found stuck in mud following a landslide in Naltar Valley in Pakistan . The landslide had killed the cub's mother. A Pakistani shepherd in the area found the cub with its female sibling, but the female had died a week later due to malnutrition. He then handed over the male cub to Pakistani authorities to care for him. Since there are no captive breeding programs or rehabilitation centers for snow leopards in Pakistan, the authorities decided to send the cub to the Bronx Zoo. The cat will be returned to its place of birth following construction of a rehab facility in the Naltar Valley with cooperation from the United States.

[ 6 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] On April 9, 2013, Leo sired a cub. He was the first cub of Leo.

[ 157 ] In 2007, the zoo successfully reintroduced three Chinese alligators into the wild. In July 2009, the zoo announced that the reintroduced alligators had begun breeding naturally in the wild, producing 15 hatchlings. The breeding was a milestone in the zoo's 10-year effort to reintroduce the species to the Yangtze River in China.

[ 158 ] In January 2010, the zoo adopted four abandoned brown bear cubs. Three of the bears, two males and one female, were siblings born in 2009 and rescued from the ABC Islands in Alaska. The cubs were named Kootz, Denali, and Sitka. The fourth cub, a grizzly bear born in 2008, was rescued from Glacier National Park in Montana and named Glacier after the park.

[ 51 ] In 2015, two other rescued grizzly bears, who had been at the zoo since 1995, were sent to one of the zoo's partner institutions, the Central Park Zoo .

[ 52 ] The next month, an "assurance colony" of Kihansi spray toads was placed in the zoo. The species disappeared in their native Tanzania home.

[ 159 ] In February 2011, the zoo took in two bald eagles that were rescued in Wyoming . The 5-year-old male was found in 2008 and was believed to have been hit by a car. The 3-year-old female was believed to have been injured during a storm. The birds were taken in by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and sent to the Woodford Cedar Run Wildlife Refuge in New Jersey for evaluation and care, where it was decided they were unable to survive in the wild.

[ 85 ] In December 2012, five Chinese yellow-headed box turtles , a critically endangered species, were born.

[ 160 ] In December 2015, the zoo rescued a juvenile Indian cobra which had stowed away on a cargo ship destined for New Jersey. The snake was found in poor condition being dehydrated , cold, and exposed to oil residue. The animal was brought to the zoo for recovery. It's unclear how the snake got onto the ship since it set out from Singapore, which is outside of the species' natural range.

[ 161 ] Incidents [ edit ] Human fatality [ edit ] On July 29, 1985, two female Siberian tigers killed 24-year-old animal keeper Robin Silverman after she entered their enclosure with a volunteer aide.

[ 162 ] It was unclear why Silverman entered the enclosure; the zoo's general curator suspected a lapse in Silverman's concentration, while her family suspected a failure on the part of the zoo. It was the first and only human fatality in the zoo's history.

[ 163 ] Non-human deaths [ edit ] In 2001, the zoo added a troop of Javan langurs to JungleWorld, sharing an enclosure with Asian small-clawed otters .

[ 164 ] Since the addition of the langurs, they were sighted taunting and provoking the otters.

[ 165 ] In June 2007, a romp of otters grabbed a langur near the water and proceeded to maul and drown it in full view of visitors. A zookeeper on the viewing deck attempted to break up the fight by whistling at the otters. To no avail of the keeper, the otters killed the langur. Part of the incident was recorded and uploaded to YouTube.

[ 166 ] In 2010, the otters were relocated into two exhibits, one at the Children's Zoo [ 167 ] and another in JungleWorld.

[ 168 ] Animal escapes [ edit ] In 1902, a seven-month-old male jaguar broke out of his cage and escaped.

[ 5 ] In July 1957, a platypus named Penelope who had recently made headlines for faking a pregnancy disappeared, abandoning her mate, Cecil. Zookeepers searched the premises but found no evidence of her.

[ 169 ] In February 1995, the zoo's De Jur Aviary collapsed during a snowstorm with about 100 seabirds, including Inca terns and gulls , inside. During the collapse, some of the residents flew off and escaped. In total, about 30 birds were lost.

[ 68 ] On March 26, 2011, the Bronx Zoo announced that World of Reptiles was closed after a venomous adolescent cobra was discovered missing from its off-exhibit enclosure on March 25. Zoo officials were confident the missing cobra would be found in the building and not outside, since the species is known to be uncomfortable in open areas.

[ 170 ] The missing snake quickly sparked a popular Twitter parody account, @BronxZoosCobra, [ 171 ] which narrated the daily hijinks of the cobra.

[ 172 ] On March 31, zoo authorities found the snake in a non-public area of the reptile house.

[ 173 ] On May 9, 2011, a female green peafowl escaped from the zoo before being caught on May 11.

[ 174 ] On September 11, 2011, a lesser kudu escaped from its enclosure for about half an hour and then returned to its enclosure once a zoo worker opened the gate.

[ 175 ] On April 26, 2023, an Indian peafowl given the nickname Raul escaped from the zoo and reportedly bit a man, although those reports were never confirmed. Raul flew back into the zoo at 11:17 a.m. the next day.

[ 176 ] Happy the Elephant [ edit ] Elephants at the zoo In the early 1970s, seven Indian elephants , named after the Seven Dwarfs from Snow White , were captured as calves in Thailand and dispersed among multiple U.S. zoos and circuses . Two of those calves, Grumpy and Happy, both females, were brought to the zoo in 1977. Over the next 25 years, the pair lived together, separated from the zoo's other elephants. In July 2002, the zoo attempted to mix the pair with two other females, Patty and Maxine. However, the introduction failed when Patty and Maxine attacked the pair and injured Grumpy. Over the next several months, the elephant's injuries worsened and, in October of that year, the zoo was forced to euthanize her. With her lifelong companion gone, Happy was paired with the zoo's younger female, Sammy, whose companion, Tus, had also died in 2002. The two got along very well until Sammy developed severe liver disease and was also euthanized in early 2006. This left Patty, Maxine, and Happy as the zoo's only remaining elephants.

[ 177 ] Despite the fact that elephants are highly social animals, the zoo decided that making a second attempt at introducing Happy to the others was too risky, with there being too high a chance that she would be attacked. She has since lived without the company of other elephants. Due to this, the zoo has been criticized by multiple animal rights organizations for supposedly mistreating Happy.

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) filed a formal complaint against the zoo with the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA), calling for them to strip the zoo of its accreditation. In Defense of Animals (IDA) has named the zoo the "Hall of Shame Winner" on their 2015, 2016, and 2017 'Ten Worst Zoos for Elephants'.

[ 178 ] IDA listed the zoo fourth on their 2012 list, [ 179 ] fifth on their 2013 and 2014 lists, [ 180 ] [ 181 ] and eighth on their 2009 list.

[ 182 ] These organizations, as well as many online petitions (some of which gain up to 200,000 supporters), have called on the zoo to send Happy to an elephant sanctuary . However, the zoo said that moving her at this stage in her life might be potentially traumatizing for her, and that she has very strong bonds with her keepers and is well-adjusted to the zoo, where she has spent well over thirty years of her life.

[ 177 ] [ 183 ] In 2012, a reporter for the New York Post wrote that she is kept inside all year and in solitary confinement . The zoo claims that she and the other two elephants have equal access to outdoor yards, and that the three elephants have limited interactions with each other and extensive interactions with zoo keepers. All three animals share the same barn, but Happy lives in separate stalls and yards.

[ 183 ] In late 2018, one of the zoo's other elephants, Maxine, was euthanized due to complications with her liver and kidneys.

[ 184 ] A lawsuit against the Bronx Zoo, stating that Happy was legally "a person with a right to be free", was dismissed in February 2020 by a judge of the Bronx County Supreme Court.

[ 185 ] However, in May 2021, the New York Court of Appeals agreed to hear the appeal, filed on behalf of Happy by the Nonhuman Rights Project .

[ 186 ] In June 2022, the Court of Appeals also ruled in favor of the zoo, saying in a 5–2 decision that the writ of habeas corpus did not apply to nonhuman animals.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] Ota Benga [ edit ] Main article: Ota Benga Ota Benga at the Bronx Zoo in 1906. Only five promotional photos exist of Benga's time here, none of them in the Monkey House; cameras were not allowed.

[ 189 ] : Photo insert In 1906, Ota Benga , a man from the Mbuti pygmy ethnic group, was brought to the zoo by the American businessman and explorer Samuel Phillips Verner , and displayed there as an exhibit, though he was allowed to roam the grounds freely. He became fond of an orangutan named Dohong, "the presiding genius of the Monkey House", who had been taught to perform tricks and imitate human behavior.

[ 189 ] : 172–174 The events leading to his "exhibition" alongside Dohong were gradual. Benga spent some of his time in the Monkey House exhibit, where the zoo encouraged him to hang his hammock and to shoot his bow and arrow at a target. On the first day of the exhibit, September 8, 1906, visitors found Benga in the Monkey House.

[ 190 ] Soon, a sign on the exhibit read: The African Pigmy, "Ota Benga." Age, 23 years. Height, 4 feet 11 inches.

Weight, 103 pounds. Brought from the Kasai River, Congo Free State, South Central Africa, by Dr. Samuel P. Verner.

Exhibited each afternoon during September.

[ 191 ] Hornaday considered the exhibit a valuable spectacle for visitors; he was supported by Madison Grant , secretary of the New York Zoological Society , who lobbied to put Benga on-display alongside apes at the zoo. A decade later, Grant became prominent nationally as a racial anthropologist and eugenicist .

[ 189 ] : 173–175 African-American clergymen immediately protested to zoo officials about the exhibit. James H. Gordon said, "Our race, we think, is depressed enough, without exhibiting one of us with the apes ... We think we are worthy of being considered human beings, with souls." [ 190 ] Gordon also thought the exhibit was hostile to Christianity and a promotion of Darwinism : "The Darwinian theory is absolutely opposed to Christianity, and a public demonstration in its favor should not be permitted." [ 190 ] A number of clergymen backed Gordon.

[ 192 ] : 47 In defense of the depiction of Benga as a lesser human, an editorial in The New York Times suggested: We do not quite understand all the emotion which others are expressing in the matter ... It is absurd to make moan over the imagined humiliation and degradation Benga is suffering. The pygmies ... are very low in the human scale, and the suggestion that Benga should be in a school instead of a cage ignores the high probability that school would be a place ... from which he could draw no advantage whatever. The idea that men are all much alike except as they have had or lacked opportunities for getting an education out of books is now far out of date.

[ 192 ] : 48 Benga was allowed to roam the grounds of the zoo. In response to the situation, as well as verbal and physical prods from the crowds, he became more mischievous and somewhat violent.

[ 193 ] : Chapter on Ota Benga Around this time, Rev. Dr. R. MacArthur of Calvary Baptist Church, was quoted in The New York Times saying: "It is too bad that there is not some society like the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. We send our missionaries to Africa to Christianize the people, and then we bring one here to brutalize him." Soon, the zoo removed Benga from the grounds.

[ 194 ] Toward the end of 1906, Benga was released into Reverend Gordon's custody.

[ 195 ] Gordon placed Benga in the Howard Colored Orphan Asylum , a church-sponsored orphanage in Brooklyn that Gordon supervised. As the unwelcome press attention continued, in January 1910, Gordon arranged for Benga's relocation to Lynchburg, Virginia , where he lived with the family of Gregory W. Hayes .

[ 196 ] While there, Benga received tutoring from Lynchburg-based Harlem Renaissance poet Anne Spencer .

[ 197 ] Benga committed suicide in 1916 at the age of 32.

[ 198 ] In 2020, WCS apologized for the zoo's treatment of Benga and promotion of eugenics.

[ 199 ] Entrances (gates) [ edit ] Asia Gate (walk in) Boston Road Bronx River Parkway Gate (parking) Fordham Road Gate (parking) Southern Boulevard Gate (parking) In popular culture [ edit ] During the 1980s, some well known celebrities including British naturalist David Attenborough , Superman actor Christopher Reeve , and Muppets creator Jim Henson visited the Bronx Zoo for special programs, mostly dedicated to helping teenagers and children alike learn about animals.

[ citation needed ] In 2013, So What? Press published an issue of its comic series Tales of the Night Watchman , entitled "The Night Collector", about a coven of vampires that takes over the bat exhibit at the Bronx Zoo. A zookeeper who specializes in bats is put at odds with his co-worker when it is discovered that the woman of their mutual affection has been turned into a vampire. It was written by Dave Kelly and illustrated by Molly Ostertag .

[ 200 ] In March 2016, Animal Planet announced plans to produce a docu-series about the zoo, titled The Zoo . The series premiered on February 18, 2017 [ 201 ] and gained a second season in March 2018.

[ 202 ] Notable people [ edit ] E. R. Sanborn (1869–1947), first official photographer References [ edit ] ^ "Wildlife Conservation Society" .

fundinguniverse.com . Funding Universe.

Archived from the original on April 12, 2012 . Retrieved May 28, 2010 .

^ "FAQs" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on December 9, 2017 . Retrieved January 17, 2018 .

^ a b c d "Bronx Zoo" .

nycgovparks.org . New York City.

Archived from the original on September 19, 2011 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ "List of Accredited Zoos and Aquariums" .

aza.org . Association of Zoos and Aquariums.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 27, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Jacob E. Osterhout (November 13, 2009).

"In honor of its birthday, 110 things to know about the Bronx Zoo" .

Daily News .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ a b c Bridges, William.

Gathering of Animals: An Unconventional History of the New York Zoological Society . New York: Harper & Row, 1974.

^ a b "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . March 13, 2009.

^ "Brooklyn Botanic Garden History" .

NYC Parks .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2012 . Retrieved April 28, 2013 .

^ Annual Report of the New York Zoological Society . Vol. 1. New York: New York Zoological Society. 1896.

Archived from the original on October 19, 2016 . Retrieved August 29, 2016 .

^ Grinnell, George (1910).

Brief History of the Boone and Crockett Club . New York, New York: Forest and Stream Publishing Company. p. 7.

^ "New Antelope house" (PDF) .

The New York Times . November 27, 1903.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 23, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2011 .

The antelope house at the Bronx Zoological Park was opened to the public yesterday.

^ "Taft Enjoys Trip To The Bronx Zoo" (PDF) .

The New York Times . May 24, 1911.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 23, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2011 .

President Taft paid a two-hour visit to the Bronx Zoological Gardens yesterday afternoon, as the guest of the New York Zoological Society.

^ "Dr. W. T. Hornaday Dies In Stamford" .

The New York Times . March 7, 1937.

Archived from the original on June 15, 2018 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ Stephen S. Lash (May 1971).

"National Register of Historic Places Registration: Rainey Memorial Gates" .

New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation . Archived from the original on September 29, 2011 . Retrieved January 12, 2011 .

^ a b c Mike Dunphy (April 6, 2015).

"Secrets of the Bronx Zoo" .

Everything New York . Archived from the original on April 8, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "Bronx Monuments" .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2013 . Retrieved November 9, 2013 .

^ "12,000 Vintage Photographs from Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium to Be Preserved" .

Untapped Cities . February 9, 2016.

Archived from the original on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ a b "The Thylacine Museum – The Thylacine in Captivity: Zoos, Circuses and Menageries (page 18)" . Archived from the original on August 26, 2014 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "Sultan: A King Among Lions" .

WBUR's The Wild Life .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ Newkirk, Pamela (June 3, 2015).

"The man who was caged in a zoo" .

The Guardian .

^ Mann, William M. (1930).

Wild Animals In and Out of the Zoo . Forgotten Books.

^ Burden, W. Douglas (1956).

Look to the Wilderness . Boston: Little, Brown and Company. pp.

169– 193.

^ "Bronx Zoo Debuts Its Baby Okapi" .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2018 . Retrieved October 19, 2018 .

^ Kear, Janet; Palmes, Prunella (1980). "Andean and James' flamingos Phoenicoparrus andinus and P.jamesi in captivity".

International Zoo Yearbook .

20 : 17– 23.

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-1090.1980.tb00937.x .

^ "ProboscisMonkey.org" .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Proboscis Monkeys Caught - Many Die" (PDF) .

IPPL News .

26 (1). April 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 5, 2016.

^ "At Bronx Zoo, a Damsel In Distress Is Rescued" .

The New York Times . June 7, 1990.

Archived from the original on October 5, 2016 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ Newman, Andy (December 24, 2005).

"Rapunzel the Rhino Is Mourned in Bronx" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2015 . Retrieved April 13, 2016 .

^ "Bronx Zoo" .

clivusmultrum.com . Clivus Multrum.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2010 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ "Composting Toilets, The Bronx Zoo, and Design that's Disgusting" .

Poop the Book . The Poop Culture Blog. Archived from the original on December 8, 2017 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ "New GSE Master's Program Approved and Ready To Roar" .

fordham.edu . Fordham University. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ a b c "Reorganization at City's Zoos Includes Buyouts and Layoffs" .

The New York Times . April 7, 2009.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ a b c d jason cochran (April 26, 2009).

"Animals and money: Bronx Zoo lays off hundreds of 'unpopular' animals" .

DailyFinance.com . Archived from the original on March 8, 2016 . Retrieved November 28, 2018 .

^ "Bronx Zoo animals could be affected by budget cuts – May. 19, 2011" .

CNNMoney .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2020 .

^ "Congresswoman's Long Quest: Bringing Pandas to New York" .

The New York Times . February 7, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2016 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ "Pandas May Be Headed To Bronx Zoo, If All The Stars Align" .

Gothamist . Archived from the original on February 24, 2016.

^ "Tickets – Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "FAQs – Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Exhibits & Attractions" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on May 26, 2010 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ a b "ZooLex Exhibit" . Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved January 20, 2019 .

^ https://bronxzoo.com/things-to-do/exhibits/sea-lion-pool ^ New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission ; Dolkart, Andrew S.

; Postal, Matthew A. (2009). Postal, Matthew A. (ed.).

Guide to New York City Landmarks (4th ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons. p. 317.

ISBN 978-0-470-28963-1 .

^ Gray, Christopher (July 19, 1992).

"Streetscapes: The Bronx Zoo; Animal House Landmarks?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2018 . Retrieved January 2, 2021 .

^ "African Plains" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on January 9, 2015 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ David Rooney: "Bronx Zoo's New Lion Cubs Are Impossibly Cute".

The New York Times , 2010.

^ "African Lion Cubs Come Out To Enjoy Sun At Bronx Zoo" . May 2014.

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo Opens New Aardvark Habitat" .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ "Bronx Zoo Debuts Hoover the Baby Aardvark!" .

ZooBorns .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ "Unique Experiences" Archived February 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine .

Bronx Zoo . Wildlife Conservation Society. Retrieved February 19, 2018.

^ Lee, Jennifer (August 6, 2009).

"Denver Zoo Gives Pair of Hyenas to Bronx Zoo" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2015 . Retrieved March 5, 2016 .

^ a b "Bronx Zoo Welcomes Bear Cubs" .

NBC New York . Archived from the original on March 2, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ a b "Central Park's New Bears Will Be Bronx Zoo Grizzly Bears" .

Gothamist . Archived from the original on March 26, 2016.

^ "Bronx Zoo's last polar bear euthanized due to health issues" . December 28, 2017.

^ "Bronx Zoo Debuts Pack of Endangered Dhole" .

^ a b "Baboon Reserve" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2015 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ "ZooLex Exhibit" . Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved January 20, 2019 .

^ "WCS's Bronx Zoo Debuts First Gelada Baboon Born in NYC in 13 years" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Gelada Baboon – San Diego Zoo Animals" . Archived from the original on April 1, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Bronx Zoo's Airborne Heralds of Spring" .

The New York Times . April 11, 1986.

Archived from the original on October 5, 2016 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ "Pakistan's First Lady welcomes snow leopard to Bronx Zoo – Big Cat Rescue" .

Big Cat Rescue . September 29, 2006.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ Danika Fears (August 27, 2013).

"Snow leopard cub with storybook beginnings makes debut at Bronx Zoo" .

TODAY.com .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Madagascar" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on May 21, 2010 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ "Name a Roach – Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2016 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ "Happy 50th to the (New) Aquatic Birds House!" . September 23, 2014.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Lesser Adjutant Storks At WCS's Bronx Zoo Foster Abandoned Egg and Raise Chick As Their Own" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Northern Brown Kiwi at the Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Little Penguins Make a Big Splash – Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ a b "Penguins and Friends Get New Home in Bronx" .

The New York Times . May 18, 1997.

Archived from the original on September 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ "Peruvian Pelicans Join the Flock in the Russell B. Aitken Sea Bird Colony At the Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "A Rare Pair – Wild View" .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2015 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ "ZooLex Exhibit" . Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved January 20, 2019 .

^ "Twice the Tiger Triplets at the Bronx Zoo!" .

ZooBorns .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Tiger Triplets debut at Bronx Zoo" .

ZooBorns .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "So cute! Meet the new tiger cubs at the Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2016 . Retrieved April 30, 2016 .

^ Peltz, Jennifer (April 5, 2020).

"Tiger at NYC's Bronx Zoo tests positive for coronavirus" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2020 . Retrieved April 5, 2020 .

^ "World of Birds" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on May 31, 2010 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ a b Rueb, Emily S. (March 19, 2013).

"These Chicks Are Not of the Easter Basket Variety" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2015 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Blue Turacos Make History at WCS's Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "World of Darkness" .

Bronx Zoo .

^ Soter, Tim (April 30, 2009).

"World of Darkness" .

Tim Soter... Blog . Archived from the original on August 20, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Instagram" .

Instagram . Retrieved December 5, 2024 .

^ "How an amateur snake hunter helped create the Bronx Zoo — in his attic" .

New York Post . June 21, 2015.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2017 . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ IUCN SSC Amphibian Specialist Group (2015).

" Nectophrynoides asperginis " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2015 : e.T54837A16935685.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2015-2.RLTS.T54837A16935685.en . Retrieved November 11, 2021 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Diamond, Marla (March 31, 2011).

"Missing Bronx Zoo Egyptian Cobra Finally Captured" .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2011 . Retrieved April 1, 2011 .

^ a b "Bald eagles find home at Bronx Zoo" .

Daily News . February 11, 2011.

Archived from the original on March 12, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "Dragons Return to the Bronx Zoo" .

The New York Times . May 24, 2014.

Archived from the original on August 27, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ "History of the Bronx Zoo: NYC Parks" .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2016 . Retrieved April 13, 2016 .

^ "Zoo Center - Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2016 . Retrieved May 1, 2016 .

^ "The Bronx Zoo's Loneliest Elephant" .

The New York Times . June 28, 2015.

Archived from the original on November 6, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ Newman, Andy (December 24, 2005).

"Rapunzel the Rhino is Mourned in Bronx" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ "American Bison" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2016 . Retrieved May 1, 2016 .

^ Wildlife Conservation Society.

"Marking the 100-year Anniversary of Historic Transfer of Bison from the Bronx Zoo to Wind Cave National Park" .

National Geographic (blogs) . Archived from the original on April 5, 2016 . Retrieved April 13, 2016 .

^ https://map.bronxzoo.com/places/52-northern-ponds ^ https://newsroom.wcs.org/News-Releases/articleType/ArticleView/articleId/23041/Red-Crowned-Crane-One-of-the-Largest-and-Most-Threatened-Crane-Species-in-the-World-Debuts-at-the-Bronx-Zoo.aspx ^ Bob Kappstatter (April 16, 2004).

"Zoo Gets Riverwalk Unveils Free New Nature Pathway" .

Daily News .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2016 . Retrieved April 12, 2016 .

^ "2012 Bronx River Riparian Invasive Plant Management Plan" (PDF) . New York City Department of Parks & Recreation Natural Resources Group. January 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 21, 2016.

^ a b "Tickets" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on May 31, 2022 . Retrieved September 18, 2020 .

^ Weaver, Shaye (May 24, 2023).

"You can now be immersed in a thousand colorful birds at the Bronx Zoo" .

Time Out New York . Retrieved January 21, 2024 .

^ "Budgie Landing" .

Bronx Zoo . Retrieved January 21, 2024 .

^ "The Carousel Works – Bronx Zoo" . Archived from the original on October 26, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

^ "Butterfly Garden" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2015 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ Exhibits Aflutter At the Bronx Zoo;Butterfly Tent Will Allow Visitors To Mingle With Winged Residents Archived September 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times . By Douglas Martin. Published: May 23, 1996 ^ "Support the Children's Zoo" .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

^ Sheila Anne Feeney (May 27, 2015).

"Bronx Zoo poised to reopen Children's Zoo with new animals: Giant anteater, pudu and more" .

am New York .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2015 . Retrieved July 4, 2015 .

^ "Congo Gorilla Forest" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2015 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ a b Jaccarino, Mike (July 5, 2009).

"Bronx Zoo's gorilla exhibit celebrates 10th anniversary" .

Daily News .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

^ "Africa - WCS.org" .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

^ Paddock, Barry (April 24, 2014).

"Pair of baby gorillas born at Bronx Zoo, first in 8 years" .

Daily News .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

^ "Bronx Zoo: Congo Gorilla Forest Exhibit" .

Martha Stewart . Archived from the original on October 12, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

^ "JungleWorld" . May 19, 2014.

Archived from the original on January 15, 2015 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

^ "JungleWorld" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on January 15, 2015 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ a b Gold, Gerald (May 26, 1985).

"A Jungle in the Bronx" .

The New York Times Magazine . Archived from the original on May 19, 2017.

^ Bazell, R. (Reporter), & Garrels, A. (Anchor). (July 22, 1985). Indoor Rainforest Opens at The Bronx Zoo. [Television series episode]. NBC Today Show. Retrieved from https://archives.nbclearn.com/portal/site/k-12/browse/?cuecard=40260 Archived October 11, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 27, 2014 . Retrieved October 7, 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Wild Asia Monorail" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2015 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g "The Bronx Zoo's wild zipline and ropes course will make a monkey out of you" .

Metro US . June 2, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 3, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2017 .

^ a b c d "NYC's Bronx Zoo Adds Zip-Line, Ropes Course, and Nature Trek to the Wildlife Experience" .

Untapped Cities . July 7, 2017.

Archived from the original on July 7, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2017 .

^ a b c Pulos, Will (May 31, 2017).

"Zip-line 50 feet over a river at the new Bronx Zoo Treetop Adventure" .

Time Out New York .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2017 .

^ a b Cusano, Arthur (July 15, 2017).

"Bronx Zoo launches new aerial attractions" .

Bronx Times .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2017 .

^ a b "Nature Trek" . Bronx Zoo. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2017 .

^ a b "FAQs" .

Treetop Adventure . Archived from the original on July 13, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2017 .

^ a b Barry Paddock (May 23, 2013).

"See It: Dinosaur Safari debuts at Bronx Zoo this weekend" .

Daily News .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ a b Tim O'Connor (March 25, 2014).

"Dinosaurs rumble into Bronx Zoo" .

Daily News .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "They're back! Bronx Zoo offers a 'Dinosaur Safari' " .

am New York . April 12, 2019.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2019 . Retrieved June 29, 2019 .

^ https://newsroom.wcs.org/News-Releases/articleType/ArticleView/articleId/17391/Ancient-History-Meets-Present-Day-Dinosaur-Safari-NOW-OPEN-at-Bronx-Zoo.aspx#:~:text=Bronx%2C%20NY%20–%20April%2012%2C,like%20in%20pre%2Dhistoric%20times ^ https://bronxzoo.com/dinosaur-safari ^ "Bronx Zoo" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Wild-Fired by the Zoo" .

New York Post . April 24, 2009.

Archived from the original on March 6, 2018 . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ "Bad Economy Causes Bronx Zoo to Evict Animals" .

Living the Scientific Life (Scientist, Interrupted) .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Tropic Zone: The Rainforest – Central Park Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ Lee, Trymaine; Baker, Al (July 10, 2008).

"Dozens Stuck in Midair at the Bronx Zoo" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 7, 2019 . Retrieved June 29, 2019 .

^ "Bronx Zoo to take down Skyfari" .

Daily News . January 24, 2009.

Archived from the original on August 17, 2019 . Retrieved June 28, 2019 .

^ Krystal D'Costa.

"Closing the Monkey House: The End of a Shared Experience" .

Scientific American Blog Network .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2017 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ a b c "Monkey House" . Bronx Zoo.

Archived from the original on January 30, 2012 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ http://69.18.170.136/multimedia/headlines/amazing-amphibians.aspx [ permanent dead link ] ^ WAZA.

"Overview: WAZA: World Association of Zoos and Aquariums" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "4-D Theater – Bronx Zoo" . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "Zoo has 'Startling Exhibit' " .

Corpus Christi Times . April 27, 1963.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Stange, Mary Zeiss (1997).

Woman the Hunter . Boston: Beacon Press. p. 212.

ISBN 978-0807046388 .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ "In 1963, the Bronx Zoo Had an Exhibit Called 'The Most Dangerous Animal in the World' " .

Rare . Rare Media LLC. July 20, 2020.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Abisch, Barry (August 9, 1981).

"Brave New Zoo" .

The Journal News . No. Suburbia Today.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ a b See: "Presented by Con Edison: The WCS Run for the Wild 2012: Run to Save Lions" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

"Run for the Wild 2011!" .

ABC7 New York .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

"WCS Announces the 5th Annual WCS Run for the Wild at the Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

"Wildlife Conservation Society/Bronx Zoo Run For The Wild 2009 (2009) - AllSportCentral.com - Registration. Results. Relax" .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2022 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

"WCS's 'Run for the Wild' Takes Runners Around the World in Only Five Kilometers" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

"Run for the Wild Bronx Zoo" .

ABC7 New York . April 28, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "Run for the Wild – Bronx Zoo" .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "WCS Run for the Wild at the New York Aquarium" .

WalkJogRun.net . Archived from the original on March 7, 2016.

^ "Second Annual WCS Run for the Wild in Brooklyn is Dedicated to Saving Walruses and Other Wildlife" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved March 2, 2016 .

^ "History of the Bison Herd – Wichita Mountains – U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "American Bison Society News and Updates" .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "Bison - WCS.org" .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ Cole, Ken (August 16, 2012).

"New research indicates hybrid bison may not be as fit as those without cattle genes" .

The Wildlife News .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "Bronx Zoo Announces Birth of the First Genetically Pure Bison Calf Ever Produced by Embryo Transfer" .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2016 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

^ "Unknown" .

Field & Stream . March 1982.

Archived from the original on May 31, 2022 . Retrieved October 30, 2020 .

^ "Bronx Zoo Workers Killing Pesky Geese" .

Los Angeles Times . October 2, 1991.

Archived from the original on October 5, 2016 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ "Cincinnati Zoo Prepares for World's First AI Indian Rhino Birth" .

The Cincinnati Zoo & Botanical Garden . Archived from the original on March 13, 2016 . Retrieved November 28, 2018 .

^ "Pakistan snow leopard cub heads to Bronx" .

NBC News . Associated Press. August 8, 2006.

Archived from the original on October 17, 2014 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ "Endangered Leo bound for Bronx" .

dawn.com . Dawn. Archived from the original on April 8, 2009 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ "Bronx Zoo Provides New Home for Pakistani Snow Leopard" .

america.gov . U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on August 29, 2010 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ Foderaro, Lisa W. (August 26, 2013).

"Baby Snow Leopard Born at Bronx Zoo Is Now on Display" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 28, 2013 . Retrieved August 26, 2013 .

^ Powell Ettinger.

"Wildlife Extra News – Critically endangered Chinese alligators breeding in the wild after reintroduction" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ www .bronxzoo .com /multimedia /headlines /kihansi-toad-exhibit .aspx ^ "The Neighborhood News" .

New York . January 7, 2013.

Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ "Indian Cobra Found As Stowaway On Cargo Ship In NJ Taken To Bronx Zoo" .

CBS2 New York . December 18, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ Oren Yaniv (December 27, 2007).

"Flashback to death by Bronx Zoo tiger" .

Daily News . Archived from the original on December 30, 2007 . Retrieved March 29, 2011 .

^ "Death at the Bronx Zoo" .

Time . April 18, 2005. Archived from the original on December 9, 2007 . Retrieved March 29, 2011 .

^ Doxhoont, L. (2001), monkey n baby , retrieved May 18, 2025 ^ Altaffer, M. (2006), A family of Asian Small-Clawed Otters play with a Ebony Langur at the Jungle World exhibit Friday, Nov. 17, 2006 at the Bronx Zoo in New York. The otter pups were born at the zoo on Aug. 25, 2006. (AP Photo/Mary Altaffer Stock Photo - Alamy , retrieved May 18, 2025 ^ "Monkey Death at Bronx Zoo" .

YouTube . June 14, 2007.

Archived from the original on November 18, 2021.

^ https://www.zoochat.com/community/media/childrens-zoo-asian-small-clawed-otter-aonyx-cinereus-exhibit.781764/ ^ https://www.zoochat.com/community/media/bronx-zoo-2010-short-clawed-otter-exhibit-in-jungle-world.130715/ ^ "ZOO MOURNS PENELOPE; Platypus Who Fled Ardent Mate 'Probably Dead' " .

The New York Times . September 18, 1957.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 13, 2023 .

^ Kevin Dolak (March 27, 2011).

"Bronx Zoo Reptile House Closed After Poisonous Snake Goes Missing" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2012 . Retrieved March 29, 2011 .

^ "Bronx Zoo's Cobra" .

Twitter .

Archived from the original on March 29, 2011 . Retrieved March 30, 2011 .

^ Allen, Jonathan (March 30, 2011).

"Missing Bronx zoo cobra sparks Twitter following" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2011 . Retrieved March 30, 2011 .

^ "Missing Bronx Zoo Egyptian Cobra Finally Captured" .

WCBS-TV . March 31, 2011.

Archived from the original on April 3, 2011 . Retrieved April 1, 2011 .

^ O'Connor, Anahad (May 10, 2011).

"Another Bronx Getaway, This Time Without the Scales" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2011 . Retrieved August 12, 2011 .

^ Paddock, Berry.

"Exotic Antelope Gets Big Break When Photographer Finds Her Loose at Bronx Zoo" .

Daily News . New York.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2013 . Retrieved August 21, 2013 .

^ Marcius, Chelsia Rose; Cruz, Liset (April 27, 2023).

"Escaped Peacock Returns to Bronx Zoo After a Night on the Loose" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 21, 2024 .

^ a b Tullis, Tracy (June 28, 2015).

"The Bronx Zoo's Loneliest Elephant" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ "In Defense of Animals 10 Worst Zoos for Elephants 2015" .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2016 . Retrieved April 29, 2016 .

^ "2012 Ten Worst Zoos for Elephants - In Defense of Animals" . Archived from the original on May 12, 2016 . Retrieved April 29, 2016 .

^ Mosbergen, Dominique (January 13, 2015).

"Bronx Zoo, Disney's Animal Kingdom Make List Of The '10 Worst Zoos For Elephants' " .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2017.

^ "2013 Ten Worst Zoos for Elephants - - In Defense of Animals" . Archived from the original on May 1, 2016 . Retrieved April 29, 2016 .

^ "In Defense of Animals Releases 2009 "Ten Worst Zoos for Elephants" List" . January 12, 2010. Archived from the original on May 30, 2016 . Retrieved April 29, 2016 .

^ a b Jim Breheny (August 28, 2015).

"Jim Breheny: Hey, elephant lovers: Happy is happy" .

Daily News .

Archived from the original on December 26, 2015 . Retrieved March 3, 2016 .

^ "Maxine, 48-Year-Old Elephant, Euthanized At Bronx Zoo After Illness" .

CBS New York . November 20, 2018.

Archived from the original on July 19, 2020 . Retrieved July 18, 2020 .

^ Katersky, Aaron (February 20, 2020).

"Siding with Bronx Zoo, judge rules Happy the elephant is not a person" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on March 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 5, 2020 .

^ Gavin, Robert (May 4, 2021).

"NY's top court to consider 'personhood' of Happy the elephant" .

Times Union .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2021 . Retrieved May 5, 2021 .

^ Cohen, Luc (June 15, 2022).

"Happy the elephant is denied personhood, to stay at Bronx Zoo" .

Reuters . Retrieved June 16, 2022 .

^ Fobar, Rachel (June 14, 2022).

"Happy the elephant is not a person, New York's highest court rules" .

Animals . Archived from the original on June 14, 2022 . Retrieved June 16, 2022 .

^ a b c Bradford, Phillips Verner; Blume, Harvey (1992).

Ota Benga: The Pygmy in the Zoo . New York: St. Martins Press.

ISBN 978-0-312-08276-5 .

^ a b c Keller, Mitch (August 6, 2006).

"The Scandal at the Zoo" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ "Man and Monkey Show Disapproved by Clergy", The New York Times , September 10, 1906, pg. 1.

^ a b Spiro, Jonathan Peter (2008).

Defending the Master Race: Conservation, Eugenics, and the Legacy of Madison Grant . Burlington, VT: University of Vermont Press. pp.

43– 51.

ISBN 978-1-58465-715-6 .

^ Smith, Ken (1998).

Raw Deal: Horrible and Ironic Stories of Forgotten Americans . New York: Blast Books, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-922233-20-5 .

^ Quoted by NPR at From the Belgian Congo to the Bronx Zoo Archived February 18, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , September 8, 2006, Retrieved May 29, 2015 ^ Keller, Mitch (August 6, 2006).

"The Scandal at the Zoo" .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 9, 2024 .

^ Bradford & Blume 1992 , pp. 191–204 ^ Bradford & Blume 1992 , pp. 212–213 ^ Delaney, Ted.

"Ota Benga (ca. 1883–1916)" .

Encyclopedia Virginia .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2024 . Retrieved December 9, 2024 .

^ Jacobs, Julia (July 29, 2020).

"Racist Incident From Bronx Zoo's Past Draws Apology" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2020 . Retrieved July 30, 2020 .

^ Bryant Dillon, Fanboy Comics President (September 18, 2013).

"Fanboy Comics – A Review of 'Tales of the Night Watchman: Volume 1 #2' and 'Tales of the Night Watchman Presents: The Night Collector' (New Hires and Nude Vampires)" .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved February 29, 2016 .

^ "Animal Planet Orders Bronx Zoo Docuseries" .

The Wrap . March 31, 2016.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ "Meet the stars of Animal Planet's 'The Zoo' season two" .

USA Today . March 6, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 13, 2018 . Retrieved March 13, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bronx Zoo .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Historical images of the Bronx Zoo .

Official website Wildlife Conservation Society Popular Official Guide to the New York Zoological Park , 1915 v t e Zoos of the Wildlife Conservation Society Zoos Bronx Zoo Central Park Zoo Prospect Park Zoo Queens Zoo Aquariums New York Aquarium v t e Zoos of New York State Zoos Adirondack Animal Land (Gloversville) Animal Adventure Park (Harpursville) Bear Mountain State Park Bronx Zoo Buffalo Zoo Central Park Zoo Fort Rickey Discovery Zoo (Rome) Long Island Game Farm (Manorville) New York State Living Museum (Watertown) Prospect Park Zoo (Brooklyn) Queens Zoo Rosamond Gifford Zoo (Syracuse) Ross Park Zoo (Binghamton) Seneca Park Zoo (Rochester) Staten Island Zoo Trevor Zoo (Stanford) Utica Zoo White Post Farms (Melville) Aquariums Long Island Aquarium and Exhibition Center (Riverhead) New York Aquarium Aquarium of Niagara (Niagara Falls) Defunct Catskill Game Farm v t e Protected areas of New York City Federal National Historic Sites Lower East Side Tenement Museum Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National monuments and memorials African Burial Ground Castle Clinton Federal Hall General Grant Governors Island Hamilton Grange Statue of Liberty Stonewall National recreation areas Gateway National Recreation Area - Jamaica Bay Floyd Bennett Field Fort Tilden Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge Jacob Riis Gateway National Recreation Area - Staten Island Fort Wadsworth Great Kills Hoffman Island Miller Field Swinburne Island State State Parks Bayswater Point Clay Pit Ponds Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Gantry Plaza Marsha P. Johnson Riverbank Roberto Clemente Shirley Chisholm State recreation lands Mount Loretto Unique Area Udalls Cove City parks and preserves Manhattan 79th Street Boat Basin Abe Lebewohl Park Abingdon Square Albert Capsouto Asphalt Green Asser Levy Battery Bella Abzug (Hudson) Bellevue South Bennett British Garden at Hanover Square Bowling Green Bryant Captain Patrick J. Brown Walk Carl Schurz Central Diana Ross Playground Great Lawn Rec Center Heckscher Playground North Meadow Rec Center Tarr Family Playground Chelsea City Hall Coleman Playground Collect Columbus Corlears Hook Dag Hammarskjöld Plaza Damrosch Dante DeSalvio Playground DeWitt Clinton Drumgoole Plaza Duane East River Greenway East River Esplanade East River Pier 42 Stuyvesant Cove Elizabeth H. Berger Plaza Father Demo Square Finn Square Foley Square Fort Tryon Fort Washington Gorman Governors Island Gramercy Grand Army Plaza Greenacre Hamilton Fish Hanover Square Harlem River Hell's Kitchen Herald Square High Line Highbridge Fort George Seating Area Holcombe Rucker Hudson River Ilka Tanya Payán Imagination Playground Inwood Hill Isham J. Hood Wright Jackie Robinson Jackson Square John Jay Liberty Little Island Louis Cuvillier Madison Square Manhattan Waterfront Greenway MacArthur Marcus Garvey McKenna Square Millennium Mill Rock Mitchel Square Montefiore Square Morningside Murphy's Brother's Playground Muscota Marsh Open Road Paley Peretz Square Peter Cooper Peter Detmold Plaza Lafayette Queen Elizabeth II September 11th Garden Ralph Bunche Randalls Island Richard Tucker Square Riverside Robert Moses Playground Roosevelt Triangle Rucker Sakura Samuel N. Bennerson 2nd Playground Sara Delano Roosevelt Septuagesimo Uno Seward Sheridan Square Sherman Square Spring Street St. John's St. Nicholas St. Vartan Straus Stuyvesant Square Swindler Cove Teardrop Theodore Roosevelt Thomas Jefferson Thomas Paine Tompkins Square Tribeca Trygve Lie Union Square Verdi Square Vesuvio Playground Vietnam Veterans Plaza Vincent F. Albano Jr.

Wagner Wards Island Washington Market Washington Square West Side Community Garden William A. Harris Garden Winston Churchill Square Zuccotti The Bronx East Bronx Bicentennial Veterans Castle Hill City Island Wetlands Ferry Point Givans Creek Woods Haffen Harding Hart Island Magenta Playground Pelham Bay Hunter Island Orchard Beach Rodman's Neck Pelham Parkway Pugsley Creek Richman Seton Falls Seton Soundview Starlight West Bronx Aqueduct Walk Bridge Bronx Bronx Skate Park Devoe Ewen Harris Henry Hudson Jerome Mosholu Parkway Poe Raoul Wallenberg Forest Riverdale Spuyten Duyvil Shorefront St. James University Woods Van Cortlandt Vidalia Vinmont Veteran Washington's Walk Williamsbridge Oval South Bronx Baretto Point Bill Rainey Carlos J. Lozada Playground Claremont Concrete Plant Crotona Estella Diggs Grant Hunts Point Riverside Joseph Rodman Drake Joyce Kilmer Julius Richman Macombs Dam Mill Pond Mullaly North and South Brother Islands Playground 52 Printer's Richman St. Mary's Taqwa Community Farm Tremont Brooklyn Alben Square American Veterans Memorial Pier Amersfort Anthony Catanzaro Square Asser Levy Ascenzi Square Bartel-Pritchard Square Bath Beach Betsy Head Bensonhurst Bocchino-Dente Memorial Plaza Breukelen Ballfields Brooklyn Bridge Brooklyn Heights Promenade Brooklyn–Queens Greenway Brooklyn Waterfront Greenway Brower Bushwick Byrne Cadman Plaza Canarsie Carroll Calvert Vaux Chief Charles A. Joshua Plaza City Line Coffey Columbus Commodore Barry Coney Island Beach & Boardwalk Coney Island Creek Coney Island Cyclone Continental Army Plaza Cooper Domino Dyker Beach Eastern Parkway Fort Greene Four Sparrow Marsh Frank M. Charles Fresh Creek Nature Preserve Friends Field Fulton Golconda Skate Park Grand Army Plaza Gravesend Green Central Knoll Herbert Von King Highland Irving Square JJ Byrne Jamaica Bay John J. Carty John Paul Jones Kaiser Kelly Leif Ericson Leon S. Kaiser Playground Lieutenant Joseph Petrosino Lincoln Terrace Linden Lindower Linton Macri Triangle Manhattan Beach Maria Hernandez Marine McCarren McGolrick McKinley Mt. Prospect Nellie Bly Ocean Parkway Owl's Head Paerdegat Basin Paerdegat Prospect Red Hook Robert E. Venable Russell D. Ramsey Triangle Saratoga Scarangella Seaside Seth Low Shore Spring Creek Steeplechase Sternberg St. Johns Sunset Tompkins Trinity Van Voorhees Walt Whitman Wingate WNYC Transmitter Zion Triangle Queens Admiral Alley Pond Andrews Grove Astoria Baisley Pond Bayside Fields Bayswater Beach Channel Big Bush Bowne Brant Point Wildlife Sanctuary Breininger Broad Channel American Broad Channel Broad Channel Wetlands Brooklyn–Queens Greenway Brookville Bulova Captain Tilly Catholic War Veterans Triangle Chris Postiglione Triangle College Point Fields Crocheron Cunningham Det. Keith L. Williams Det. William T. Gunn Dr. Charles R. Drew Dubos Point Wildlife Sanctuary Doughboy Douglaston Elmhurst Evergreen Far Rockaway Skate Park Feehan Triangle Flushing Fields Flushing Meadows-Corona Foch Sitting Area Forest Fort Tilden Fort Totten Francis Lewis Frank Golden Frank Principe Haggerty Harvey Highland Hillcrest Veterans Square Hinton Hoffman Hook Creek Hunter's Point Idlewild Jamaica Bay Joe Sabba John Golden Judge Moses Weinstein Playground Juniper Valley Kissena Kohlreiter Square Kopytko Triangle Libra Triangle Linden Linnaeus Little Bay LoCicero Triangle Louis Pasteur Lynch Triangle Mafera Macneil Marconi Marie Curie Montbellier O'Donohue One Room Schoolhouse Overlook Park of the Americas Phil "Scooter" Rizzuto Playground Seventy Five Ofc. Edward Byrne Powell's Cove Proctor-Hopson Circle Queens County Farm Museum Queensbridge Rachel Carson Railroad Ralph Demarco Remsen Cemetery Rochdale Rockaway Beach and Boardwalk Rockaway Community Roy Wilkins Rufus King Seagirt Avenue Wetlands Socrates Sculpture Spring Creek Springfield St. Albans Travers Travis Triangle Triangle 54 Tribute Tudor Turtle Playground Underbridge Dog Run Vleigh Playground Walter J. Wetzel Triangle Wayanda Staten Island North Shore ( Community District 1 ) Allison Pond Austen House Buono Beach Barrett Clove Lakes Clove's Tail Corporal Thompson Eibs Pond Faber Forest Grove Fort Hill Gaeta Graniteville Quarry Graniteville Swamp Hero Ingram Woods Jones Woods Joseph Manna Lyons Pool Recreation Center Maple Woods Northerleigh Richmond Terrace Wetlands Sailors' Snug Harbor Shooters Island Silver Lake Sobel Court Tappen Tompkinsville Von Briesen Walker Westerleigh Mid-Island ( Community District 2 ) Blood Root Valley Bradys Pond Deere Father Macris FDR Boardwalk Gen. MacArthur High Rock Last Chance Midland Field Ocean Breeze Old Place Creek Prall's Island Saw Mill Creek Marsh Schmul South Beach Wetlands St. George Staten Island Industrial Westwood Willowbrook Mid-Island & South Shore (Community Districts 2 & 3 ) Freshkills LaTourette Meredith Woods William T. Davis Wildlife Refuge South Shore ( Community District 3 ) Aesop Amundsen Circle Annadale Arbutus Woods Arden Woods Bayview Terrace Bloomingdale Blue Heron Blueberry Bunker Ponds Carlton Conference House Crescent Beach Fairview Great Kills Huguenot Ponds Hybrid Oak Woods Isle of Meadows King Fisher Kingdom Pond Lemon Creek Long Pond Olmstead-Beil House Reed's Basket Willow Swamp Seaside Wildlife Nature Siedenburg Tottenville Shore Wegener Wolfe's Pond Other Nature centers Alley Pond Belvedere Castle Blue Heron Crotona Dana Discovery Center Forest Fort Greene Fort Totten Greenbelt High Rock Inwood Hill Orchard Beach Prospect Salt Marsh Van Cortlandt Zoos Bronx Central Park Prospect Park Queens Staten Island Botanical gardens Brooklyn Botanic Conservatory New York Botanical Queens Botanical Staten Island Botanical New York Chinese Scholar's Wave Hill Roosevelt Island Lighthouse Southpoint Other lists World War I-related parks Vietnam War-related parks Hispanic and Latino-related parks Category Department of Parks and Recreation New York State Commons Portals : New York City Animals Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Greece Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐t2l49
Cached time: 20250817170652
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.174 seconds
Real time usage: 2.507 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17287/1000000
Revision size: 155069/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 581880/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17224/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 729631/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.311/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13180787/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2025.470      1 -total
 62.57% 1267.422      1 Template:Reflist
 36.92%  747.735    138 Template:Cite_web
  8.90%  180.265      1 Template:Infobox_zoo
  8.83%  178.918     35 Template:Cite_news
  8.58%  173.865      1 Template:Infobox
  4.97%  100.570      2 Template:Harvnb
  4.02%   81.513      8 Template:Navbox
  3.31%   67.058      1 Template:Short_description
  3.29%   66.579      1 Template:Zoos_of_WCS Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:92359:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817170652 and revision id 1305577514. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bronx_Zoo&oldid=1305577514 " Categories : Zoos in New York City Fordham, Bronx New York City Designated Landmarks in the Bronx Tourist attractions in the Bronx Wildlife Conservation Society Educational organizations established in 1899 Zoos established in the 19th century 1899 establishments in New York City Heins and LaFarge buildings Beaux-Arts architecture in New York City Bronx Park Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using NRISref without a reference number Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with dead external links from November 2017 CS1:Vancouver names with accept markup Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2022 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from April 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 22:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bronx Zoo 38 languages Add topic

