Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Standards 2 Materials and hazards Toggle Materials and hazards subsection 2.1 Flammable solids: Class A (US/EU/AU) 2.2 Flammable liquids: Class B (US/EU/AU) 2.3 Flammable gases: Class B (US) / Class C (EU/AU) 2.4 Combustible metals: Class D (US/EU/AU) 2.5 Electrical fires: Class C (US) / Class E (AU) / Unclassified (EU) 2.6 Grease fires (cooking): Class F (EU/AU) / Class K (US) 3 Comparison 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fire classification 9 languages Deutsch Español Français Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Română West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia System of categorizing fire Demonstration of using the wrong suppressant on a grease fire Fire classification is a system of categorizing fires with regard to the type(s) of combustible material(s) involved, and the form(s) of suitable extinguishing agent(s).

[ 1 ] Classes are often assigned letter designations, [ 2 ] which can differ somewhat between territories.

Standards [ edit ] International (ISO) : ISO3941 Classification of fires Australia : AS/NZS 1850 Europe : DIN EN2 Classification of fires United States : NFPA 10 Chapter 5.2.1-5.2.5 Materials and hazards [ edit ] Flammable solids: Class A (US/EU/AU) [ edit ] Fires involving ordinary flammable solids fall under Class A . This includes wood , paper , fabric , rubber , and some types of plastics . Such fires may be extinguished by water, wet chemical suppression, or dry chemical powder.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Flammable liquids: Class B (US/EU/AU) [ edit ] A carbon dioxide fire extinguisher rated for flammable liquids and gases Fires involving flammable liquids or liquefiable solids fall under Class B [ note 1 ] . Examples may include petrol/gasoline , oil , paint , some waxes & plastics, though cooking fats and oils are explicitly excluded (discussed and categorised separately below).

A solid stream of water should never be used to extinguish this type of fire because it can cause the fuel to scatter, spreading the flames.

[ 6 ] The most effective way to extinguish a liquid fire is by inhibiting the chemical chain reaction of the fire, which can be done by dry chemical or Halon extinguishing agents.

[ 7 ] Smothering with CO 2 or foam is also effective. Halon has fallen out of favor in recent times (except for aircraft fire extinguishing systems) because it is an ozone-depleting material (the Montreal Protocol declares that Halon should no longer be used). Chemicals such as FM-200 are now the recommended halogenated suppressant.

[ 8 ] ^ Under the European and Australian systems, flammable liquids designated Class B require flash points no more than 93 °C (199 °F).

[ 5 ] Flammable gases: Class B (US) / Class C (EU/AU) [ edit ] Fires involving flammable gases fall under Class C in the European/Australian system, and Class B (along with flammable liquids) in the US system.

[ 9 ] [ 7 ] [ 10 ] This can include natural gas , hydrogen , propane , and butane .

Due to the nature of the fuel, these fires can be difficult to extinguish. The most effective techniques for the control of a flammable gas fire are to stop the flow of fuel (by turning off any gas taps or valves) or to displace the supply of oxygen.

[ 4 ] Control of fires involving flammable gases where the gas source cannot be controlled must be carefully managed. If the flames are extinguished, but the gas continues to leak, an explosive atmosphere may be created, and the gas may find a source for reignition outside of the originally affected area. Strategies employed to manage these fires may include trying to direct or contain the fire to prevent the ignition of other fuels whilst work is done to control the fuel supply.

[ 1 ] Combustible metals: Class D (US/EU/AU) [ edit ] Fires involving combustible metals fall under Class D . This especially concerns alkali metals like lithium , potassium and sodium , alkaline earth metals such as magnesium , and group 4 elements such as titanium and zirconium .

[ 3 ] Metal fires represent a unique hazard because people are often unaware of the characteristics of these fires and are not properly prepared to fight them.

[ 3 ] It is also not always clear what type of metal is burning. Certain metals catch fire in contact with air or water (for example, sodium ), which exacerbates this risk.

[ 10 ] Monolithic masses of combustible metals do not usually represent great fire risks because heat is conducted away from hot spots so efficiently that the heat of combustion cannot be maintained. In consequence, significant heat energy is required to ignite a contiguous mass of combustible metal. Generally, metal fires are a hazard when the metal is in the form of swarf which combusts more rapidly than larger blocks due to the increased surface-area-to-volume ratio .

[ 7 ] [ 10 ] Metal fires can be ignited by the same ignition sources that would start other common fires.

[ 7 ] Special care must be taken when extinguishing metal fires. Water and other common firefighting agents can exacerbate them.

[ 7 ] The National Fire Protection Association recommends that metal fires be fought with dry powder extinguishing agents that work by smothering and heat absorption.

[ 7 ] Different metals require different extinguishing agents and for a particular metal, agents cannot necessarily be substituted for one another. The most common agents are sodium chloride granules and graphite powder.

[ 10 ] In recent years, [ when?

] powdered copper has also come into use.

[ 10 ] These dry powder extinguishers should not be confused with those that contain dry chemical agents. The two are not the same, and only dry powder should be used to extinguish a metal fire. Using a dry chemical extinguisher in error, in place of dry powder, can be ineffective or actually increase the intensity of a metal fire.

[ 7 ] Lacking a specialist extinguisher, sand may in some cases provide a sufficient alternative, though notably sand may contain moisture which could result in a rapid, hazardous release of steam.

[ 11 ] Electrical fires: Class C (US) / Class E (AU) / Unclassified (EU) [ edit ] "Electrical fire" redirects here; not to be confused with Electric fire .

Road damage from an electrical fire caused by energized fallen power line caused by Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico Fires involving the danger of electrical hazards fall under Class E under the Australian system, and Class C under the US system.

[ 4 ] The European system previously assigned this Class E , but no longer has a specific classification for electrical fires, instead focussing on the ignited fuel type.

Electrical fires can result from the likes of faulty electrical equipment or wiring [ 7 ] (for instance loose or corroded connections; deteriorated insulation; electrical arcing ), overheating electrical components (possibly due to improper system or product design), or unintentional contact of electrical or electronic components with flammable materials. These fires can be a severe hazard to firefighters using water or other conductive agents, which upon contact with electrical sources can establish a conductive path through the firefighter to Earth . Such electric shocks have caused many firefighter deaths.

[ 7 ] Electrical fires may be fought in the same way as an ordinary combustible fire, but water, foam, and other conductive agents should not be used due to the dangers just described. Instead an extinguishing agent specifically rated for electrical fires should be used.

Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), NOVEC 1230, FM-200 , dry chemical powder extinguishers, and even baking soda are especially suited to extinguishing this sort of fire.

[ 6 ] PKP should be a last resort solution due to its corrosive tendencies.

Once electricity is shut off to the equipment involved, it will generally become an ordinary combustible fire.

[ 6 ] Grease fires (cooking): Class F (EU/AU) / Class K (US) [ edit ] Laboratory simulation of a chip pan fire : a beaker containing wax is heated until it catches fire. A small amount of water is then poured into the beaker. The water vaporizes instantly ( slopover ), expanding to 1700 times its volume, [ 6 ] ejecting a plume of burning liquid wax into the air.

Fires involving cooking oils and fats (greases) fall under Class F under the European and Australian systems, and Class K under the US system.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 9 ] Though such fires are technically a subclass of the flammable liquid/gas class(es), the special characteristics of these types of fires, namely the higher flash point, are considered important enough to recognize them separately.

Some special extinguishers designed for this use smother the fire by turning the oil into a foam. As with Class B fires, a solid stream of water should never be used to extinguish this type because it can cause the fuel to scatter, spreading the flames.

[ 7 ] Commercial kitchens may have a fire suppression system built into exhaust hoods to release an extinguishing agent onto stove tops, releasing automatically with a fusible link or manually using a pull station.

[ 9 ] If a fire blanket is used to extinguish burning liquids the liquid can soak into the blanket. A hot liquid might then lead to the self-ignition of the blanket.

[ 4 ] A blanket must therefore only be used if it does not act as a wick or if it is heavy enough to cool the liquid down below autoignition temperature . Preferably a lid or a similar solid item should be used to seal the burning container off from the surrounding atmosphere.

[ 5 ] Comparison [ edit ] Comparison of letter codes in different regional standards.

Type of fire Class Australia Europe United States Flammable solids A A A Flammable liquids, excluding cooking fats and oils B B B Flammable gases C C B Combustible metals D D D Electrical fires E [ a ] Unclassified (formerly E [ a ] ) C Grease fires (cooking fats and oils) F F K ^ a b Technically there is no such thing as a "Class E" fire, as electricity itself obviously does not burn. However, it is considered a dangerous and very deadly complication to a fire, therefore using the incorrect extinguishing method can result in serious injury or death. Class E, however generally refers to fires involving the danger of electricity, therefore a bracketed "(E)" is denoted on various types of extinguishers suitable for such scenarios.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Fire control Fire extinguisher References [ edit ] ^ a b Fire Detection and Suppression Systems (Third ed.). Stillwater, OK: International Fire Service Training Association. 2005. p. 9.

ISBN 0-87939-267-3 .

OCLC 62785313 .

^ a b "Understanding Various Types of Fires and Their Causes" .

KForce Security . February 15, 2025 . Retrieved February 15, 2025 .

^ a b c Fire Detection and Suppression Systems (Third ed.). Stillwater, OK: International Fire Service Training Association. 2005. p. 10.

ISBN 0-87939-267-3 .

OCLC 62785313 .

^ a b c d e "Choosing and using fire extinguishers" .

U.S. Fire Administration . December 12, 2017. Archived from the original on May 30, 2019 . Retrieved May 30, 2019 .

^ a b "Flammable and combustible liquids" .

WorkSafe . March 23, 2025 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

In the European/Australian system, flammable liquids are designated "Class B" having flash points no more than 93°C.

^ a b c d "Classes of Fires & Fire Extinguishers - Safety | UCLA Health" .

www.uclahealth.org . Retrieved April 12, 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "NFPA 10 Standard Development" .

www.nfpa.org . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ "Wollongong Extinguisher Service-Australia. For Fire Extinguishers" . May 8, 2008. Archived from the original on May 8, 2008 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ a b c "AS/NZS 1841.1:2007 4" (PDF) . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ a b c d e Standards, European.

"BS EN 2:1992 Classification of fires" .

www.en-standard.eu . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ "Extinguishers For Metals" . June 1, 2025 . Retrieved June 1, 2025 .

^ New South Wales Rural Fire Service VF - (2005) Village Firefighter Manual, pg 16.

External links [ edit ] Classification of Portable Fire Extinguishers , Occupational Safety and Health Administration Evacuation Plans and Procedures eTool , Occupational Safety and Health Administration Information on Fire Extinguishers , The Fire Safety Advice Centre Australian Fire Classes , Futura Fire – Australia For Fire Extinguishers , Wollongong Extinguisher Service-Australia v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐9v285
Cached time: 20250812002811
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.368 seconds
Real time usage: 0.546 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1862/1000000
Revision size: 15593/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70799/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2051/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 65350/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.189/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7952550/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  424.759      1 -total
 29.33%  124.601      3 Template:Reflist
 17.72%   75.262      1 Template:Fire_fighting
 17.50%   74.343      1 Template:Use_mdy_dates
 17.41%   73.937      2 Template:Navbox
 15.48%   65.763      2 Template:Cite_book
 12.24%   51.981      1 Template:Short_description
  8.75%   37.183      9 Template:Cite_web
  7.29%   30.952      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.83%   24.774      1 Template:When Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4700183:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812002811 and revision id 1298707300. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_classification&oldid=1298707300 " Categories : Classification systems Firefighting Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from June 2025 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 04:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire classification 9 languages Add topic

