Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Creation myth 2 Pantheon 3 See also 4 Bibliography 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Aztec mythology 39 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religious folklore of the Nahua peoples of the Triple Alliance (Aztec Empire) Mictlantecuhtli (left), god of death, the lord of the Underworld and Quetzalcoatl (right), god of wisdom, life, knowledge, morning star, patron of the winds and light, the lord of the West . Together they symbolize life and death.

Aztec civilization Aztec society Nahuatl language Religion Mythology Philosophy Calendar Medicine Use of entheogens Human sacrifice Tenochtitlan Templo Mayor Aztec history Aztlán Warfare Codices Aztec script Aztec Empire Tlaxcallan Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire Moctezuma II Fall of Tenochtitlan v t e Aztec mythology is the body or collection of myths of the Aztec civilization of Central Mexico.

[ 1 ] The Aztecs were a culture living in central Mexico and much of their mythology is similar to that of other Mesoamerican cultures.  According to legend, the various groups who became the Aztecs arrived from the North into the Anahuac valley around Lake Texcoco . The location of this valley and lake of destination is clear – it is the heart of modern Mexico City – but little can be known with certainty about the origin of the Aztec.  There are different accounts of their origin. In the myth, the ancestors of the Mexica/Aztec were one of seven groups that came from a place in the north called Aztlan , to make the journey southward, hence their name "Azteca." Other accounts cite their origin in Chicomoztoc , "the place of the seven caves", or at Tamoanchan (the legendary origin of all civilizations).

The Mexica/Aztec were said to be guided by their war-god Huitzilopochtli, to an island in Lake Texcoco , they saw an eagle , perched on a nopal cactus, holding a rattlesnake in its talons. This vision fulfilled a prophecy telling them that they should found their new home on that spot. The Aztecs built their city of Tenochtitlan on that site, building a great artificial island , which today is in the center of Mexico City . This legendary vision is pictured on the Coat of Arms of Mexico .

Creation myth [ edit ] Huitzilopochtli is raising up the skies of the South , one of the four directions of the world, surrounded by their respective trees, temples, patterns, and divination symbols.

According to legend, when the Mexica arrived in the Anahuac valley around Lake Texcoco , they were considered by the other groups as the least civilized of all, but the Mexica decided to learn... and they took in all that they could from the other people, especially from the ancient Toltec (whom they seem to have partially confused with the more ancient civilization of Teotihuacan ). To the Aztec, the Toltec were the originators of all culture; " Toltecayotl " was a synonym for culture. Aztec legends identify the Toltecs and the cult of Quetzalcoatl with the legendary city of Tollan , which they also identified with the more ancient Teotihuacan.

Because the Aztecs adopted and combined several traditions with their own earlier traditions, they had several creation myths . One of these, the Five Suns , describes four great ages preceding the present world, each of which ended in a catastrophe, and "were named in function of the force or divine element that violently put an end to each one of them".

[ 2 ] Coatlicue was the mother of Centzon Huitznahua ("Four Hundred Southerners"), her sons, and Coyolxauhqui , her daughter. At some point, she found a ball of feathers and placed it in her waistband, thus becoming pregnant with Huitzilopochtli . Her other children became suspicious as to the identity of the father, and vowed to kill their mother. She gave birth on Mount Coatepec, pursued by her children, but the newborn Huitzilopochtli (born fully armed and prepared to fight) defeated most of his brothers, who then became the stars. He also killed his half-sister, Coyolxauhqui , by tearing out her heart using Xiuhcoatl (a blue snake) and throwing her body down the mountain. This was said to inspire the Aztecs to rip the hearts out of their human sacrifices and throw their bodies down the sides of the temple dedicated to Huitzilopochtli, who represents the sun,  chasing away the stars at dawn.

Our age ( Nahui-Ollin ), the fifth age , or fifth creation, began in the ancient city of Teotihuacan [ citation needed ] . According to the myth, all the gods had gathered to sacrifice themselves and create a new age. Although the world and the sun had already been created, it would only be through their sacrifice that the sun would be set into motion, and time and history could begin. The strongest and most handsome of the gods, Tecuciztecatl , was supposed to sacrifice himself but when it came time to self-immolate, he could not jump into the fire. Instead, Nanahuatl the smallest and humblest of the gods, who was also covered in boils, sacrificed himself first, and jumped into the flames. The sun was set into motion with his sacrifice, and time began. Humiliated by Nanahuatl's sacrifice, Tecuciztecatl, too, leaped into the fire and became the moon.

[ 3 ] Pantheon [ edit ] Main article: List of Aztec gods and supernatural beings Embodied spirits; Tonalleque (1), Cihuateteo (2).

Patterns of War; (1a) Tlaloc , (1b) Xiuhtecuhtli , (2a) Mixcoatl , (2b) Xipe-Totec .

Patterns of Merchants; (1a) Huehuecoyotl , (1b) Zacatzontli , (2a) Yacatecuhtli , (2b) Tlacotzontli , (3a) Tlazolteotl and Metztli , (3b) Tonatiuh .

Mythology Mythologies Indeterminate Proto-Indo-European Africa Berber Bantu Efik Guanche Kongo Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Somali West African Yoruba Mediterranean Egyptian French Greek Iberian Basque Catalan Cantabrian Lusitanian Italian Etruscan Roman Romanian Turkic Europe Albanian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Prussian Celtic Breton Cornish Irish Scottish Welsh English Estonian Georgian Germanic Nazi mythology Frankish Continental Germanic Norse Anglo-Saxon Gothic Slavic Uralic Finnish Hungarian Proto-Uralic Sámi Middle East Arabian Armenian Christian Hittite Jewish Mesopotamian Ossetian Persian Talysh Asia Buddhist Chinese Hindu Japanese Korean Meitei Mongol Philippine Tai Thai Tibetan Vietnamese Oceania Aboriginal Australian Indonesian Māori Melanesian Micronesian Papuan Polynesian North America Algonquian Abenaki Blackfoot Lenape Aztec Californian Miwok Ohlone Choctaw Muscogee/Creek Haida Inuit Iroquois Maya Kwakwakaʼwakw Plains Indians Ho-Chunk Lakota Pawnee Puebloan Hopi Zuni Talamancan South America Brazilian Chaná Chilote Guarani Inca Muisca Selk'nam Types Creation Flood National Origin Lists Creations Creatures Deities Feral children Floods Heroes Culture Folk Objects Pairs Places Sources Related concepts Deity Legendary creature Type Legendary progenitor Twins Culture hero Folk hero See also Comparative mythology Comparative religion Euhemerism Folklore Epics Lower mythology Pseudo-mythology Religion and mythology Symbolism Theology v t e Water deities Tlaloc , god of rain, lightning and thunder. He is a fertility god.

Chalchiuhtlicue , goddess of running water, lakes, rivers, seas, streams, horizontal waters, storms, and baptism.

Huixtocihuatl , goddess of salt Opochtli , god of fishing and birdcatchers, discoverer of both the harpoon and net Atlahua , god of water, a fisherman and archer Fire deities Xiuhtecuhtli , god of fire and time Chantico , goddess of the hearth (firebox) and volcanoes Xolotl , god of fire, lightning, and death, associated with Venus as the Evening Star (Twin of Quetzalcoatl) Death deities Mictlantecuhtli , god of the dead, ruler of the Underworld (Mictlan) Mictecacihuatl , goddess of the dead, ruler of the Underworld (Mictlan) Xolotl , god of lightning, death and deformity, associated with Venus as the Evening Star (Twin of Quetzalcoatl) Sky deities Tezcatlipoca , god of providence, darkness, and the invisible, lord of the night, ruler of the North .

Xipe-Totec , god of force, lord of the seasons and rebirth, ruler of the East .

Quetzalcoatl , god of life, the light and wisdom, lord of the winds and daytime, ruler of the West .

Huitzilopochtli , god of war and sacrifice, lord of the sun and fire, ruler of the South .

Xolotl , god of lightning, death, and fire, associated with Venus as the Evening Star (Twin of Quetzalcoatl) Ehecatl , god of wind (a form of Quetzalcoatl) Tlaloc , god of rain, lightning and thunder. He is a fertility god.

Coyolxauhqui , goddess and leader of the Centzonhuitznahua, associated with the moon.

Meztli , goddess of the moon.

Tonatiuh , god of the sun.

Nanahuatzin , god of the sun. He sacrificed himself in a burning fire, so the god Tonatiuh took his place.

Centzon-mimixcoa , 400 gods of the northern stars Centzon-huitznahua , 400 gods of the southern stars Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli , god of the morning star ( Venus ) Lieges of the Night Xiuhtecuhtli , god of fire and time Tezcatlipoca , god of providence, the darkness and the invisible, lord of the night, ruler of the North .

Piltzintecuhtli , god of visions, associated with Mercury (the planet that is visible just before sunrise, or just after sunset) and healing Centeotl , god of maize Mictlantecuhtli , god of the Underworld (Mictlan) Chalchiuhtlicue , goddess of running water, lakes, rivers, seas, streams, horizontal waters, storms, and baptism.

Tlazolteotl , goddess of lust, carnality, and sexual misdeeds.

Tepeyollotl , god of the animals, darkened caves, echoes, and earthquakes. Tepeyollotl is a variant of Tezcatlipoca, whose name means "heart of the mountain" Tlaloc , god of rain, lightning and thunder. He is a fertility god.

Lieges of the Time Xiuhtecuhtli , god of fire and time Tlaltecuhtli , the god/goddess of the earth (changed in the landscape and atmosphere) Chalchiuhtlicue , goddess of running water, lakes, rivers, streams, the sea, horizontal waters, storms, and baptism.

Tonatiuh , god of the Sun Tlazolteotl , goddess of lust, carnality, and sexual misdeeds.

Mictlantecuhtli , god of the Underworld (Mictlan) Mictecacihuatl , goddess of the Underworld (Mictlan) Centeotl , god of maize Tlaloc , god of rain, lightning and thunder. He is a fertility god.

Quetzalcoatl , god of life, light and wisdom, lord of the winds and the day, ruler of the West .

Tezcatlipoca , god of providence, the darkness and the invisible, lord of the night, ruler of the North .

Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli , god of dawn ( Venus ) Citlalicue , goddess of female stars in the Milky Way .

Citlalatonac , god of female stars (Husband of Citlalicue) Earth deities Xipe-Totec , god of force, lord of the seasons and rebirth, ruler of the East .

Tonacatecuhtli , god of sustenance, associated with Ometecuhtli.

Tonacacihuatl , goddess of sustenance, associated with Omecihuatl.

Tlaltecuhtli , old god/goddess of earth (changed in the landscape and atmosphere) Chicomecoatl , goddess of agriculture, whose name means "seven-serpent" Centeotl , god of the maize associated with the Tianquiztli (Pleiades) Xilonen , goddess of tender maize Matron goddesses Coatlicue , goddess of fertility, life, death and rebirth Chimalma , goddess of fertility, life, death and rebirth Xochitlicue , goddess of fertility, life, death and rebirth Itzpapalotl , warrior and death goddess, obsidian butterfly, leader of the Tzitzimimeh Toci , goddess of health Star deities Centzon-mimixcoa , 400 gods of the northern stars Centzon-huitznahua , 400 gods of the southern stars Citlalicue , goddess of female stars in the Milky Way .

Citlalatonac , god of female stars (Husband of Citlalicue) Itzpapalotl , warrior and death goddess, obsidian butterfly, leader of the Tzitzimimeh Mixcoatl , god of the hunt and "god of many tribes," identified with the Milky Way, the stars, and the heavens Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli , god of the morning star ( Venus ) Tzitzimimeh , monstrous deities associated with stars, often described as " demons " Xolotl , god of death, associated with Venus as the Evening Star (Twin of Quetzalcoatl) See also [ edit ] Mexico portal List of Aztec gods and supernatural beings Santa Muerte , the Mictecacihuatl reincarnate The Stinking Corpse Thirteen Heavens Mayan mythology Bibliography [ edit ] Primo Feliciano Velázquez (1975).

Códice Chimalpopoca. Anales de Cuauhtitlán y Leyenda de los Soles (in Spanish). Instituto de Investigaciones Históricas. p. 161.

ISBN 968-36-2747-1 .

Adela Fernández (1998).

Dioses Prehispánicos de México (in Spanish). Panorama Editorial. p. 162.

ISBN 968-38-0306-7 .

Cecilio Agustín Robelo (1905).

Diccionario de Mitología Nahua (in Spanish). Biblioteca Porrúa. Imprenta del Museo Nacional de Arqueología, Historia y Etnología. p. 851.

ISBN 978-968-432-795-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Otilia Meza (1981).

El Mundo Mágico de los Dioses del Anáhuac (in Spanish). Editorial Universo México. p. 153.

ISBN 968-35-0093-5 .

Patricia Turner and Charles Russell Coulter (2001).

Dictionary of Ancient Deities . Oxford University Press. p. 608.

ISBN 0-19-514504-6 .

Michael Jordan (2004).

Dictionary of Gods and Goddesses . Facts on File. p. 402.

ISBN 0-8160-5923-3 .

Nowotny, Karl Anton (2005).

Tlacuilolli: Style and Contents of the Mexican Pictorial Manuscripts with a Catalog of the Borgia Group . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. p. 402.

ISBN 978-0-8061-3653-0 .

François-Marie Bertrand (1881).

Dictionnaire universel, historique et comparatif, de toutes les religions du monde: comprenant le judaisme, le christianisme, le paganisme, le sabéisme, le magisme, le druidisme, le brahmanisme, le bouddhismé, le chamisme, l'islamisme, le fétichisme (in French). Vol. 1, 2, 3, 4. Migne. p. 602.

Douglas, David (2009).

The Altlas of Lost Cults and mystery religions . Godsfield Press. pp.

34– 35.

Boone, Elizabeth H., ed. (1982).

The Art and Iconography of Late Post-Classic Central Mexico . Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks .

ISBN 0-88402-110-6 .

Boone, Elizabeth Hill (2013).

Cycles of Time and Meaning in the Mexican Books of Fate . University of Texas Press.

ISBN 978-0-292-75656-4 .

Brinton, Daniel G., ed. (1890).

"Rig Veda Americanus" .

Library of Aboriginal American Literature . Vol. VIII.

Project Gutenberg reproduction.

(in English and Nahuatl languages) Leon-Portilla, Miguel (1990) [1963].

Aztec Thought and Culture . Translated by Davis, J.E. Norman, Oklahoma: Oklahoma University Press.

ISBN 0-8061-2295-1 .

Miller, Mary ; Karl Taube (1993).

The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya . London: Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 0-500-05068-6 .

James Lewis Thomas Chalmbers Spence , The Myths of Mexico and Peru: Aztec, Maya and Inca , 1913 The Myths of Mexico and Peru: Aztec, Maya and Inca Miguel León Portilla, Native Mesoamerican Spirituality , Paulist Press, 1980 Native Mesoamerican Spirituality: Ancient Myths, Discourses, Stories, Doctrines, Hymns, Poems from the Aztec, Yucatec, Quiche-Maya and Other Sacred Traditions References [ edit ] ^ Kirk, p. 8; "myth", Encyclopædia Britannica ^ Portilla, Miguel León (1980).

Native Mesoamerican Spirituality: Ancient Myths, Discourses, Stories, Hymns, Poems, from the Aztec, Yucatec, Quiche-Maya, and other sacred traditions . New Jersey: Paulist Press. p. 40.

ISBN 0-8091-2231-6 .

^ Smith, Michael E. "The Aztecs". Blackwell Publishers, 2002.

External links [ edit ] Rig Veda Americanus at Project Gutenberg , Daniel Brinton (Ed); late 19th-century compendium of some Aztec mythological texts and poems appearing in one manuscript version of Sahagun's 16th-century codices.

Aztec history, culture and religion Bernal Díaz del Castillo , The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico (tr. by A. P. Maudsley , 1928, repr. 1965) Portal Aztec Mythology (in Spanish) "A Visual Guide to the Aztec Pantheon" .

v t e Aztec mythology Primordials Ōmeteōtl : Ometēcuthli and Omecihuātl (or Tōnacātēcuhtli and Tōnacācihuātl ) Creator gods (Four Tezcatlipocas) Huītzilōpōchtli Quetzalcoatl Tezcatlipoca Xipe Totec (or Camaxtle ) Deities Lords of the Night Centeōtl Chalchiuhtlicue Cinteotl Mictlāntēcutli Piltzintecuhtli Tepēyōllōtl Tezcatlipoca (see Creator gods ) Tláloc Tlazōlteōtl Xiuhtecuhtli Lords of the Day Citlālicue Mictēcacihuātl Nanahuatzin Tlāhuizcalpantecuhtli Tlaltecuhtli Tōnatiuh Acolnahuacatl Acuecueyotl (see Chalchiuhtlicue ) Atlahua Atlacoya Chalchiuhtotolin Chantico Chicomecōātl Chīmalmā Cihuacōātl Cihuatecayotl Cipactonal Cōātlīcue Coyolxāuhqui Ehecatl Huēhuecoyōtl Huitztlampaehecatl Huixtocihuatl Ilamatecuhtli Ītzpāpālōtl Itzpapalotlcihuatl Itzpapalotltotec Itztlacoliuhqui Ixtlilton Macuiltochtli Macuilxochitl Malinalxochitl Mayahuel Metztli Mictlanpachecatl Mixcoatl Opochtli Oxomoco Painal Patecatl Tēcciztēcatl Temazcalteci Tepoztēcatl Tlacotzontli Tlalocayotl Tlilhua Toci Toltecatl Tonantzin Xilonen Xōchipilli Xōchiquetzal Xochitlicue Xocotl Xolotl Yacatecuhtli Zacatzontli Groups Ahuiateteo Centzonmīmixcōa Centzonhuītznāhua Centzon Tōtōchtin Cintēteo Cihuateteo Civateteo Ehecatotontli Tiānquiztli Tzitzimitl Xiuhtotontli Places Anahuac Aztlán Cemanahuac Chicomoztoc Huēyi Teōcalli Mictlān (The Underworld ) Tamoanchan Teotihuacan Thirteen Heavens Tlālōcān Tlillan-Tlapallan Tōllān Beliefs and practice Five Suns The Stinking Corpse Use of entheogens Codices Aubin Codex Aubin Manuscript no. 20 Aubin Tonalamatl Codex Azcatitlan Codices Azoyú I & II Badianus Manuscript Codices Becker I & II Boban Aztec Calendar Wheel Codex Bodley Codex Borbonicus Codex Borgia Codex Boturini Mapas de Cuauhtinchan 1-4 Codex Chimalpahin Codex Chimalpopoca Codex Colombino Codex Cospi Codex Cozcatzin Codex Dresden Codex Durán Codex Fejérváry-Mayer Codex Florentine Codex Huamantla Códice de Huichapan Codex Huexotzinco Humboldt fragment 1 Codex Ixtlilxochitl Codex Laud Lienzo Antonio de León Lienzo de Coixtlahuaca I & II Lienzo de Santa María Nativitas Lienzo de Santiago Ihuitlan Lienzo de Zacatepec I & II Codex Madrid Codex Magliabechiano Matrícula de Tributos Codex Mexicanus Crónica Mexicayotl Códice Maya de México Codex Osuna Oztoticpac Lands Map of Texcoco Paris Codex Plano en papel de maguey Primeros Memoriales Codex Porfirio Díaz Mapa Quinatzin Codex Ramírez Codex Reese Relación de Michoacán Codex Ríos Romances de los señores de Nueva España Codex Santa Maria Asunción Selden Roll Mapa Sigüenza Codex Telleriano-Remensis Tira de Tepechpan Anales de Tlatelolco Codex Tlatelolco Mapa Tloztin Historia Tolteca-Chichimeca Codex Totomixtlahuaca Codex Tudela Anales de Tula Codex Vaticanus B Codex Vindobonensis Mexicanus I Codex Xolotl Codex Zouche-Nuttall NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐khbx4
Cached time: 20250814215648
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.490 seconds
Real time usage: 0.618 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1666/1000000
Revision size: 16846/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 82389/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3158/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74289/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.288/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19117319/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  486.578      1 -total
 26.49%  128.913     14 Template:Cite_book
 16.49%   80.214      1 Template:In_lang
 14.87%   72.359      1 Template:Aztecbox
 14.57%   70.891      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.97%   53.355      1 Template:Short_description
 10.44%   50.808      1 Template:Aztec_mythology
 10.00%   48.644      1 Template:Navbox
  6.41%   31.191      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.98%   29.113      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:53197:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215648 and revision id 1296577275. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aztec_mythology&oldid=1296577275 " Categories : Culture of Mexico Aztec mythology and religion Mesoamerican mythology and religion Culture of Latin America Pre-Columbian mythology and religion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with sources in Nahuatl languages (nah) Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 21:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aztec mythology 39 languages Add topic

