Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rationale 2 Meaning 3 Interpretation 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The unexamined life is not worth living 10 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia پښتو Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Saying by Greek philosopher Socrates Part of a series on Socrates " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Gadfly Trial of Socrates Eponymous concepts Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic irony Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic problem Socratic questioning Category v t e " The unexamined life is not worth living " is a famous dictum supposedly uttered by Socrates at his trial for impiety and corrupting youth, for which he was subsequently sentenced to death. The dictum is recorded in Plato 's Apology (38a5–6) as ὁ δὲ ἀνεξέταστος βίος οὐ βιωτὸς ἀνθρώπῳ ( ho dè anexétastos bíos ou biōtòs anthrṓpōi , literally "but the unexamined life is not liveable for a man").

Rationale [ edit ] This statement relates to Socrates' understanding and attitude towards death and his commitment to fulfilling his goal of investigating and understanding the statement of the Pythia (i.e., that there was no one wiser than Socrates). Socrates understood the Pythia 's response to Chaerephon 's question as a communication from the god Apollo and this became Socrates's prime directive, his raison d'être . For Socrates, to be separated from elenchus by exile (preventing him from investigating the statement) was therefore a fate worse than death. Since Socrates was religious and trusted his religious experiences, such as his guiding daimonic voice , he accordingly preferred to continue to seek the truth to the answer to his question, in the after-life, than live a life not identifying the answer on earth.

[ 1 ] Meaning [ edit ] Socrates believed that a life devoid of introspection, self-reflection, and critical thinking is essentially meaningless and lacks value. This quote emphasizes the importance of self-awareness and questioning one's beliefs, actions, and purpose in life.

[ 2 ] The words were supposedly spoken by Socrates at his trial after he chose death, rather than exile. They represent (in modern terms) the noble choice, that is, the choice of death in the face of an alternative.

[ 3 ] Interpretation [ edit ] See also: Trial of Socrates § Interpretations of the trial of Socrates Socrates believed that philosophy – the love of wisdom – was the most important pursuit above all else. For some, he exemplifies more than anyone else in history the pursuit of wisdom through questioning and logical argument, by examining and by thinking. His "examination" of life in this way spilled out into the lives of others, such that they began their own "examination" of life, but he knew they would all die one day, as saying that a life without philosophy – an "unexamined" life – was not worth living.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] As part of Plato's continued relevance to philosophy throughout the history of philosophy as well as contemporary philosophy, Socrates' dictum also represents the continuing import of philosophy as a self-reflecting activity, including reflecting on the activity of philosophy itself. Yafeng Shan writes in "The unexamined philosophy is not worth doing: An introduction to New Directions in Metaphilosophy" that "[o]ne of the most distinctive features of philosophy is self-reflection. Philosophers are not only concerned with metaphysical, epistemological, conceptual, ethical, and aesthetic issues of things around us, they also pay serious attention to the nature, value, methods, and development of philosophy itself." [ 6 ] These areas of philosophic inquiry are also seen in this context as a further "examination" of life without which, in line with Socrates' dictum, one's life is not worth living.

References [ edit ] ^ Brickhouse, Thomas C.; Smith, Nicholas D. (1994).

Plato's Socrates . Oxford University Press. pp. 201–.

ISBN 978-0-19-510111-9 .

^ "Socrates: 'The unexamined life is not worth living.' " .

The Socratic Method . Retrieved 2024-10-30 .

^ Julian Baggini - Wisdom's folly The Guardian newspaper (Guardian News and Media Limited), Thursday 12 May 2005 ^ Spivey, Nigel; Squire, Michael (1 March 2011).

Panorama of the Classical World . Getty Publications. pp. 230–.

ISBN 978-1-60606-056-8 .

^ D.M. Johnson - Socrates and Athens (p.74) Cambridge University Press, 31 Mar 2011 ISBN 0521757487 [Retrieved 2015-04-25] ^ Shan, Yafeng (2022).

"The unexamined philosophy is not worth doing: An introduction to New Directions in Metaphilosophy" .

Metaphilosophy (53): 153– 158 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Plato.

Apology 38a . Plato in Twelve Volumes, Vol. 1 translated by Harold North Fowler; Introduction by W.R.M. Lamb. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1966. via Perseus Tufts J. O. Famakinwa – IS THE UNEXAMINED LIFE WORTH LIVING OR NOT?

Think / Volume 11 / Issue 31 / Summer 2012, pp 97–103 The Royal Institute of Philosophy 2012 J. M. Ambury – Socrates (469—399 B.C.E.) -2biii - The Unexamined Life in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_unexamined_life_is_not_worth_living&oldid=1306034223 " Categories : Aphorisms Socrates Philosophical phrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The unexamined life is not worth living 10 languages Add topic

