Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Values 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Duels and violence 2.1.1 Preston Brooks 2.2 Civil War and modern era 3 Lost Cause 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Citations 7 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 7.1 Primary sources Toggle the table of contents Southern chivalry 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 19th-century cultural concept of the Southern U.S.

Representative Preston Brooks , who claimed the Southern code of honor as cause for physically attacking an abolitionist on the Congress floor; Condemned as "argument versus clubs" in one of many Northern caricatures of "Southern Chivalry" Southern chivalry , or the Cavalier myth , was a popular concept describing the aristocratic honor culture of the Southern United States during the Antebellum , Civil War , and early Postbellum eras. The archetype of a Southern gentleman became popular as a chivalric ideal of the slaveowning planter class , emphasizing both familial and personal honor in addition to the ability to defend either by force if necessary. Southern chivalry is today seen as an attempt to justify the racist and patriarchal stratification of Southern society, with the goal of maintaining or legitimizing the human rights abuses of American slavery .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Prior to the Civil War this concept of a gentleman's honor was frequently used as a basis for duels and other forms of extrajudicial violence , most notably the caning of Charles Sumner by Preston Brooks , and contributed to the militarization of the South by encouraging young men to be taught at military schools.

By the later Antebellum era, the term had taken on an ironic meaning for Northerners and abolitionists , among whom it was used as a pejorative to describe what was perceived as the barbarism of Southern slave owners and their hostility and duplicity in dealing with the North, as was particularly seen in various political caricatures before and during the war.

In the modern era the romanticization of Southern chivalry became a core aspect of the Lost Cause myth , which portrays the Confederate States of America as a morally and culturally superior civilization defending its honor against a materialistic and immoral North.

Values [ edit ] During the Antebellum period the culture of the Southern aristocracy was, according to some historians, loosely codified as a chivalric Southern code , emphasizing the quasi-feudal ability of a Southern gentleman, or Cavalier, [ a ] to control his dependents , including both white family members and black chattel slaves .

[ 2 ] A sense of rivalry against the rest of the Union is described as pervading much of Southern culture during the Antebellum years, when "Exuberant southerners meant to draw [Northerners' attentions] to such presumed aristocratic virtues as gallantry, classical education, polished manners, a high sense of personal and family honor, and contempt for money-grubbing." [ 1 ] Young men of the upper class were expected to be educated in courage, conduct, and the humanities from an early age, including both Victorian literature and the Greek classics .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Such men would then be expected to be sent to a military school, with many military leaders on either side of the Civil War having received their training from such institutions across the South.

[ 2 ] "Knight" and "knightly" entered common parlance as impactful terms of admiration for virility and masculinity.

[ 1 ] The belle as the archetypal Daughter of the South , by Charles Dana Gibson (1909) Southern chivalry also placed great importance on upholding the strict gender roles seen among white Southerners of the time, encouraging a division between strong, educated gentlemen and demure, submissive belles . The Southern woman was seen as inferior to her husband but nonetheless an embodiment of grace and purity whose defense from disgrace was considered a core duty of the dominant gentleman, [ 3 ] such that Julian S. Carr is reported as openly boasting how he had " horsewhipped a Negro wench until her skirts hung in shreds because [...] she had publicly insulted and maligned a Southern lady." [ 4 ] [ b ] The use of the Cavalier myth ultimately cultivated a fictionalized image of what Encyclopedia Virginia described as a "benevolent male authority" across the region's history, enforcing a patriarchal narrative of the upper classes at the expense of black slaves, free women, and other marginalized workers responsible for the economic successes of the South. Rather than expressing actual moral values of the South, the concept of a Southern gentleman is instead argued to have served to justify widespread slavery by recasting the relationship between master and slave as a noble, paternal one rather than the coercive and exploitative reality.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Southern encyclopedist Charles Reagan Wilson argues that "[e]lites used the mythology of Cavaliers and moonlight-and- magnolias plantations to construct a romantic region that obscured differences across the South's regions and among its social groupings." [ 3 ] In 1945, Old South apologist Richard M. Weaver instead defended Southern chivalry as a necessary, if violent and culturally regressive, mechanism to preserve the rules of war originally developed by the upper classes of various nations during their progression out of the European Dark Ages , and lamented the breakdown of such rules during the Civil War as prophetic of the industrialized warfare and mass killing of the world wars era .

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Depiction (from 1913) of the Royalist presence in Virginia during the reign of Oliver Cromwell over the Home Islands Popular concepts of a Southern aristocracy originated with the heritage of the " Old South " as the colonial possessions of the British Empire , when the meteoric growth of the plantation industry led to the entrenchment of wealthy landowners as a dominant socially and politically conservative planter class.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] This aristocracy modeled itself after the old British gentry, with the Cavalier and Southern gentleman myths developing in response to a wider 19th-century nostalgia for the knightly aristocracy of the English Middle Ages .

[ 4 ] [ c ] Later nationalist narratives in particular claimed white Southerners' descent from the Norman knights of William the Conqueror , "a race [...] renowned for its gallantry, chivalry, its honour, its gentleness, and its intellect".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The concept of the Cavalier was instead introduced to the continent through the Virginia Cavaliers and other Royalists of the English Civil Wars , who the Cavalier myth incorrectly states fled to Virginia en masse after their defeat. This original historical archetype of the Old South Royalist, now indicating a gentleman distinguished by his gallantry and code of conduct rather than the original political inclination, [ d ] was further elevated to a folk hero or stock character by American "Cavalier" fiction as it and other forms of Anglo-Saxon nostalgia flourished throughout the 1800s.

Theodore Goodridge Roberts and Molly Elliot Seawell dealt with the Virginia Cavaliers directly in their fiction, [ 5 ] which became influential in the South alongside the more general strain of Medievalist writers like Walter Scott .

[ 9 ] The knightly and Christian values described in such works were seen by proponents as arising to a unique degree in the Southern states as opposed to the more bourgeois North, allowing the gentlemen planters to be easily reimagined as landed knights defending the white Southerners' wealth and culture.

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] Northerners, in response, quickly co-opted Medievalist language as a point of derision against a South they saw as a rural backwater led by regressive aristocrats "[as] idle, ignorant, dissolute, and ferocious as that medieval chivalry to which they are fond of comparing themselves", a negative view which has since been supported by many mainstream historians.

[ 1 ] Duels and violence [ edit ] Main article: Dueling in the Southern United States Dueling was as present in the 19th-Century Southern states as elsewhere in the English-speaking world, causing many deaths among upper-class gentlemen in spite of increasingly strict regulations against such violence.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] While the practice remained in vogue across the United States it turned particularly deadly in the South, where martial ability was extolled as a measure of a Cavalier's worthiness and refusing a challenge would lead to "posting," a type of public ostracism as a coward; "[D]ueling remained the preferred way to defend one's honor -- or even to commit murder . A jilted lover need only wait for a rival's insult, or even manufacture one. He was then free to challenge and kill the rival without condemnation." [ 9 ] Duels were also restricted to contests between gentlemen of equal rank, with Weaver comparing these formal arrangements to the knightly tournaments of the Middle Ages to argue that such gentlemen saw this gamification of combat as the line of separation between themselves and the various "uncivilized" peoples they opposed.

[ 6 ] Congressional politics were no stranger to the spectacle, though Southern politicians preferred to challenge one another over their Northern opponents, believing those less honorable than themselves could not be trusted to follow the formal rules of dueling.

[ 9 ] Preston Brooks [ edit ] "Arguments of the Chivalry", John Henry Bufford with a quote by Henry Ward Beecher Main article: Caning of Charles Sumner Some of the most enduring invocations of Southern honor in both the original and ironic senses come from the Brooks-Sumner affair , which occurred after abolitionist Charles Sumner gave a charged speech on the admission of territories as slave states , titled "the Crime Against Kansas." [ e ] Sumner's speech personally attacked South Carolina Senator Andrew Butler for his activity in favor of this slave power , seeking to present Butler's defense of slavery as a deluded obsession while arguing his sense of chivalry to be closer to that of the satirical Alonso Quijano from Don Quixote than heroes of the actual Medieval romances favored by the Southern elite: The senator from South Carolina has read many books of chivalry, and believes himself a chivalrous knight with sentiments of honor and courage. Of course he has chosen a mistress to whom he has made his vows, and who, though ugly to others, is always lovely to him; though polluted in the sight of the world, is chaste in his sight—I mean the harlot , Slavery. For her, his tongue is always profuse in words. Let her be impeached in character, or any proposition made to shut her out from the extension of her wantonness, and no extravagance of manner or hardihood of assertion is then too great for this senator. The frenzy of Don Quixote, in behalf of his wench , Dulcinea del Toboso , is all surpassed.

[ 10 ] Preston Brooks , a relative of Butler's, became determined to defend Butler's honor; He originally intended to challenge Sumner to a duel, but was convinced by a fellow representative that "A duel was the means by which social equals proved their honor; social inferiors, on the other hand, could be more summarily beaten with a cane ." [ 11 ] Brooks then attacked Sumner on the floor of the Old Senate Chamber on May 22nd, terming his speech libel against South Carolina. The uproar over the event in the North portrayed Sumner as a martyr and the attack as an act of dishonor and hypocrisy, with John L. Magee 's particularly famous political caricature depicting Brooks as a savage and faceless assailant assisted or jeered on by fellow Southerners alongside a caption noting the perceived dissonance between the beliefs of the Southern gentlemen and their actions.

[ 12 ] Civil War and modern era [ edit ] A romanticized depiction of the "splendid chivalry" of the Confederate leadership (1922) By the outbreak of the Civil War, Weaver argues, the concept of Southern chivalry had become well known among both Northerners and Southerners; Like the gentlemanly duels of the Antebellum era, many Southerners had hoped for the war to be a test of their masculinity against that of the North, leading to premature declarations of a Confederate moral victory as early as First Manassas / First Bull Run and subsequent expressions of dismay at the conflict's eventual degeneration into total warfare in place of the "Christian soldiery" attempted by Southern troops. Weaver attempts to distinguish between high-born Confederates like John Gordon , Lee , or Davis , who balked at unconventional forms of warfare, espoused admiration for Grant and other Unionists thought to have proven themselves in battle, or sought to preserve the honor of white Northerners under their occupation, and low-born officers like Mosby or Stonewall Jackson , who instead conformed to the Northern middle-class view of the war as a "simple destruction" of one's opponents.

[ 6 ] [ f ] Confederate leaders made heavy use of the same Medievalist language that had defined the Antebellum aristocracy, with Davis and others referring to the Confederacy's generals as 'knights' or 'Cavaliers' both during and after the war.

[ 1 ] A journalist termed P. G. T. Beauregard a " Sir Galahad " of the South's values.

[ 13 ] The eponymous "Cav Man" mascot of the Virginia Cavaliers , 2009 Forsyth provided an understanding of Postbellum readings of William Shakespeare 's Othello as a paradoxically sympathetic "Southern hero", one who is, in spite of his race, so bound by a gentleman's duty to preserve the honor of the white women around him that he ends the play by murdering Desdemona for what he believes to be her infidelity.

[ 14 ] First-wave feminist and former slaveowner Rebecca Latimer Felton cited chivalric values, namely the duty of gentlemen to provide and care for a lady, when petitioning for women's suffrage in 1915, [ 15 ] and public figures extolled states like South Carolina as standing "for culture, for chivalry, and for exalted citizenship, for higher ideals than which no people ever possessed" well into the Postbellum years.

[ 1 ] The swashbuckling, plume-hatted Virginia Cavalier endures as a popular symbol of the state, including the Virginia Cavaliers sports teams of the University of Virginia .

[ 5 ] Lost Cause [ edit ] Main article: Lost Cause of the Confederacy Lost Cause proponents seek to present the Southerners as tragic heroes fighting for the supposed moral ideals of the Confederacy, arguing that the Northern military victory came about due to an overwhelming industrial and numerical advantage where the Confederacy instead won its victories through the superior prowess and mettle of the average Rebel soldier and his noble leaders.

[ 16 ] The New Georgia Encyclopedia closely compares the Lost Cause to a social religion , [ 17 ] while Laura Brodie identified the early canonization of Robert E. Lee as a Messianic "Saint of the South" with the Victorian English "cult of mourning" in the wake of the death of Prince Albert.

[ 4 ] Assertions of an honorable lost cause of the Confederacy became ubiquitous as the country attempted to rebuild the union between North and South, including the rebranding of the Civil War as a " War of Northern Aggression " to fallaciously argue that "while southerners were a people of honor and purity, Northerners were invaders, a people consumed by lust for power." Works of popular culture like Gone with the Wind (1939) repeatedly extolled the Antebellum South as a lost country of "Cavaliers and Cotton Fields".

[ 17 ] Historian Rollin G. Osterweis identified the "chivalric planter", alongside the Southern belle, the Uncle Remus , and the Confederate veteran, "once a knight of the field and saddle", as the founding stock characters of what later coalesced into the Lost Cause myth.

[ 18 ] Confederate apologia additionally flourished during the Golden Age of Fraternalism that manifested in large part in the universities of the South, including the Knights of the White Camelia from Louisiana and the Kappa Alpha Order of Virginia.

[ 4 ] The Ku Klux Klan also made frequent use of terms like "Knight" or "Empire" in their internal vocabulary and hierarchy .

[ 19 ] Gallery [ edit ] Caricature of the "Southern Gentleman", Union Envelopes Caricature of "Rebel Chivalry" during the Maryland Campaign , Harper's Weekly A quote from Woodrow Wilson used in an intertitle from The Birth of a Nation .

See also [ edit ] History of the Southern United States United Confederate Veterans – American Civil War veterans' organization for soldiers and sailors of the CSA United Daughters of the Confederacy – American hereditary association Southern Cross of Honor – American medal for Confederate veterans (1899–1959) Romanticism – Artistic, literary, musical, and intellectual movement Christianity in the United States List of duels in the United States List of Confederate duels Anglo-Saxonism in the 19th century – Cultural belief system Anti-Tom novels and Confederate literature Colonel (U.S. honorary title) and Category:People using the U.S. civilian title colonel Antebellum architecture – Neoclassical architectural style characteristic of the 19th-century Southern United States King Cotton – Slogan of the pre-Civil War American South Albion's Seed — claims English cavaliers to be key founders of Southern culture References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Spelled Chevalier in primary sources of the time.

^ See Silent Sam for the context of Carr's address.

^ This is something argued to have been seen elsewhere in the Anglosphere with Tennyson 's rechristening of Prince Albert as " Albert the Good " in emulation of the Arthurian Epics .

^ The Encyclopedia Virginia points to the anti-Crown populism of the American Revolutionary War as a cause behind this depoliticization of the concept, with the Virginian George Washington , grandson of planter Royalist John Washington , as a new ideal of a knightly, sophisticated gentleman.

^ See the Bleeding Kansas crisis for further context.

^ Weaver in this context highlights the disproportionate demonization of Sherman over Grant, in spite of the latter having had the far greater impact on the CSA's ultimate prospects over the former.

Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Genovese, Eugene D . "The Chivalric Tradition in the Old South." The Sewanee Review , vol. 108, no. 2, 2000, pp. 188–205. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/27548832 . Accessed 12 May 2024.

^ a b c d e f "The Plantation & Chivalry" , USHistory.org . Retrieved 12 May 2024.

^ a b Charles Reagan Wilson.

The New Encyclopedia of Southern Culture: Volume 4: "Myth, Manners, and Memory". The University of North Carolina Press, 2006.

EBSCOhost .

^ a b c d e Brodie, Laura.

"Myths of Chivalry: Confederate monuments, and how Kara Walker undoes these long-revered symbols of the South" , Museum of Modern Art Magazine, 14 January 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2024.

^ a b c Michie, Ian.

"The Virginia Cavalier" , Encyclopedia Virginia . Retrieved 12 May 2024 ^ a b c d e Weaver, R. M.

"Southern Chivalry and Total War." The Sewanee Review , vol. 53, no. 2, 1945, pp. 267–78. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/27537582 . Accessed 29 Sept. 2023.

^ Falconer, William (June 1860).

"The Difference of Race Between the Northern and Southern People" .

Southern Literary Messenger .

30 (6): 407.

^ McPherson, James M. (1999). "Was Blood Thicker than Water? Ethnic and Civic Nationalism in the American Civil War".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

143 (1): 106.

JSTOR 3181978 .

^ a b c "The American Experience | Dueling, American Style" . PBS.

Archived from the original on 2012-11-11 . Retrieved 2012-10-22 .

^ Storey, Moorfield (1900).

American Statesmen: Charles Sumner . Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. pp.

139– 140.

ISBN 978-0-7222-9204-4 – via Google Books .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Powers, Annie.

""If Men Should Fight:" Dueling as Sectional Politics, 1850–1856," Intersections, Autumn volume, 2012, pp. 2-36.

^ National Museum of American History description.

"Southern Chivalry: Argument versus Clubs" , Harry T. Peters "America on Stone" Lithography Collection.

^ Williams, T. Harry .

P.G.T. Beauregard: Napoleon in Gray . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, pp. 338–340. 1955.

ISBN 0-8071-1974-1 ^ Forsyth, Vikki. "Representing Othello in 1890s New Orleans: The Myth of Chivalry in the South1." The Mississippi Quarterly , vol. 70/71, no. 1, 2017, pp. 3–21.

^ Scott, Thomas Allan (1995).

Cornerstones of Georgia History: Documents that Formed the State . University of Georgia Press. p. 168.

ISBN 978-0-8203-1743-4 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ Landrieu, Mitch.

"How I Learned About the "Cult of the Lost Cause"" , Smithsonian Magazine , 12 March 2018. Retrieved 14 May 2024.

^ a b Williams, David S.

"Lost Cause Religion" , New Georgia Encyclopedia , 2 October 2017. Retrieved 12 May 2024.

^ Osterweis, Rollin Gustav (1973).

The Myth of the Lost Cause, 1865–1900 . Archon Books. p. ix.

ISBN 978-0-208-01318-7 .

^ "Ku Klux Klan: A Report to the Illinois General Assembly" (PDF) . October 1976 . Retrieved June 10, 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cash, W. J.

The Mind of the South , Knompf, 1941.

Drake, Ross (March 2004).

"Duel! Defenders of honor or shoot-on-sight vigilantes? Even in 19th-century America, it was hard to tell" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Archived from the original on 2014-01-07 . Retrieved 2012-10-22 .

Myers, Cayce. "Southern Traitor or American Hero?: The Representation of Robert E. Lee in the Northern Press from 1865 to 1870." Journalism History , vol. 41, no. 4, 2016, pp. 211–21.

Towers, Frank (2010). "The Origins of the Antimodern South: Romantic Nationalism and the Secession Movement in the American South". In Don Harrison Doyle (ed.).

Secession as an International Phenomenon From America's Civil War to Contemporary Separatist Movements . University of Georgia Press. pp.

179– 180, 183– 187.

ISBN 9780820330082 .

Watson, Ritchie D. Jr.

The Cavalier in Virginia Fiction . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985.

Wyatt-Brown, Betrarm.

Southern honor: ethics and behavior in the Old South . New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.

Primary sources [ edit ] "The Southern Chivalry" , New York Times , 8 November 1863. Retrieved 21 May 2024.

"Southern Chivalry" , New Haven Daily Palladium , 29 April 1861. Reprinted under Sixteen Months to Sumter: Newspaper Editorials on the Path to Secession , American Historical Association . Retrieved 21 May 2024.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bnlcs
Cached time: 20250817065047
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.495 seconds
Real time usage: 0.631 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2682/1000000
Revision size: 27939/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 27006/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3012/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59914/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.333/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13516816/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  547.379      1 -total
 31.90%  174.609      7 Template:Annotated_link
 26.87%  147.096      2 Template:Reflist
 16.56%   90.619      2 Template:Cite_journal
 13.24%   72.453      1 Template:Short_description
  8.42%   46.080      1 Template:Gallery
  8.03%   43.946      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.54%   24.846      3 Template:Main
  4.45%   24.365      4 Template:Cite_book
  4.09%   22.364      1 Template:Multiple_image Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:74919269:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817065047 and revision id 1304181563. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southern_chivalry&oldid=1304181563 " Categories : Culture of the Southern United States Lost Cause of the Confederacy Chivalry History of the Southern United States Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from May 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 13:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Southern chivalry 1 language Add topic

