Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Colonial 1.2 American Revolution 1.3 Westward Expansion 1.4 American Civil War 1.5 Reconstruction, Gilded Age and Progressive Era 1.6 World Wars and interwar period 1.7 Cold War 1.8 Modern era 2 Contemporary United States 3 Varieties of American nationalism Toggle Varieties of American nationalism subsection 3.1 Cultural nationalism 3.2 Civic nationalism 3.3 Trumpism 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Historical movements 4.2 Laws 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents American nationalism 13 languages العربية Español Français Galego 한국어 Монгол Português Русский کوردی Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Americanism (ideology) .

Flag of the United States This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e American nationalism is a form of civic , ethnic , cultural or economic influences [ 1 ] found in the United States .

[ 2 ] Essentially, it indicates the aspects that characterize and distinguish the United States as an autonomous political community. The term often explains efforts to reinforce its national identity and self-determination within its national and international affairs.

[ 3 ] All four forms of nationalism have found expression throughout American history, depending on the historical period. The first Naturalization Act of 1790 passed by Congress and George Washington defined American identity and citizenship on racial lines, declaring that only "free white men of good character" could become citizens, and denying citizenship to enslaved black people and anyone of non-European stock; thus it was a form of ethnic nationalism . Some American scholars have argued that the United States government institutionalized a civic nationalism founded upon legal and rational concepts of citizenship, being based on common language and cultural traditions , [ 2 ] and that the Founding Fathers of the United States established the country upon liberal and individualist principles.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of the United States Colonial [ edit ] The United States traces its origins to the Thirteen Colonies founded by Britain in the 17th and early 18th century. Residents identified with Britain until the mid-18th century when the first sense of being "American" emerged. The Albany Plan proposed a union between the colonies in 1754. Although unsuccessful, it served as a reference for future discussions of independence.

John Trumbull 's Declaration of Independence is often identified as a depiction of the signing of the Declaration, but it actually shows the five person drafting committee presenting its work to the Second Continental Congress .

[ 4 ] American Revolution [ edit ] Soon afterward, the colonies faced several common grievances over acts passed by the British Parliament , including taxation without representation . Americans were in general agreement that only their own colonial legislatures —and not Parliament in London—could pass internal taxes. Parliament vigorously insisted otherwise and no compromise was found. The London government punished Boston for the Boston Tea Party , and the Thirteen Colonies united and formed the Continental Congress , which lasted from 1774 to 1789. Fighting broke out in 1775 and the sentiment swung to independence in early 1776, influenced significantly by the appeal to American nationalism by Thomas Paine . His pamphlet Common Sense was a runaway best seller in 1776, read aloud in taverns and coffee houses.

[ 5 ] Congress unanimously issued a Declaration of Independence announcing a new nation of independent states had formed, the United States of America.

American Patriots won the American Revolutionary War and received generous peace terms from Britain in 1783. The minority of Loyalists (loyal to King George III) could remain or leave, but about 80% remained and became full American citizens.

[ 6 ] Frequent parades along with new rituals and ceremonies—and a new flag—provided popular occasions for expressing a spirit of American nationalism.

[ 7 ] The new nation operated under the very weak national government set up by the Articles of Confederation , and most Americans prioritized their state over the nation. Nationalists led by George Washington , Alexander Hamilton , and James Madison had Congress call a constitutional convention in 1787. It produced the Constitution for a strong national government which was debated in every state and unanimously adopted. It went into effect in 1789 as the first modern constitutional liberal democracy based on the consent of the governed , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] with Washington as the first President.

[ 11 ] Westward Expansion [ edit ] In an 1858 speech, future President Abraham Lincoln alluded to a form of American civic nationalism originating from the tenets of the Declaration of Independence as a force for national unity in the United States, stating that it was a method for uniting diverse peoples of different ethnic ancestries into a common nationality: If they look back through this history to trace their connection with those days by blood, they find they have none, they cannot carry themselves back into that glorious epoch and make themselves feel that they are part of us, but when they look through that old Declaration of Independence they find that those old men say that "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal", and then they feel that moral sentiment taught in that day evidences their relation to those men, that it is the father of all moral principle in them, and that they have a right to claim it as though they were blood of the blood, and flesh of the flesh of the men who wrote the Declaration, and so they are. That is the electric cord in that Declaration that links the hearts of patriotic and liberty-loving men together, that will link those patriotic hearts as long as the love of freedom exists in the minds of men throughout the world.

— Abraham Lincoln , address to Chicagoan voters, July 10, 1858 [ 12 ] American Civil War [ edit ] White Southerners increasingly felt alienated—they saw themselves as becoming second-class citizens as aggressive anti-slavery Northerners tried to end their ability to enslave people to the fast-growing western territories. They questioned whether their loyalty to the nation trumped their commitment to their state and their way of life since it was so intimately bound up with slavery and whether they could enslave people.

[ 13 ] A sense of Southern nationalism was starting to emerge; however, it was rudimentary as late as 1860 when the election of Lincoln was a signal for most of the slave states in the South to secede and form a new nation.

[ 14 ] The Confederate government insisted the nationalism was real and imposed increasing burdens on the population in the name of independence and nationalism. The fierce combat record of the Confederates demonstrates their commitment to the death for independence. The government and army refused to compromise and were militarily overwhelmed in 1865.

[ 15 ] By the 1890s, the white South felt vindicated through its belief in the newly constructed memory of the Lost Cause of the Confederacy . The North came to accept or at least tolerate racial segregation and disfranchisement of black voters in the South. The spirit of American nationalism had returned to Dixie .

[ 16 ] Reconstruction, Gilded Age and Progressive Era [ edit ] An 1869 Thomas Nast cartoon espousing American exceptionalism shows Americans of different ancestries and ethnic backgrounds sit together at a dinner table with Columbia to enjoy a Thanksgiving meal as equal members of the American citizenry while Uncle Sam prepares and sets the table, thus espousing an inclusive form of American nationalism that is civic, where membership in the nation is not dependent upon ethnicity.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The North's triumph in the American Civil War marked a significant transition in American national identity. The ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment settled the fundamental question of national identity, such as the criteria for becoming a citizen of the United States. Everyone born in the territorial boundaries of the United States or those areas and subject to its jurisdiction was an American citizen, regardless of ethnicity or social status (indigenous people on reservations became citizens in 1924, while indigenous people off reservations had always been citizens).

[ 19 ] In the early 20th century, one of the highest-profile advocates for American nationalism was Theodore Roosevelt . Roosevelt's policies both at home and abroad, which came to be known as the New Nationalism , included an element of a strong national identity. He insisted that one had to be 100% American, not a hyphenated American who juggled multiple loyalties.

[ citation needed ] With a fast-growing industrial economy, immigrants were welcome from Europe, Canada, Mexico, and Cuba, and millions came. Becoming a full citizen was easy, requiring the completion of paperwork over five years.

[ 20 ] However, new Asian arrivals were not welcome. The U.S. imposed restrictions on most Chinese immigrants in the 1880s and informal restrictions on most Japanese in 1907. By 1924, it was difficult for any Asian to enter the United States, but children born in the United States to Asian parents were full citizens. The restrictions were ended on the Chinese in the 1940s and on other Asians in 1965.

[ 21 ] Newspaper reporting the annexation of the Republic of Hawaii in 1898 World Wars and interwar period [ edit ] After the United States entered World War I , nationalism surged. Americans enlisted in the military en masse, motivated by propaganda and war films.

[ 22 ] There was very little resistance to conscription.

[ 23 ] By the First World War, many native-born Protestants were skeptical of recent immigrants to the United States, who were often Catholic or Jewish and spoke languages other than English in their daily lives.  There was a strong belief among many in favor of "one hundred percent Americanism", in contrast to "hyphenated Americanism".  This was exemplified by the film The Birth of a Nation in 1915 and the rise of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1910s and 20s.  In the early- to-mid 20th century, public school education became compulsory in many jurisdictions, with parochial schools being restricted or outlawed.  The school day typically began with the Pledge of Allegiance .  It was in this milieu that the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed to regulate immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe.  However, during this period, citizenship was also extended to Native Americans, both on- and off-reservation, for the first time.

World War II led to unprecedented nationalism in the United States. After the 1941 Attack on Pearl Harbor , many Americans enlisted in the military.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] During the war, much of American life centered on contributing to the war effort, mainly through volunteer efforts, entry into the labor force, rationing , price controls , and income saving. Citizens willingly accepted these sacrifices out of a sense of nationalism, feeling they were for the greater good.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Even members of anti-war groups like the pacifist churches, anti-war movement , and conscientious objectors abandoned their pacifism for the sake of the war, feeling that World War II was a just war.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 24 ] Cold War [ edit ] Following World War II and beginning with the Cold War , the United States emerged as a world superpower and abandoned its traditional policy of isolationism in favor of interventionism . With this, nationalism took on a new form in the U.S., as Americans began to view their country as a world police with the ultimate goal of eradicating communism from the world. This nationalist fervor was fueled by US involvement in the Korean War , Vietnam War , Bay of Pigs Invasion , and many other conflicts .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Modern era [ edit ] The September 11 attacks of 2001 led to a wave of nationalist expression in the United States. The start of the war on terror was accompanied by a rise in military enlistment that included not only lower-income Americans but also middle-class and upper-class citizens .

[ 32 ] This nationalism continued long into the War in Afghanistan and Iraq War .

[ 33 ] Contemporary United States [ edit ] Nationalism and Americanism remain topics in the modern United States. Political scientist Paul McCartney, for instance, argues that as a nation defined by a creed and sense of mission, Americans tend to equate their interests with those of humanity, which informs their global posture.

[ 34 ] In some instances, it may be considered a form of ethnocentrism and American exceptionalism .

Due to the distinctive circumstances involved throughout history in American politics , its nationalism has developed concerning loyalty to a set of liberal, universal political ideals and perceived accountability to propagate those principles globally. Acknowledging the conception of the United States as accountable for spreading liberal change and promoting democracy throughout the world's politics and governance has defined practically all of American foreign policy . Therefore, democracy promotion is not just another measure of foreign policy, but it is instead the fundamental characteristic of their national identity and political determination.

[ 35 ] Varieties of American nationalism [ edit ] In a 2016 paper in the American Sociological Review , "Varieties of American Popular Nationalism", sociologists Bart Bonikowski and Paul DiMaggio report on research findings supporting the existence of at least four kinds of American nationalists, including, groups which range from the smallest to the largest: (1) the disengaged, (2) creedal or civic nationalists , (3) ardent nationalists, and (4) restrictive nationalists.

[ 36 ] Bonikowski and Dimaggio's analysis of these four groups found that ardent nationalists made up about 24% of their study, and they comprised the largest of the two groups Bonikowski and Dimaggio consider "extreme". Members of this group closely identified with the United States, were very proud of their country and strongly associated themselves with factors of national hubris. They felt that a "true American" must speak English and live in the U.S. for most of their life. Fewer, but 75%, believe that a "true American" must be a Christian, and 86% believe a "true American" must be born in the country. Further, ardent nationalists thought that Jews , Muslims , agnostics and naturalized citizens were something less than genuinely American. The second class, Bonikowski and DiMaggio considered "extreme", was the smallest of the four classes because its members comprised 17% of their respondents.

The disengaged showed low pride in the government institutions, and they did not fully identify with the United States. Their lack of pride extended to American democracy, American history, political equality in the U.S., and the country's political influence. This group was the least nationalistic of all of the four groups which they identified.

[ 36 ] Studies supported the idea that the American flag increased nationalism.

[ 37 ] The two remaining classes were less homogeneous in their responses than the ardent nationalists and disengaged were.

Restrictive nationalists had low levels of pride in America and its institutions, but they defined a "true American" in ways that were markedly "exclusionary". This group was the largest of the four because its members comprised 38% of the study's respondents. While their levels of national identification and pride were moderate, they espoused beliefs that caused them to hold restrictive definitions of "true Americans"; for instance, their definitions excluded non-Christians." The final group to be identified was creedal nationalists (also known as civic nationalists), whose members made up 22% of the study's respondents who were studied. This group believed in liberal values, was proud of the United States, and its members held the fewest restrictions on who could be considered a true American. They closely identified with their country, which they felt "very close" to, and were proud of its achievements. Bonikowski and Dimaggio dubbed the group "creedal" because their beliefs most closely approximated the precepts of what is widely considered the American creed .

[ 36 ] As part of their findings, the authors report that the connection between big money, religious belief, and national identity is significant. The belief that being a Christian is an integral part of what it means to be a "true American" is the most significant factor which separates the creedal nationalists and the disengaged from the restrictive and ardent nationalists. They also determined that their groupings cut across partisan boundaries, and they also help to explain what they perceive is the recent success of populist , nativist , and racist rhetoric in American politics.

[ 36 ] According to a 2021 American Journal of Sociology study by Bart Bonikowski, Yuval Feinstein, and Sean Bock, competing understandings of American nationhood had emerged in the United States in the prior two decades. They find, "nationalism has become sorted by party, as Republican identifiers have come to define America in more exclusionary and critical terms and Democrats have increasingly endorsed inclusive and positive conceptions of nationhood." [ 38 ] Cultural nationalism [ edit ] Cultural nationalism has historically been an integral element of American nationalism. Such cultural nationalists form group allegiances based on a common cultural heritage rather than race or political party. This heritage may include culture ( Culture of the United States ), language ( English language ), religion ( Christianity ), history ( History of the United States ), ideology ( Democracy ), and symbols ( National symbols of the United States ). Cultural nationalism is distinct from ethnic nationalism , in which race and ethnicity are emphasized over culture and language.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Nationalism gained a cultural character beginning in the late 18th century. Multiple historical ideas have shaped modern cultural nationalism in the U.S., including the concept of the nation state , the fusion of nationalism and religion into religious nationalism , and identity politics .

[ 40 ] Civic nationalism [ edit ] American nationalism sometimes takes the form of Civic nationalism , a liberal form of nationalism based on values such as freedom , equality , and individual rights . Civic nationalists view nationhood as a political identity. They argue that liberal democratic principles and loyalty define a civic nation. Membership is open to every citizen, regardless of culture, ethnicity, or language, as long as they believe in these values.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Trumpism [ edit ] See also: New Nationalism (21st century) § United States , Trumpism , and America First (policy) Donald Trump flag President Donald Trump was described as a nationalist, [ 43 ] and he embraced the term himself.

[ 44 ] Several officials within his administration were described as representing a "nationalist wing" within the federal government, [ 45 ] including former White House Chief Strategist Steve Bannon , [ 46 ] Senior Advisor to the President Stephen Miller , [ 46 ] Director of the National Trade Council Peter Navarro , [ 47 ] former Deputy Assistant to the President Sebastian Gorka , [ 46 ] Special Assistant to the President Julia Hahn , [ 48 ] former Deputy Assistant to the President for Strategic Communications Michael Anton , [ 49 ] Secretary of State Mike Pompeo , [ 50 ] Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross , [ 51 ] Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer , [ 52 ] former acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell , [ 53 ] former National Security Advisor John R. Bolton [ 54 ] and former National Security Advisor Michael Flynn .

[ 55 ] In a February 2017 article in The Atlantic , journalist Uri Friedman described "populist economic nationalist" as a new nationalist movement "modeled on the ' populism ' of the 19th-century U.S. President Andrew Jackson " which was introduced in Trump's remarks to the Republican National Convention in a speech written by Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon. Miller had adopted Senator Jeff Sessions ' form of "nation-state populism" while working as his aide.

[ 56 ] By September 2017, The Washington Post journalist Greg Sargent observed that "Trump's nationalism" as "defined" by Bannon, Breitbart , Miller and "the rest of the 'populist economic nationalist ' contingent around Trump" was beginning to have wavering support among Trump voters.

[ 57 ] Some Republican members of Congress were also described as nationalists during the Trump era, such as Representative Steve King , [ 58 ] Representative Matt Gaetz , [ 59 ] Senator Tom Cotton [ 60 ] and Senator Josh Hawley .

[ 61 ] During the Trump era, commonly identified American nationalist political commentators included Rush Limbaugh , Ann Coulter , [ 62 ] Michelle Malkin , [ 63 ] Lou Dobbs , [ 64 ] Alex Jones , [ 65 ] Charlie Kirk , [ 66 ] Laura Ingraham , [ 62 ] Candace Owens , [ 67 ] Michael Savage , [ 68 ] Tucker Carlson , [ 69 ] Mike Cernovich , [ 70 ] and Nick Fuentes .

[ 71 ] See also [ edit ] United States portal American ancestry American conservatism American exceptionalism American literary nationalism American nativism American nationalism and sport American neo-nationalism American patriotism Americanism Americanization Americentrism Christian Patriot Liberal nationalism Melting Pot National symbols of the United States Paleoconservatism Patriot movement Propaganda in the United States Pax Americana Salad bowl (cultural idea) White nationalism in the United States Historical movements [ edit ] Manifest Destiny New Nationalism (Theodore Roosevelt) American nationalist poets Walt Whitman and Langston Hughes Laws [ edit ] Emergency Quota Act Immigration Act of 1924 References [ edit ] Notes ^ Barbour, Christine & Wright, Gerald C. (January 15, 2013).

Keeping the Republic: Power and Citizenship in American Politics, 6th Edition The Essentials . CQ Press. pp.

31– 33.

ISBN 978-1-4522-4003-9 . Retrieved January 6, 2015 .

Who Is An American? Native-born and naturalized citizens Shklar, Judith N. (1991).

American Citizenship: The Quest for Inclusion . The Tanner Lectures on Human Values. Harvard University Press. pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 9780674022164 . Retrieved December 17, 2012 .

Slotkin, Richard (2001).

"Unit Pride: Ethnic Platoons and the Myths of American Nationality" .

American Literary History .

13 (3): 469– 498.

doi : 10.1093/alh/13.3.469 .

S2CID 143996198 . Retrieved December 17, 2012 .

But it also expresses a myth of American nationality that remains vital in our political and cultural life: the idealized self-image of a multiethnic, multiracial democracy , hospitable to differences but united by a common sense of national belonging.

Eder, Klaus & Giesen, Bernhard (2001).

European Citizenship: Between National Legacies and Postnational Projects . Oxford University Press. pp.

25– 26.

ISBN 9780199241200 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

In inter-state relations, the American nation state presents its members as a monistic political body-despite ethnic and national groups in the interior.

Petersen, William; Novak, Michael & Gleason, Philip (1982).

Concepts of Ethnicity . Harvard University Press. p. 62.

ISBN 9780674157262 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

To be or to become an American, a person did not have to be of any particular national, linguistic, religious, or ethnic background. All he had to do was to commit himself to the political ideology centered on the abstract ideals of liberty, equality, and republicanism. Thus the universalist ideological character of American nationality meant that it was open to anyone who willed to become an American.

Hirschman, Charles; Kasinitz, Philip & Dewind, Josh (November 4, 1999).

The Handbook of International Migration: The American Experience . Russell Sage Foundation. p.

300 .

ISBN 978-1-61044-289-3 .

Halle, David (July 15, 1987).

America's Working Man: Work, Home, and Politics Among Blue Collar Property Owners . University of Chicago Press. p. 233.

ISBN 978-0-226-31366-5 .

The first, and central, way involves the view that Americans are all those persons born within the boundaries of the United States or admitted to citizenship by the government.

^ a b Motyl 2001 , p. 16.

^ Miscevic, Nenad (March 31, 2018). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved March 31, 2018 – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Wills, Inventing America , 348.

^ Loughran, Trish (March 1, 2006). "Disseminating Common Sense: Thomas Paine and the Problem of the Early National Bestseller".

American Literature .

78 (1): 1– 28.

doi : 10.1215/00029831-78-1-1 .

ISSN 0002-9831 .

^ Savelle, Max (1962). "Nationalism and Other Loyalties in the American Revolution".

The American Historical Review .

67 (4): 901– 923.

doi : 10.2307/1845245 .

JSTOR 1845245 .

^ Waldstreicher, David (1995). "Rites of Rebellion, Rites of Assent: Celebrations, Print Culture, and the Origins of American Nationalism".

The Journal of American History .

82 (1): 37– 61.

doi : 10.2307/2081914 .

JSTOR 2081914 .

^ Barksdale, Nate (October 28, 2018).

"What is the world's oldest democracy?" .

history.com .

Archived from the original on October 5, 2019 . Retrieved October 21, 2021 .

^ Markoff, John. "Where and When Was Democracy Invented?" Comparative Studies in Society and History, Vol. 41, No. 4. (Oct. 1999), pp. 660-690.

"Comparative Studies in Society and History" (PDF) . Cambridge University Press.

^ Gascoigne, Bamber . "History of Democracy". 2001.

"History of Democracy: Modern Democracy" .

^ Larson, Edward J. (2016) George Washington, Nationalist . University of Virginia Press ^ Address to Chicagoan voters (July 10, 1858); quoted in Roy P. Basler, ed., The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln (1953), vol 2 p. 501.

^ Kohn, Hans (1961).

The Idea of Nationalism: A Study in Its Origins and Background . Macmillan.

OCLC 1115989 .

^ McCardell, John (1979).

The Idea of a Southern Nation: Southern Nationalists and Southern Nationalism, 1830–1860 . Norton.

ISBN 978-0393012415 .

OCLC 4933821 .

^ Quigley, Paul (2012) Shifting Grounds: Nationalism and the American South, 1848–1865 ^ Foster, Gaines M. (1988) Ghosts of the Confederacy: Defeat, the Lost Cause and the Emergence of the New South, 1865–1913 ^ Kennedy, Robert C. (November 2001).

"Uncle Sam's Thanksgiving Dinner, Artist: Thomas Nast" .

On This Day: HarpWeek . The New York Times Company. Archived from the original on November 23, 2001 . Retrieved November 23, 2001 .

^ Walfred, Michele (July 2014).

"Uncle Sam's Thanksgiving Dinner: Two Coasts, Two Perspectives" .

Thomas Nast Cartoons . Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 5, 2016 .

^ Larsen, Charles E. (1959). "Nationalism and States' Rights in Commentaries on the Constitution after the Civil War".

The American Journal of Legal History .

3 (4): 360– 369.

doi : 10.2307/844323 .

JSTOR 844323 .

^ Archdeacon, Thomas J.

(2000) European Immigration from the Colonial Era to the 1920s: A Historical Perspective ^ Lee, Erika (2007). "The "Yellow Peril" and Asian Exclusion in the Americas".

Pacific Historical Review .

76 (4): 537– 562.

doi : 10.1525/phr.2007.76.4.537 .

^ Kennedy, David M.

Over Here: The First World War and American Society (2004) ^ John Whiteclay Chambers II, To Raise an Army: The Draft Comes to Modern America (1987) ^ a b David Kennedy, Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929-1945 (2001) ^ Prange, Gordon W.; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1982).

At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor .

^ Schneider, Carl G and Schneider, Dorothy; World War II ISBN 1438108907 ^ Harold G. Vatter, The U.S. Economy in World War II (1988) ^ Mitchell K. Hall, 'A Withdrawal from Peace: The Historical Response to War of the Church of God (Anderson, Indiana),' Journal of Church and State (1985) 27#2 ^ Scott H. Bennett, " American Pacifism, the 'Greatest Generation,' and World War II" in G. Kurt Piehler and Sidney Pash, The United States and the Second World War: New Perspectives on Diplomacy, War, and the Home Front (2010) Online Archived 2020-01-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gaddis, John Lewis (2005).

The Cold War: A New History .

^ Blakeley, Ruth (2009).

State Terrorism and Neoliberalism: The North in the South .

Routledge . p.

92 .

ISBN 978-0415686174 .

^ "The Demographics of Military Enlistment After 9/11" . Archived from the original on February 26, 2010 . Retrieved July 6, 2007 .

^ Sanger, David E.

(2012). "1–5".

Confront and Conceal: Obama's Secret Wars and Surprising Use of American Power .

^ McCartney, Paul (August 28, 2002).

The Bush Doctrine and American Nationalism . Annual meeting of the American Political Science Association. American Political Science Association. McCartney-2002. Archived from the original on August 12, 2007 . Retrieved February 6, 2011 .

^ Monten, Jonathan (2005) "The Roots of the Bush Doctrine: Power, Nationalism, and Democracy Promotion in U.S. Strategy" International Security v.29 n.4 pp.112-156 ^ a b c d Bonikowski, Bart and DiMaggio, Paul (2016) "Varieties of American Popular Nationalism" .

American Sociological Review , 81(5): 949–980.

^ Kemmelmeier, Marcus (December 2008).

"Sowing Patriotism, But Reaping Nationalism? Consequences of Exposure to the American Flag" .

Political Psychology .

29 (6): 859– 879.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9221.2008.00670.x .

^ Bonikowski, Bart; Feinstein, Yuval; Bock, Sean (2021).

"The Partisan Sorting of "America": How Nationalist Cleavages Shaped the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election" .

American Journal of Sociology .

127 (2): 492– 561.

doi : 10.1086/717103 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

S2CID 246017190 .

^ "Nationalism And Ethnicity: Cultural Nationalism" .

Encyclopedia.com . Infonautics.

^ a b Kramer, Lloyd (2011).

Nationalism in Europe and America: Politics, Cultures, and Identities Since 1775 . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 9780807834848 .

^ Auer, Stefan (2004).

Liberal Nationalism in Central Europe . Routledge.

ISBN 1134378602 .

^ Anna Stilz. "Civic Nationalism and Language Policy".

Philosophy & Public Affairs .

37 (3).

^ "Trump visits Poland and not everyone is happy about it" .

USA Today . July 3, 2017.

^ "Trump: I Am A Nationalist In A True Sense" .

RealClearPolitics . February 27, 2017.

^ "The White House struggle between Stephen Bannon and H.R. McMaster is apparently coming to a head" .

The Week . August 14, 2017.

^ a b c "Trump pressured to dump nationalist wing" .

The Hill . August 15, 2017.

^ Sherman, Gabriel (December 21, 2017).

" "I Have Power": Is Steve Bannon Running for President?" .

vanityfair.com . Retrieved March 31, 2018 .

^ "Breitbart writer expected to join White House staff" .

Politico . January 22, 2017.

^ "The Populist Nationalist on Trump's National Security Council" .

The Atlantic . March 24, 2017.

^ " 'Congressman from Koch' Mike Pompeo tapped to replace Tillerson at State Department" .

Marketwatch . March 13, 2018.

^ "Trump expected to tap billionaire investor Wilbur Ross for commerce secretary" .

The Washington Post . November 24, 2016.

^ "The Little-Known Trade Adviser Who Wields Enormous Power in Washington" .

The New York Times . March 8, 2018.

^ "Grenell to join Trump campaign" .

Politico . May 26, 2020.

^ "US nationalist policymakers take hold of foreign policy" .

Financial Times . March 23, 2018.

^ "The Alt-Right and Glenn Greenwald Versus H.R. McMaster" .

New York . August 8, 2017.

^ Friedman, Uri (February 27, 2017).

"What is a populist? And is Donald Trump one?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved September 15, 2017 .

^ Sargent, Greg (September 15, 2017).

"Trump's top supporters are in a full-blown panic. They're right to be afraid" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved September 15, 2017 .

^ "Steve King ingests the poison of nationalist ideology" .

Washington Examiner . March 13, 2017.

^ " 'It's a horror film': Matt Gaetz warns of Democratic rule at Republican convention" .

Tampa Bay Times . August 25, 2020.

^ "How Sen. Tom Cotton emerged as one of Trumpism's leading voices - The Washington Post" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Polishing the Nationalist Brand in the Trump Era" .

The New York Times . July 19, 2019.

^ a b Brownstein, Ronald (April 16, 2017).

"Why Trump's Agenda Is Tilting in a More Conventional Direction" .

The Atlantic .

^ "Free speech continues to be squelched from left and right".

Atlanta Journal-Constitution . Atlanta. January 16, 2020.

^ "Donald Trump 'Cherishes' Lou Dobbs So Much He Puts Him on Speakerphone for Oval Office Meetings" .

The Daily Beast . October 26, 2019.

^ "Donald Trump still calls Alex Jones for advice, claims the InfoWars founder and far right conspiracy theorist" .

The Independent . February 23, 2017.

^ Stone, Peter (October 23, 2021).

"Money and misinformation: how Turning Point USA became a formidable pro-Trump force" .

The Guardian . Retrieved October 26, 2021 .

^ "After backlash, conservative pundit Candace Owens clarifies viral Hitler comment" .

^ "Misunderstood Nationalist — Understanding Michael Savage" . National Summary. Archived from the original on January 22, 2008 . Retrieved June 24, 2009 .

^ Coppins, McKay (February 23, 2017).

"Tucker Carlson: The Bow-Tied Bard of Populism" .

The Atlantic .

^ Stack, Liam (April 5, 2017).

"Who Is Mike Cernovich? A Guide" .

The New York Times .

^ "Nick Fuentes" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved January 23, 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Arieli, Yehoshua (1964) Individualism and Nationalism in American Ideology . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Birkin, Carol (2017) A Sovereign People: The Crises of the 1790s and the Birth of American Nationalism . Basic Books, ISBN 978-0-465-06088-7 .

Faust, Drew G. (1988) The Creation of Confederate Nationalism: Ideology and Identity in the Civil War South . Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press.

Kramer, Lloyd S. (2011) Nationalism in Europe and America: Politics, Cultures, and Identities Since 1775 . Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 9780807872000 Lawson, Melinda (2002) Patriot Fires: Forging a New American Nationalism in the Civil War North . Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas.

Li, Qiong, and Marilynn Brewer (2004) "What Does It Mean to Be an American? Patriotism, Nationalism, and American Identity After September 11." Political Psychology . v.25 n.5 pp. 727–39.

Motyl, Alexander J.

(2001).

Encyclopedia of Nationalism, Volume II . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-227230-1 .

Maguire, Susan E. (2016) "Brother Jonathan and John Bull build a nation: the transactional nature of American nationalism in the early nineteenth century." National Identities v.18 n.2 pp. 179–98.

Mitchell, Lincoln A. (2016) The Democracy Promotion Paradox . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

ISBN 9780815727026 Quigley, Paul (2012) Shifting Grounds: Nationalism and the American South, 1848-1865 . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199735488 Schildkraut, Deborah J. 2014. " Boundaries of American Identity: Evolving Understandings of "Us".

" Annual Review of Political Science Staff (December 13, 2016) "How similar is America in 2016 to Germany in 1933" .

Boston Public Radio Staff (December 20, 2005).

"French anti-Americanism: Spot the difference" .

The Economist .

Trautsch, Jasper M. (September 2016) "The origins and nature of American nationalism," National Identities v.18 n.3 pp. 289–312.

Trautsch, Jasper M.

(2018) The Genesis of America; U.S. Foreign Policy and the Formation of National Identity, 1793 - 1815 . Cambridge Waldstreicher, David (1997) In the Midst of Perpetual Fetes: The Making of American Nationalism, 1776–1820 . Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press Zelinsky, Wilbur (1988) Nation into State: The Shifting Symbolic Foundations of American Nationalism . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

External links [ edit ] Media related to American nationalism at Wikimedia Commons v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e Ethnic nationalism Nationalisms in Africa North Arab Berber Coptic Egyptian Pharaonism Kabyle Sahrawi East Acholi Amhara Hutu Oromo Somali Tigrayan Nigeria & West Igbo Ogoni Ewe Southern Afrikaner Americas North American Chicano Greenlandic Indigenous Canadian Lakota Québécois Sequoyahan Caribbean Haitian Puerto Rican South Criollo Mapuche Peruvian Asia Middle East Arab Assyrian Iranian Iraqi Jewish Diaspora Zionism Jordanian Kurdish Lebanese Palestinian Syrian Turkish in Cyprus Zaza Eastern Ainu Cantonese Chinese Han chauvinist Hongkonger Japanese Korean Manchu Okinawan Ryukyu Taiwanese Tibetan South Assamese Bengali in Bangladesh Bodo Dravidian Hazara Meitei Naga Punjabi Sindhi Sinhalese Sylheti Tamil in Sri Lanka Tripuri Southeast Filipino Khmer Malay Mon Shan Thai Vietnamese North & Central Baloch Buryat Mongolian South Mongolia Pan-Turkism Pashtun Siberian Uyghur Yakut South Caucasus Armenian Azerbaijani Georgian Laz Europe Southeastern Albanian in Albania in Kosovo in North Macedonia Aromanian Bosniak Croatian Greek in Cyprus Macedonian Moldovan Montenegrin Romani (Gypsy) Romanian Serbian Central Austrian Bavarian Czech Frisian German in Austria Völkisch Hungarian Polish Silesian Slovak Slovenian Eastern Belarusian Crimean Russian Ukrainian Yiddish North Caucasus Balkar and Karachay Circassian Ingush Lezgin Ossetian Volga Region Bashkir Chuvash Tatar Western Breton Dutch Flemish French Irish Occitan Walloon United Kingdom British Cornish English Scottish Ulster Welsh Southern Arpitan Basque Corsican Italy Italian Lombard Padanian Sardinian Sicilian Venetian Spain Spanish Andalusian Aragonese Asturian Basque Canarian Castilian Catalan Galician Navarrese Valencian Northern Danish Estonian Faroese Finnish Icelandic Latvian Lithuanian Norwegian Oceania Australian Hawaiian Indigenous Australian Māori Pan-nationalism African Arab Asian Bangladeshi Caucasian Celtic Chinese Congolese Czechoslovak European Finnic Germanic Hispanic Hui Iberian Indian Iranian Iraqi Korean Latin Libyan Mongolian Native American Nigerian Nordic Oceanian Pakistani Russian Scandinavian Slavic South Slavic Tunisian Turanian Turkic Ugandan Movements Americas & Oceania Greenland Hawaii Māori Mapuche Wallmapuwen Asia Aceh Assam Assyrian Champa East Turkestan Guangdong Inner Mongolian Muslim (Philippines) Papua Pasundan Patani Riau Ryukyu Siberian Taiwan Tibetan Europe Alsace Catalan Faroese Flemish Åland Galician (Spain) Kashubian Corsican Scottish Silesian Székely Vojvodina Walloon Welsh Projects Arakan Assyria Azawad Balawaristan Balochistan Bangsamoro Basque Country (greater region) Catalan Countries Chameria Champa Chechen Republic of Ichkeria Circassia Crimea Hatay State Hazarajat Danzig Donetsk East Turkestan Herzeg-Bosnia Hutu Power Ilirida Karakalpakstan Karelia Katarism Ketuanan Melayu Kurdistan Lezgistan Luhansk Manchukuo Marathi Abhimaangeet Northern Epirus Occitania Ossetia Pashtunistan Republika Srpska Santa Cruz Sápmi Saraikistan Silesia Sindhudesh Székely Land Tamil Eelam Tibet Timor Raya Other Local (China) Racial American Indigenous Black German Indigenous White Note : Forms of nationalism based primarily on ethnic groups are listed above. This does not imply that all nationalists with a given ethnicity subscribe to that form of ethnic nationalism .

v t e Alt-right Ideas Core American Nationalism Antifeminism Fourteen Words Ghost skin White ethnostate White nationalism White supremacy Conspiracy theories Cultural Marxism Eurabia George Soros Great Replacement Homosexual agenda Kalergi Plan Murder of Seth Rich New World Order Pizzagate White genocide Zionist Occupation Government Related Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Boogaloo movement Christian Identity DezNat Identitarian movement Incel Kinism Manosphere Men Going Their Own Way Neo-Confederates Neo-fascism Neo-nationalism Neo-Nazism Nouvelle Droite Paleoconservatism Paleolibertarianism QAnon Radical right Reactionary Dark Enlightenment Third Position Ultraconservatism Online culture Alt-tech 4chan /pol/ 8chan BitChute Epik Gab Gettr Minds Parler Rumble Terrorgram Truth Social Voat (defunct) Websites American Renaissance Breitbart News The Daily Stormer Infowars Kingdom Identity Ministries Kuruc.info Metapedia Occidental Observer The Occidental Quarterly Rebel News Red Ice Reddit (r/The_Donald) The Right Stuff StoneToss Stormfront TruNews Vanguard News Network VDARE WorldNetDaily Memes " Basket of deplorables " " Beta male " " Cuckservative " Fashwave Happy Merchant " It's okay to be white " Moon Man NPC OK gesture " Owning the libs " Pepe the Frog " Red pill and blue pill " Right Wing Death Squad " Remove Kebab " " Shadilay " " Snowflake " " Social justice warrior " Trash Doves Triple parentheses Undercut Groups AltRight Corporation American Freedom Party Anti-Communist Action The Base Deplorable Pride Diagolon Groypers Hundred-Handers Identity Evropa (defunct) Les Identitaires National Policy Institute Patriot Front Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Traditionalist Worker Party (defunct) Vanguard America Washington Summit Publishers Events Incidents Berkeley protests Comicsgate DeploraBall End Domestic Terrorism rally Gamergate Macron e-mail leaks Unite the Right rally Unite the Right 2 Attacks Assault of DeAndre Harris Charlottesville car attack Christchurch mosque shootings Murder of Blaze Bernstein Murder of Timothy Caughman Pittsburgh synagogue shooting Portland train attack Lists Timeline of activities involving the Proud Boys People James Allsup Andrew Anglin Andrew "weev" Auernheimer Steve Bannon Theodore "Vox Day" Beale Carl "Sargon of Akkad" Benjamin Owen Benjamin Peter Brimelow Christopher Cantwell Mike Cernovich Alain de Benoist John Derbyshire Jack Donovan David Duke Mike Enoch Guillaume Faye Haakon Forwald Daniel Friberg Nick Fuentes Jean-François Gariépy Ben Garrison Austin "Augustus Sol Invictus" Gillespie Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet Jim Goad Faith Goldy Paul Gottfried Matthew Heimbach Michael A. Hoffman II Sam Hyde Dillon Irizarry Charles C. Johnson Greg Johnson William Daniel Johnson Alex Jones Jason Jorjani Ruuben Kaalep Tom Kawcyznski Jason Kessler Douglas Murray Steve King Elliott Kline Nick Land Lana Lokteff Laura Loomer Norman Lowell Kevin MacDonald Jeremy MacKenzie Stephen McNallen Merlin Miller Stephen Miller Stefan Molyneux Paul Nehlen Paul "GypsyCrusader" Nicholas Miller Ethan Nordean Jack Posobiec Bronze Age Pervert Paul Ray Ramsey William Regnery II Colin "Millennial Woes" Robertson Thomas Rousseau Steve Sailer Martin Sellner Lauren Southern Richard B. Spencer Brett Stevens Jared Taylor Tila Tequila Daryush "Roosh V" Valizadeh Paul Joseph Watson Lucian Wintrich Curtis Yarvin Milo Yiannopoulos Opposition and criticism People Antifa Steven "Destiny" Bonnell II Ian "Vaush" Kochinski Harry "Hbomberguy" Brewis Ian "Innuendo Studios" Danskin Robert Evans Emily Gorcenski Daryle Lamont Jenkins Angela Nagle David Neiwert Shaun Abigail "Philosophy Tube" Thorn Natalie "ContraPoints" Wynn Donna Zuckerberg Media Alt-America Angry Goy II Culture Warlords Devil's Bargain Feels Good Man I Don't Speak German It Came from Something Awful Kill All Normies Knowledge Fight White Right: Meeting the Enemy Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8r8bq
Cached time: 20250817183250
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.270 seconds
Real time usage: 1.542 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6194/1000000
Revision size: 48367/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 321080/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6808/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 278164/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.712/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9656168/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1108.072      1 -total
 42.57%  471.654      1 Template:Reflist
 16.51%  182.891     16 Template:Cite_book
 12.10%  134.053      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  9.89%  109.571      1 Template:United_States_topics
  9.32%  103.278     22 Template:Cite_news
  7.07%   78.316      1 Template:Short_description
  6.59%   73.051     14 Template:Cite_web
  4.87%   54.009      2 Template:Sfn
  4.54%   50.284      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1172181:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817183250 and revision id 1303789653. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_nationalism&oldid=1303789653 " Categories : American nationalism Culture of the United States Political terminology of the United States Conservatism in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2018 Use American English from April 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American nationalism 13 languages Add topic

