Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission Toggle Mission subsection 1.1 Reconnaissance vs. Direct Action 1.2 Green operations 1.3 Black operations 2 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 2.1 Table of organization (T/O) 2.2 Active 2.3 Deactivated 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Weapons Planning Group (Code 121) 4 Operations Toggle Operations subsection 4.1 Vietnam War, 1965–1974 4.2 Recent 5 Mission training plan Toggle Mission training plan subsection 5.1 Phase 1 5.1.1 Accession pipeline 5.1.2 Special schools 5.2 Phase 2 5.2.1 Training cell 5.3 Phase 3 5.3.1 Special Operations Training Group (SOTG) 5.4 Phase 4 5.5 Phase 5 6 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 6.1 Table of equipment (T/E) 6.2 Special equipment 6.2.1 Parachute pack systems 6.2.2 Parachutist individual equipment kit 6.2.3 Single-action release personal equipment lowering equipment (SARPELS) 7 Annual Warrior Competition 8 Creed 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Bibliography 13 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance 9 languages Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 עברית 日本語 Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia USMC deep reconnaissance unit This article is about the reconnaissance element at the task force level. For reconnaissance element at the division level, see United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2021 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Force Reconnaissance Force Recon insignia Active June 19, 1957 – present Country United States of America Branch United States Marine Corps Type Deep reconnaissance unit Role Direct support of Marine Air-Ground Task Force for Deep reconnaissance [ 1 ] Amphibious and underwater reconnaissance [ 2 ] Advanced Force Operations [ 2 ] Surveillance [ 2 ] Hydrographic survey and other specialized technical reconnaissance [ 2 ] Pathfinding and LZ / DZ preparation [ 2 ] Direct Action [ 2 ] Post-strike reconnaissance [ 2 ] Counterreconnaissance [ 2 ] Specialized limited scale raids including Visit, Board, Search, and Seizure (VBSS) and Maritime Interdiction Operations (MIO) [ 2 ] Size Four companies: three active duty and one reserve Part of Fleet Marine Force (FMF) Atlantic (FMFLant) Pacific (FMFPac) Nickname(s) Force Recon, FORECON Patron Dion Williams James L. Jones Sr.

Bruce F. Meyers Joseph Z. Taylor Motto(s) Celer, Silens, Mortalis ("Swift, Silent, Deadly") Engagements Vietnam War Operation Urgent Fury Operation Just Cause Operation Desert Storm Operation Restore Hope Operation Enduring Freedom Operation Iraqi Freedom Operation Inherent Resolve Military unit Force Reconnaissance ( FORECON ) are United States Marine Corps reconnaissance units [ a ] that provide amphibious reconnaissance, deep ground reconnaissance, surveillance, battle-space shaping and limited scale raids in support of a Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), other Marine air-ground task forces or a joint force.

[ 5 ] Although FORECON companies are conventional forces they share many of the same tactics, techniques, procedures and equipment of special operations forces .

[ b ] During large-scale operations, Force Reconnaissance companies report to the Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF) and provide direct action and deep reconnaissance. Though commonly misunderstood to refer to reconnaissance-in-force , the name "Force Recon" refers to the unit's relationship with the Marine Expeditionary Force or Marine Air-Ground Task Force.

[ 7 ] Force reconnaissance platoons formed the core composition of the initial creation of the  Marine Special Operations Teams (MSOTs) found in Marine Forces Special Operations Command ( MARSOC ) Raider battalions, though Marine Raiders now have their own separate and direct training pipeline.

A force recon detachment has, since the mid-1980s, formed part of a specialized sub-unit, of either a Marine expeditionary unit (special operations capable) (MEU(SOC)) or a Marine expeditionary unit (MEU), known as the Maritime Special Purpose Force (MSPF) for a MEU(SOC) and as the Maritime Raid Force (MRF) for a MEU.

Mission [ edit ] The mission of Force Reconnaissance is to conduct amphibious reconnaissance, deep ground reconnaissance, surveillance, battle-space shaping and limited scale raids in support of the Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), other Marine air-ground task forces or a joint force.

[ 5 ] These responsibilities can generally be divided into two operational mission sets: "green" operations (reconnaissance) and "black" operations (direct action).

[ 7 ] Force Recon is not part of the United States Special Operations Command, and are conventional forces, not special operations forces. The Force Recon platoons operate farther inland than their Division Recon counterparts, penetrating deeper into enemy territory from their assigned littoral (coastal) region within a force commander's tactical area of responsibility (TAOR), often at ranges beyond the support of friendly artillery and/or naval gunfire support (NGFS).

[ 9 ] Reconnaissance vs. Direct Action [ edit ] Two mission sets emerged during the Vietnam War : Key Hole ( deep reconnaissance ) and Sting Ray ( direct action ).

[ citation needed ] Key Hole patrols were designed purely around reconnaissance and surveillance. Usually lightly equipped and armed with defensive weapons , they employ evasive techniques to break away from the enemy should the need arise; avoiding enemy contact is paramount.

[ citation needed ] Conversely, Sting Ray operations had goals more closely aligned with offensive strikes. In a Sting Ray operation, the FORECON operators were heavily armed and use artillery and/or naval gunfire support, if available.

[ citation needed ] However, what began as a "keyhole" patrol could become a "stingray" patrol with little warning.

[ citation needed ] The versatility of FORECON is demonstrated through switching between deep reconnaissance patrols to direct action engagements in certain situations.

[ 10 ] Green operations [ edit ] A four-man fireteam of Marines simulates infiltrating a beachhead to gain information about the enemy and the adjacent beaches to help forecast a ship-to-shore landing operation — an example of green operations Green operations are the principal mission of Force Recon to collect any pertinent intelligence of military importance, observe, identify, and report adversaries to MAGTF commanders.

[ 11 ] [ 7 ] Like Division Recon (also known as the Marine Recon Battalions), they employ a mixed element of amphibious reconnaissance and ground reconnaissance .

[ 7 ] This practice fundamentally covers a wide spectrum of reconnaissance but primarily the FORECON operators conduct deep reconnaissance .

[ 12 ] Their reconnaissance missions include preliminary (or "pre–D-Day") and post-assault reconnaissance. Some examples are: Battle damage assessment (BDA) missions – Witnessing and reporting damage to targets, either from heavy support fire measures (artillery and naval gunfire), air strikes , or thermonuclear weapons .

[ 2 ] Remote sensors operations [ 13 ] [ 2 ] – Placing remote sensors and beacons is vital for marking friendly/hostile boundaries and areas for helicopter assault and infantry transport.

Initial terminal guidance (ITG)–setting up/preparing landing zones (LZ) and drop zones (DZ) for forward operating sites, Marine fixed or rotary-wing aircraft, or waterborne locations (landing force, ship-to-shore).

[ 2 ] Black operations [ edit ] A team of operators from a direct action platoon (DAP) conducts 'Visit, Board, Search, and Seizure' (VBSS) training during a Maritime Interdiction Operation (MIO) exercise — an example of black operations Black operations are the missions that require direct action (DA).

[ 7 ] They are the opposite of green operations missions, where the Force Recon operators "look for trouble." [ 7 ] Examples are the seizures and occupation of gas/oil platforms (GOPLAT) and the visit, board, search, and seizure (VBSS) of ships during Maritime Interdiction Operations (MIO).

[ 2 ] They provide personal security detail (PSD) for critically important personnel within the MAGTF. They were formerly capable of performing In-Extremis Hostage Rescue (IHR), but this is no longer a Force Recon mission task.

[ 14 ] Organization [ edit ] In the past, early Force Reconnaissance companies initially were designed to function under the echelon of the Navy/Marine force commanders (e.g. under the direct operational control of the Commander, Amphibious Task Force (CATF) and Landing Force (CLF), and Fleet Marine Force ) during amphibious landing operations or expeditionary engagements—to provide timely intelligence without exhausting their reconnaissance assets from the Marine Division without hampering their valuable support to its infantry regiments.

Due to these changes, FORECON has been detached and reported to multiple commanders of Marine divisions , the Command Elements (CE) of the Marine Air-Ground Task Forces , and the immediate commander of the Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF). They were re-organized or reserved for "special reconnaissance" assignments that would otherwise help shape the outcome of his battlefield.

[ 15 ] These companies, for a few times in their existence, had either folded into the Marine Division, its Regiment's Recon Battalions, or dissolved entirely to only resurface during conflicts, or when other similar reasons had arisen.

[ 10 ] The creation of Marine Special Operations Command (MARSOC) on February 24, 2006, marked the United States Marine Corps' first commitment to the United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM).

[ 16 ] On August 11 2006, 2nd FORECON was deactivated with the majority of its personnel transferred to MARSOC to establish 2nd Marine Special Operations Battalion (2nd MSOB) with two platoons reassigned to 2nd Reconnaissance Battalion to establish D Company.

[ 17 ] [ 16 ] [ 18 ] Two months later in October, 1st FORECON met the same fate, with the majority of its personnel transferred to establish 1st Marine Special Operations Battalion (1st MSOB) with two platoons reassigned to 1st Reconnaissance Battalion to establish D Company.

[ 19 ] The D companies in the Division Reconnaissance Battalions were designed to maintain and preserve a "deep reconnaissance" asset for the Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF).

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In 2007, 2nd Reconnaissance Battalion deactivated its D Company.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In 2008, the Commandant of the Marine Corps , directed that Force Reconnaissance Companies be re-established from Division Reconnaissance Battalion personnel to support the three MEFs: I MEF , II MEF and III MEF .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The companies were placed under the operational command of the MEF and under the administrative control of the Division Reconnaissance Battalion.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] In December 2008, 2nd Reconnaissance Battalion activated its Force Reconnaissance Company.

[ 20 ] The three Force Reconnaissance companies of I, II, and III MEF are currently the only active components of force- level reconnaissance; whereas the 3rd FORECON is the Selected Reserve force reconnaissance asset available to augment and reinforce the Fleet Marine Force. In the Marine Corps Reserve, the FORECON is a separate unit reporting directly to the 4th Marine Division Commanding General (4th MarDiv CG), unless mobilized and ordered detached to a Gaining Force Commander. Additionally, as a separate unit, the FORECON are not part of 4th Reconnaissance Battalion , which is itself a separate unit reporting directly to the 4th MarDiv CG.

A force recon detachment had, since the mid-1980s, formed part of the Maritime Special Purpose Force (MSPF), a specialized sub-unit of a Marine expeditionary unit (special operations capable) (MEU(SOC)).

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] From 2013 to 2023, MEU(SOC) were defunct, including the integral MSPF.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] A MEU had a Maritime Raid Force (MRF), the successor of the MSPF built around a FORECON detachment.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] In July 2023, II Marine Expeditionary Force certified the first MEU(SOC) in over decade, including an MSPF.

[ 32 ] In February 2021, 4th Force Reconnaissance Company was deactivated and consolidated into the 4th Reconnaissance Battalion .

[ 33 ] Table of organization (T/O) [ edit ] Each Force Reconnaissance company is basically the same; they all contain a command element and Force Recon platoons. Each company is commanded by a company commander and his executive officer .

Commanding officer (CO) Executive officer (XO) Command Element (S-1) Administration (S-2) Intelligence (S-3) Operations (S-4) Logistics (S-6) Communications Headquarters and Service (H&S) Platoon 1st Platoon ( DAP ) 2nd Platoon (DAP) 3rd Platoon ( DRP ) 4th Platoon (DRP) 5th Platoon ( SSP ) Active [ edit ] Emblem Name Parent division/Battalion Location Force Reconnaissance Company 1st Reconnaissance Battalion , 1st Marine Division MCB Camp Pendleton, CA 2nd Reconnaissance Battalion , 2nd Marine Division MCB Camp Lejeune, NC 3rd Reconnaissance Battalion , 3rd Marine Division Camp Schwab , Okinawa 3rd Force Reconnaissance Company 4th Marine Division (Reserve) Marine Forces Reserve Mobile, Alabama Deactivated [ edit ] Logo Name Parent command Location 1st Force Reconnaissance Company I Marine Expeditionary Force MCB Camp Pendleton, CA 2nd Force Reconnaissance Company II Marine Expeditionary Force MCB Camp Lejeune, NC 4th Force Reconnaissance Company Marine Forces Reserve Alameda, CA 5th Force Reconnaissance Company III Marine Expeditionary Force MCB Camp Butler, Okinawa History [ edit ] Main articles: FMF Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion and Marine Corps Test Unit  § 1 The historical roots of "Force Recon" companies can be traced back to the antecedent Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion , whose numerous pre-D–Day reconnoitering of enemy beaches during the Pacific campaigns of World War II proved the vitality of the Fleet Marine Force's amphibious reconnaissance doctrine . This unique unit reported directly to the landing force commander, providing him important intelligence at his disposal.

Formed initially as a company-size element from the Observer Group , under the command of Major James L. Jones , they were among the first—along with the early Navy Combat Demolition Units (the predecessor to the Underwater Demolition Teams [i.e., the Navy SEALs])—to embark from submarines; most of their missions complemented those of the NCDU and the UDT. The "amphibious reconnaissance" doctrine clearly outlined that the recon Marines' duties consisted of scouting the littoral areas, or beachhead, and inland; to test the soil permeability for a possible beach landing; to clear any obstacles that may hinder an amphibious assault; and to observe any sign of enemy activity. The Navy UDT were tasked with providing the same, but from off the coastline to the littoral, or adjacent beach areas.

[ 34 ] Jones and his Recon Marines scouted the Japanese-fortified beaches and observed the terrain, materials, or other entities, primarily reporting to the force commander any vital intelligence of mission-oriented importance. Although Jones's Marines were all skilled surface swimmers, they usually inserted by boats—mostly due to the multiple radios (primary and contingent) they carried, as relaying communication to the landing force commander was paramount, and as a timely means of sending in a platoon-sized element with heavy firepower (mortars, machine guns, etc.) at their disposal since they were greatly outnumbered and isolated from other major Marine forces, which were still embarked on the destroyer-transport ships.

[ 15 ] By the end of World War II , the Amphibious Recon Battalion disbanded its command; its Marines either filled the ranks of other infantry platoons, or integrated into the Scout (Tank) companies, and the newly formed division reconnaissance companies. This force-level reconnaissance element was not re-established until the early 1950s, when the Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalions were assembled for preliminary operations in Korea. Their efforts proved that gaining the knowledge of the enemy before a major operation was crucial to safeguarding the men, and provided better operational planning.

The Korean War introduced the new concept of using rotary-wing aircraft to the Marine Corps in combat employment for logistics and rapid troop transport. Also, the atomic age was emerging and caused concern among the military leaders. The Commandant of the Marine Corps , General Lemuel Shepherd created a test unit, the Marine Corps Test Unit 1 (MCTU #1), to research and experiment on new and improved combat tactics and on methods to prepare the Marine Corps to operate strategically, in concert with or against, the use of nuclear weapons .

[ 35 ] Many of the conceptual ideas for Force Recon were pioneered by Major Bruce F. Meyers, the test unit's "Reconnaissance/Pathfinder Project Officer" from MCTU #1's Plans and Development (P&D) Section. His position can be seen as an unillustrated [ clarification needed ] subsidiary to an "operations" (G-6) and "training" (G-7) officer. Major Meyers tested various innovative techniques for the "Recon Platoon" and evaluated their results for use in parachuting and pathfinding missions, in addition to using its heliborne and aircraft wing assets to add 'deeper' reconnaissance penetration capabilities. This new-found capability gave reconnaissance Marines the advantage of operating further behind enemy lines.

[ 36 ] MCTU#1's Reconnaissance Platoon, commanded by Captain Joseph Taylor, founded and adopted the more modern "force reconnaissance" doctrine, methods which were instrumented by Major Meyers. They were developing and performing innovative clandestine insertion methods before the Navy SEALs , and the Army's "Green Berets" , such as the submarine locking -in and -out methods, and underwater "blow-and-go" ascents.

The USMC concluded that parachute reconnaissance and pathfinding capabilities would exist at force level, the Fleet Marine Force (the highest command echelon of the United States Marine Corps). At first, the concept was to be formed into a "Force Recon Battalion"—this battalion would have as many "force recon" companies as there were division-wing MAGTFs in the Marine operating forces. Recognizing the limited budget during the fiscal year of 1957, it was instead recommended that it be formed at company-sized elements for the West and East Coast.

[ 36 ] In July 1957, MCTU #1 was amalgamated into the existing 1st Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion. The next day, the battalion cased its colors and re-designated it as 1st Force Reconnaissance Company. Although the test unit was no longer operating, Meyers continued to research and test more innovative methods.

Major Meyers and his top swimmers and senior officers of the company would test and train in submarine lock-in and lock-out methods and ascending techniques. After being cross-trained by the Navy's Master Divers, they learned the operation of the early rebreather systems and advanced open water swimming. Meyers understood that his recon Marines would be operating 50 to 150 miles away from their littoral or operating area, or from any naval support. In order to get his Marines out of a "hot" area, extraction techniques needed to be developed. Bruce Meyer's 1st FORECON , along with 1st Recon Company and 1st Marine Aircraft Wing were aware of the McGuire rig and STABO systems that were used by the United States Army's Special Forces, though they agreed that they had defects and disadvantages. Instead, the Marine Corps created a system that was a more simplified rig that had greater capacity, the Special Personnel Insertion and Extraction (SPIE) rig.

[ 36 ] The CIA 's highly secretive Special Activities Division (SAD), and more specifically its elite Special Operations Group (SOG), recruit operators from Marine Force Recon.

[ 37 ] In addition, joint Force Recon and CIA operations go back to the famed Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group ( MACV-SOG ) during the Vietnam War and still exist to this day.

[ 38 ] Weapons Planning Group (Code 121) [ edit ] The Reconnaissance/Surveillance Section of the Weapons Planning Group, Landing Force Development Center at Quantico introduced Force Recon to new technological methods of achieving their objective. Many of its tests and evaluations resembled the tests of MCTU #1. However, MCTU #1 were testing methods of inserting reconnaissance teams "deep" into the battlefield. The Weapons Planning Group (Code 121) provided the equipment that would become instrumental to recon Marines. Beacons for helicopter guidance, laser designators for the guidance of ordnance, laser rangefinders , and many more were tested.

[ 39 ] During the Vietnam War, one of the reconnaissance officers of Code 121, then-Major Alex Lee, brought most of his testing experience to 3rd Force Reconnaissance Company when he was assigned as the commanding officer from 1969 to 1970. He formed Force Recon's missions that are still distinct today: remote sensor operations . The Surveillance and Reconnaissance Center (SRC), predecessor to the Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and Intelligence Group (SRIG), was formed within the III Marine Amphibious Force (III MAF). The obsolete pathfinding operations were taken over by the newer beacons and homing devices.

[ 39 ] Operations [ edit ] Vietnam War, 1965–1974 [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 3rd Force Reconnaissance Company was activated, trained, fought, and deactivated during the Vietnam War . Activated in September 1965 as one of the first group of add-on units to meet demands of operations in Vietnam, the company formed at Camp Lejeune, N.C.

and satellite on Second Force Reconnaissance Company that was under strength due to the demands for trained Force Recon Marines assigned to First Force in country. Facilities, cadre and equipment for training were provided by Second Force.

Volunteers were solicited from throughout the Marine Corps, and the first four months were devoted to bringing the company up to strength in personnel. Beginning in January 1966, all operational personnel departed Camp Lejeune to train in the Caribbean and Panama. Returning to North Carolina in March, final preparations were carried out to meet the projected deployment date in May 1966. The expected deployment of the entire company did not occur, but a two-platoon detachment embarked on the USS Boxer, transited through the Suez Canal, and arrived in country in time to be introduced to combat in Operation Hastings as part of the Special Landing Force in early July 1966.

The company (-) dropped to a not combat ready readiness status. Headquarters Marine Corps transferred several Officers and numerous Staff Non Commissioned Officers immediately after the detachment departed. In mid-June the company (-) was alerted to deploy immediately. Due to the reduced personnel readiness status, HQMC changed the deployment plan and ordered that a platoon be assigned to deploy with First Battalion, 26th Marines that had been activated at Camp Pendleton. The remainder of the company was ordered to move to Camp Pendleton to refit.

At the conclusion of Hastings the detachment was attached to Third Reconnaissance Battalion that had just arrived in Phu Bai from Da Nang , having been replaced by the First Reconnaissance Battalion that had just begun arriving with the First Marine Division. Shortly, they were joined by the platoon that had come in country with 1/26.

They patrolled in Thua Thien Province until early January, 1967, when a task organized Special Purpose group carried out a prisoner rescue attempt. The remainder were sent to Khe Sanh where they developed the intelligence of a large enemy buildup, that was the prelude to The Hill Fights that occurred in April 1967.

Reunited, what was left of the three platoons, returned to Phu Bai to await the arrival of the company (-). Having been brought up to strength and operational readiness, the company was reunited on April 27, 1967, just in time for the North Vietnamese Army (NVA) offensive to seize Quảng Trị Province . The logistics element arrive at the "Ramp" at Đông Hà just in time for the opening salvos of the NVA artillery attacks that would continue daily until late autumn.

The operational element experienced a mortar attack in Phu Bai at the same time resulting in several shrapnel wounds, only one of which, required evacuation. The new arrivals were integrated with combat veterans and the entire eighteen teams conducted a zone reconnaissance in the Cobi Than Tan Valley east of Huế City before displacing to Đông Hà .

Upon arrival at Dong Ha in early May the Commanding Officer assumed command of Third Recon Battalion (Forward), which had reconnaissance responsibility for all of Quang Tri Province except the Khe Sanh TAOR (Tactical Area of Operations). The company patrolled the area north of Highway nine to the DMZ, while the Battalion Company was targeted south of Highway Nine to the Thua Thien border. Occasional circumstances caused deviation from that concept, but, for the most part, those deviations were rare. Third Force continued that operational commitment until the Third Division left country in November 1969.

Third Force was placed under command of The Third Marine Expeditionary Force and operated in general support of IIId MAF until deactivated in mid-1970.

Recent [ edit ] On September 9, 2010, the Force Reconnaissance platoon assigned to the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit (special operations capable) (MEU(SOC)) on the USS Dubuque (LPD-8) conducting the USMC's first opposed Visit, Board, Search, and Seizure (VBSS) recapturing the MV Magellan Star from Somali pirates in the Gulf of Aden .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In 2010, a Force Reconnaissance team from the 24th MEU won the 2010 2nd Annual Warrior Competition against tactical units from all over the world.

[ 42 ] Mission training plan [ edit ] For information regarding the preliminary training (selection and indoctrination) of Force Recon, see United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Selection and Indoctrination .

Training within the company is outlined by the mission training plan (MTP).

[ 43 ] It is used in conjunction with the training and exercises that are conducted by the Marine Expeditionary Units for their " Special Operations Capable " certification. It follows a systematic approach to training, and the emphasis is to "train as they expect to fight".

"The best form of WELFARE for our Marines and sailors is first class training; this saves unnecessary casualties" . —MTP quote by S-3 of FORECON companies.

[ 14 ] The mission training plan has five phases, and is based on a two-year platoon cycle. Training is ongoing and continuous, and functions as if it were a loop. Before FORECON operators are "Special Operations Capable" they follow the company's MTP, which underlines the training protocol of the Pre-deployment Training Program (PTP) .

Phase 1: Individual training Phase 2: Unit training Phase 3: MEU (SOC) training Phase 4: MEU (SOC) deployment Phase 5: MEU (SOC) post deployment Phase 1 [ edit ] The Marine candidates who had passed the initial yet vigorous indoctrination exam must undergo and complete a series of courses required for the designated MOS 0326 [formerly 8654 ], "Reconnaissance Marine, Parachutist/Combatant Diver Qualified," known as the 'accession pipeline.' Their courses to its various schools are intertwined with the Pre-deployment Training Program (PTP), a training protocol of the Fleet Marine Force –its task forces –that are conducted yearly in a perpetual, continuous cycle. The reconnaissance Marines within FORECON community are unique in that it is the volition of the individual Marine to remain another two-year detachment to the Force Reconnaissance Company. Those that had chosen to remain in the company will proceed to the advanced course of instructions, and again during the next FMF rotational training cycle, and forth. This is due in respects to their status of having already completed and qualified in the appropriate course required for MOS 0321; which otherwise, the initial training, e.g. the accession pipeline, are reserved for the candidates.

The first phase in FORECON's Mission Training Plan takes place within the MEU's Initial Training Phase .

[ 14 ] Accession pipeline [ edit ] Further information: United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Selection and Indoctrination § Accession Pipeline A platoon of Force Recon team operators paddle their Combat Rubber Reconnaissance Craft (CRRC) against the surf out to sea, a skill that they learned since their days in the Basic Recon Course.

Infantry Rifleman Course – Infantry Training Battalion, US Marine Corps Schools of Infantry (East or West) Basic Reconnaissance Course (BRC) – United States Marine Corps School of Infantry (West) Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) [Level "C"] /Navy Remote Training Sites; NAS North Island , Warner Springs, California .

United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course – Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center, Naval Support Activity Panama City , Florida Basic Airborne Course – United States Army Airborne School , Fort Benning , Georgia Multi Mission Parachute Course – CPS Complete Parachute Systems, Coolidge, Arizona [ 44 ] High Risk Personnel (HRP) Course – MCB Quantico , Virginia Special Operations Training Group (SOTG) – I MEF , Camp Pendleton ; II MEF , Camp Lejeune ; III MEF , Camp S.D. Butler Special schools [ edit ] During the "Individual Training Phase", the candidates are undergoing the accession pipeline to become qualified MOS 0321 (Reconnaissance Marine). After further training, the already-billeted Force Recon operators (who had already completed the required courses in the accession pipeline [BRC, parachutist and diving, and SERE/HRP courses]) attain MOS 0326 (Reconnaissance Marine, parachute and combatant diver qualified) and may continue to remain with FORECON after the three-year rotation cycle. They may be selected for additional advanced cross-service training from other schools provided by the Special Operations Forces (SOF) units. Although these specialized schools are not necessarily required, they are highly encouraged.

Many Marine Corps 'training liaisons' represent the Marines at many cross-services schools, to ensure training slots and openings are met and filled by the Marines that requested, or were recommended, for advanced training.

[ 14 ] Some of these courses may not be able to facilitate the Marine students; the instructors of these schools resort to complement the Marines' requested syllabus by designing similar subsidiary courses. This argument becomes clear on whether Marines may, or may not, actually attend the Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL training (BUD/S). Nonetheless, in the past, selected operators within Force Recon had attended the courses of instructions provided by BUD/S Instructors and their completion is documented in their military Service Record Book (SRB) or Officer Qualification Record (OQR).

[ citation needed ] Marines from the 3rd Reconnaissance Battalion practice JumpMaster Personnel Inspection (JMPI) during the Military Free-Fall Jumpmaster Course , conducted by the U.S. Military Free-Fall School 's Mobile Training Team at Kadena Air Base , part of the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School .

Tactical Air Control Party – one per team U.S. Army Ranger School – all team leaders and above U.S. Army Reconnaissance and Surveillance Leaders Course – all team leaders and above U.S. Army Pathfinder School – all team leaders and above U.S. Army Jumpmaster School – minimum two per platoon Military Free-Fall Jumpmaster Course – minimum two per platoon Mountain Leaders (Summer/Winter) Course – one per team USMC Scout Sniper Course – minimum one per team Helicopter Rope Suspension Technique (HRST) Master Course – minimum two per platoon Dive Supervisor Course – minimum two per platoon LAR V Technician Course – two per platoon Phase 2 [ edit ] The second phase of the MTP also takes place during the MEU's PTP Initial Training Phase .

Training cell [ edit ] The training cell (T-Cell) is regulated by the experienced staff non-commissioned officers (SNCOs) of FMF Recon company's Operations Section (S-3). This removes the responsibility of coordinating training from the platoon headquarters, and permits them to train with their men (rather than to just oversee the training).

" Train like you fight and fight like you train!" —quote by George S. Patton .

[ 45 ] An additional and no less important advantage to the T-Cell is that it acts as a training ground for future platoon sergeants. Those assigned to the T-Cell are all highly trained and experienced operators. Some have deployed as platoon sergeants, and some have not. Experienced FORECON operators within T-Cell monitor, evaluate and improve the training to ensure that exercises meet real-world conditions.

[ 14 ] Advanced Long Range Communications Package (3 weeks) – It is conducted by the Company Communications Section. As the term deep reconnaissance indicates, the platoon will operate well forward of other forces. In order to report observations, calls for fire or extract, all members need to have a complete and thorough knowledge of the sophisticated communication equipment carried. It includes manual Morse code , and long-range high frequency (HF), satellite , multi-band, and digital communications.

Weapons and Tactics Package (3 weeks) – Involves 5,000–8,000 rounds fired from the M4 carbine equipped with a Special Operations Peculiar Modification kit and the MEU(SOC) Pistol ( .45 ACP ). A live fire and maneuvering exercise in immediate action (IA) drills within close range of rotary wing support, as well as transportation, is conducted on the third week. As the Marines become familiar with their weapons, they conduct field exercise, force-on-force, live-fire drills using a militarized version of the Simunitions kit called the Special Effects Small Arms Marking Systems, or SESAMS. The Marking Cartridge ammunition contains a sabot and a small, plastic round encasing a colored detergent or paint, usually red or blue.

Threat Weapons Familiarization Package (1 week) – Concludes "knowledge of weapons" with identification and operation of threat weapons used by adversaries of the United States. Threat Weapons include assault, automatic and mobilized weapons.

Force Fires Package – Gives the Marines a working knowledge of fixed and rotary wing close air support and Naval Gun Surface Fire (NGSF) by using the AN/PEQ-1 SOFLAM to "paint" their targets.

The Mercedes-Benz GDT-290 "Interim Fast Attack Vehicle" (IFAV) is a replacement of the Chenowth FAV desert buggy and the modified M-151A2 jeep), c.

2001 Mobile Reconnaissance Package – Covers operating and maintaining the M998 HMMWV and the Interim Fast Attack Vehicle . Rapid deployment of FORECON requires fast mobilization. The current IFAV is a replacement of the two earlier FAVs, the M-151A2 and the Chenowth FAV that were employed in the 1980s and 1990s.

Advanced Airborne Package – Extremely important to Force Recon for inserting Marines behind enemy lines. In this three-week period, Marines has started the  transition from conventional Low Level Static Line (LLSL) insertions into the hallmark HALO techniques. Usually it consists of consecutive night jumps with night combat equipment, but HALO training is done in the Paraloft of the S3 Section using a complex virtual reality -based (VR) computer system. While wearing a VR headset device, the Marines hang suspended from the Paraloft ceiling that resembles the MC-5 Ram Air parachute . Many simulations are factored in this Virtual Reality Parachute Simulation; it allows the Marine to jump at high altitudes and visually check his main canopy for proper deployment, alleviate malfunctions, to cutaway and deploy a reserve parachute, then employ guidance and control to an unmarked drop zone (DZ) .

Combat Trauma Package – Examination of first aid and medical treatment that can prepare Marines in many realistic scenarios where Marines can become casualties. This package is built for Marines to give them confidence and knowledge to apply medical attention to themselves or others while operating in hazard environments whether they are engaged in combat or not.

Amphibious Training Package (2 weeks) – While Marines were introduced to amphibious reconnaissance from the BRC, the T-Cell outlines the Amphibious Training package before they are attached to a MEU(SOC), this package refines their ability to conduct amphibious operations, and conventional and selected maritime special operations capabilities incorporating all their skills for Marines to work as a team. Refreshes long-range nautical navigation, and refines the platoon SOP for conducting hydrographic surveys . Launch and recovery is from a variety of naval vessels, including surface combatants and submarines . This training takes place at Seal Beach and San Diego , California on the West Coast; and Onslow Beach , North Carolina on the east coast.

Combatant Dive Package – Designed for concentrating on the unit's capabilities in the water. They will learn more about the LAR-V rebreather as they have been taught at the USMC Combatant Dive Course. The T-Cell will introduce the Diver Propulsion Device (DPD) and the " buddy line ", a 15–20-foot (4.6–6.1 m) pipe made from composite plastics that every Marine is attached to when diving. This ensures that the team remain close together as the water may be impossible for visuals contact in subsurface swimming.

[ 46 ] Other training packages are available to mold the Marines into a fully functional Recon unit, including long range patrolling in desert areas, such as Twentynine Palms or MCAS Yuma , mountainous terrain and other environments relevant in peacetime or conflict. At the end of Phase 2 Training, the platoon is completely stood up in all aspects of the long-range reconnaissance mission. More importantly, they have spent 6 months of 'platoon-oriented' training together.

[ 14 ] Phase 3 [ edit ] Special Operations Training Group (SOTG) [ edit ] See also: Special Operations Training Group This six-month training phase emphasizing more in the direct action , or "black operations". It is conducted by the Special Operations Training Group (SOTG). This phase takes place during the MEU's PTP Intermediate Training Phase . These courses involves both aspects of maritime and urbanized environments and how to apply close quarters combat and science in demolition, gas/oil platform (GOPLAT) training, cordon and search, Visit, Board, Search, and Seizure (VBSS), shipboard assaults training and humanitarian operations.

[ 47 ] The recon operators get the chance to train in unfamiliar urban areas and maritime structures.

[ 14 ] Phase 4 [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Once the SOC Certification Final Training Phase is finished, the MEU with the detached Force Recon platoon as a functional special operations capable force. Then, they sail on a six-month deployment. This long deployment is known as the "Deployment Phases" to Force Recon; they sail from either three locations, off the East or West Coast, or Okinawa . The I MEF on the West would deploy its Marine Expeditionary Units (MEUs) to the western Pacific , and the II MEF's MEUs on the East Coast sail cross the Atlantic Ocean to either the Mediterranean Sea or the Persian Gulf . The III MEF 's 31st MEU in Okinawa is to be used as a contingency for reinforced support of an area spanning from the Southwest Asia to the Central Pacific . The III MEF is the only MEF of the FMF that is permanently fully deployed at all times.

Whether garrisoned on land or aboard ship, along with their naval counterpart, training is constant while at sea. These Marines are firing a modified Springfield .45 ACP, the MEU(SOC) pistol .

While Force Recon is afloat, they still remain focused on their self-disciplined training sessions. They conduct small arms live fire training on the deck of the ships and physical fitness training. In many cases, foreign maritime forces alike participate in joint exercises or training maneuvers, such as the Royal Thai Marine Corps , British Royal Marines , and Australian Forces . But while they may be training, the MEU are capable of projecting fully forward deployed operational task forces. Thus, epitomizing the infamous Marine Corps slogan, "force-in-readiness".

Phase 5 [ edit ] The last phase is the post-deployment phase. After 18 months of training and deployment, the platoon is granted 30 days of military leave . Once a Force Recon operator has finished deployment, they have a decision to make. What makes Force Recon unique from Division Recon , and the other SOFs , is the career style that is being placed in the Force Recon company structure. They can choose to stay with the Force Recon Company and continue their assignment with the MEU, recycling its loop cycle; or they can get release from the FORECON company and go back to their original assignment, whether administration, motor transport, or infantry. However, on average, approximately 50% of the platoon will leave, their time in Force having expired.

[ 14 ] Equipment [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) For information on the general equipment of reconnaissance Marines, see United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions § Table of Equipment .

The primary weapons used by both Division and FMF Recon assets are typically the same standard-issued weapons in the arsenal of the Marine Corps. However, since Force Recon's missions are directly involved in parachuting and underwater insertions, they demand weapons and equipment that are essential to their job. Their equipment reflects on which ever tasks that have been assigned by the MAGTF, MEF, or MEU commander; either direct action (black) or deep recon (green) operations.

Table of equipment (T/E) [ edit ] Some equipment only fits the needs for one particular mission over another. There is however some equipment that is used for both black and green operations, and these pieces of gear are usually combat vests, flak and armor jackets (or systems), and harnesses for use in hasty extraction measures.

Particularly during green operations, these missions normally encompass surveillance and reconnaissance. The equipment items carried into the field are usually cameras, scopes, and most importantly communications. Two recon Marines serve as radiomen in the team. Each team/platoon often brings two field radios that are able to withstand the elements of seawater, and rugged patrolling as they tread inland—if one radio fails, they resort to the supplemental radio. This is to ensure that vital information can always be sent to the commander, and to the S-3/S-6 shop, or similar intelligence collection agencies. More common in today's infrastructure, much of the intelligence-gathered information is sent to and processed by the Marine Expeditionary Force's "Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and Intelligence Group" (SRIG).

For black operations, the Marines carry weapons that are more of the close-quarter combative use; grenades, carbine rifles, sub-machine guns (SMGs), and any tool to use for breaching barricades and doors. They can be equipped with laser designating devices to "paint" their targets with laser-guiding coordinates to deliver payload to un-expecting targets. Since they are "bringing the fight to the enemy", they do not rely on camouflage as stealthy action is not a factor in these situations.

Equipment Mission Type M4A1 Close Quarters Battle Weapon (CQBW) Special Operations Peculiar Modification (SOPMOD) M4A1 kit M203 Grenade Launcher Black Weapon M27 IAR Green Weapon MARPAT Combat Utility Uniform (Desert · Woodland) Green Uniform MARPAT Flame Resistant Organizational Gear (Desert · Woodland) Black Uniform Combat Integrated Releasable Armor System (CIRAS) ( Land or Maritime ) - Combat gear M45A1 Pistol with Safariland 6004 holster Black Weapon Interim Fast Attack Vehicle (IFAV) Black Vehicle Sniper/precision rifles M40 Sniper Rifle M110 SASS Green Weapon M82A3 SASR .50 Anti-Materiel Weapon Black Weapon M240 General Purpose Machine Gun (GPMG) Black Weapon M2HB .50-cal Heavy Machine Gun Black Weapon Future Assault Shell Technology helmet Black Combat gear NOMEX Uniform (Desert · Woodland) Flight suit * modified for Force Recon operator use balaclava Aviator gloves rigger's belt Black Uniform Breaching shotguns Benelli M1014 Mossberg 500 Remington 870 Black Weapon Improved load-bearing equipment (ILBE) - Combat gear Long-range communications, radio and SATCOM AN/PRC-148 —Racal multiband inter/intra team radio (MBITR) AN/PRC-117F AN/PRC-138 (V2 ICOM) Green Equipment Observation scopes Kowa TSN-822 DRS Technologies "Nightstar" Green Equipment Man Pack Secondary Imagery Dissemination System (MPSIDS) Green Equipment M2120 SOPHIE Long Range Thermal Imager Green Equipment AN/PEQ-1A Special Operations Forces Laser Marker (SOFLAM) Green Equipment Defense Advanced GPS Receiver (DAGR) Green Equipment Amphibious equipment - Jet fins, low-volume mask and snorkel Special equipment [ edit ] A six-man stick of team operators from 1st Force Recon perform a 'high-altitude, low-opening' (HALO) parachute insertion jump at ≈22,000–30,000 ft. above sea-level. — circa 2004 Throughout training and real life operations, jet fins, snorkels and low-volume double lens dive masks are used.

[ 48 ] In addition to the SCUBA equipment used in amphibious mission-essential tasks, Force Recon maintains and operates parachutes. This is the main difference and separation from Division Reconnaissance—all FORECON operators are required to be parachutists. The parachutist equipment is stored in the Force Reconnaissance's Parachute Loft.

Parachute pack systems [ edit ] The parachute is one of the trademarks of Force Recon, throughout its existence the operators have extensively used a wide variety of parachutes. In the mid-1950s, they used the T-10 parachute , then later adopting the Capewell canopy release which provided a cut-away to reduce the deadly effect of drag. The T-10 became the most frequented parachute; which had two variants, one for low-level static line (LLSL) and the other for military free fall (MFF) descends. They had numerous parachutes listed under the Table of Equipment (T/E) that had been contained in the Paraloft. Even in its formative days in the Marine Corps Test Unit#1 , the operators and testers of the Naval Parachute Unit (NPU) at El Centro had tested and sported numerous parachutes, adding modifications and suggestions that soon were adopted by other parachutists. By the 1990s, the MC-4 and MC-5 ram air parachutes became the feasible choice, as it allows more detailed and accurate landing in smaller areas, easy to control—especially during oscillation of the canopy. Plus, it was formed to modulate between the LLSL and MFF without having to consort to a different pack.

These are parachutes that are still contained in the T/E of the Parachute Loft, however some may not be currently in use: T-10 MC1-B MC-series ram air parachutes (MC-4, MC-5) Canopies (Main & Reserve): Surface area 370 square feet (34 m 2 ) Altitude range: 3,000 feet (910 m) AG> to 30,000 feet (9,100 m) ft MSL Forward speed: 15–25 mph Rate of descent: 4–18 ft/sec Maximum Load: 700 pounds (320 kg) Multi-Mission Parachute System (MMPS) [currently being implemented—replacing the older MC-5] Parachutist individual equipment kit [ edit ] The parachutist individual equipment kit (PIEK) contains all the Force Recon's parachutist clothing and equipment assigned by Force Recon's Paraloft. They are used for the high-altitude MFFs (HAHO or HALO) and LLSL parachute operations. Due to extreme cold encountered during high altitude parachute operations, the parachutist must have protection from the environment.

Gore-Tex jumpsuit Polartec jumpsuit liner Cotton ripstop jumpsuit Flyer's gloves Gore-Tex cold-weather gloves Overboots MA2-30 altimeter Helmet Flyer's helmet bag Flyer's kitbag—used to carry operator's rucksack, ammunition, communications, etc.

Single-action release personal equipment lowering equipment (SARPELS) [ edit ] The Force Recon operators are equipped with a complete equipment lowering system for both LLSL and MFF parachute operations. It allows them carry various configurations of all their individual mission-essential equipment, usually contained within their flyer's kitbag. The single-action release personal equipment lowering equipment (SARPELS) provides easy access to their weapons and equipment upon parachute landing and has a single-action release capability. It can be front or rear mounted, whichever is preferred. Once they have descended to about 100 feet (30 m) above the surface, they use the SARPEL to release their gear (weapons/kitbag), dropping it below them while still attached to their harness by a 25-foot (7.6 m) rope. It is used to minimize injuries in landing due to heavy load of equipment. The parachutists must maneuver themselves in order not to drop onto their gear during parachute landing falls .

SARPELS cargo carrier Horizontal & vertical cargo carrier securing straps Single-action release handle MFF eEquipment attaching strap 15-foot (4.6 m) LLSL lowering line 8-foot (2.4 m) MFF lowering line Annual Warrior Competition [ edit ] The 24th MEU 2nd Force Reconnaissance Company won the 2010 Annual Warrior Competition against tactical units from all over the world.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Creed [ edit ] R ealizing it is my choice and my choice alone to be a Reconnaissance Marine, I accept all challenges involved with this profession. Forever shall I strive to maintain the tremendous reputation of those who went before me.

E xceeding beyond the limitations set down by others shall be my goal. Sacrificing personal comforts and dedicating myself to the completion of the reconnaissance mission shall be my life. Physical fitness, mental attitude, and high ethics—The title of Recon Marine is my honor.

C onquering all obstacles, both large and small, I shall never quit. To quit, to surrender, to give up is to fail. To be a Recon Marine is to surpass failure; To overcome, to adapt and to do whatever it takes to complete the mission.

O n the battlefield, as in all areas of life, I shall stand tall above the competition. Through professional pride, integrity, and teamwork, I shall be the example for all Marines to emulate.

N ever shall I forget the principles I accepted to become a Recon Marine. Honor, Perseverance, Spirit and Heart. A Recon Marine can speak without saying a word and achieve what others can only imagine.

[ 51 ] See also [ edit ] Semper fidelis Notes [ edit ] ^ FORECON companies conduct deep reconnaissance.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] ^ FORECON companies share many of the same tactics, techniques and procedures (TTP), and terms and equipment with special operations forces .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b United States Marine Corps (26 July 2017).

Marine Corps Operations (PDF) . MCDP 1-0 (w/change 1,2,3). United States Marine Corps.

11– 3. PCN 14200001400 . Retrieved 27 November 2023 .

The company trains in unique insertion/extraction modes for deep reconnaissance ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m MCRP 2-10A.6 2018 , p. 2-4.

^ United States Marine Corps (23 July 2020).

Organization of the United States Marine Corps (PDF) . MCRP 1-10.1. United States Marine Corps.

5– 26. PCN 144 00005000 . Retrieved 27 November 2023 .

The primary mission of the force reconnaissance company, or elements thereof, is employed to observe, identify, and report intelligence information on the enemy, weather, and terrain ^ Carr 2012 , pp. 5, 10.

^ a b "Force Recon: Mission and History" .

Military.com . Monster. 2012-12-05 . Retrieved 2024-12-18 .

^ United States Marine Corps (4 April 2018).

Ground Reconnaissance Operations (PDF) . MCRP 2-10A.6. United States Marine Corps. 2–6. PCN 14400023800 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 .

Marine Corps ground reconnaissance units are not special operations forces (SOF), although they do share many of the same TTP, terms, and equipment.

^ a b c d e f g Caltrider, Mac (1997-04-07).

"Swift, Silent, Deadly: Where Does Marine Recon Stand Among Other Elite Units?" .

Coffee or Die Magazine . Retrieved 2024-12-19 .

^ United States Marine Corps (4 April 2018).

Marine Corps Special Operations (PDF) . MCWP 3-05. United States Marine Corps. Glossary-5. PCN14300017800 . Retrieved 30 December 2024 .

conventional forces — those forces other than designated special operations forces.

^ Eric Sof (November 7, 2013).

"USMC Force Reconnaissance (FORECON): Celer, Silens, Mortalis" .

Combat Operators . Retrieved May 21, 2025 .

^ a b Pushies, Fred J (2003). "Chapter 1: History".

Marine Force Recon . Zenith Imprint. pp.

18– 19.

ISBN 978-0-7603-1011-3 .

^ Fleet Marine Force Manual (FMFM) 2-1, Intelligence (Sep 1980).

^ "Force RECON Overview" .

Military.com . Monster. 2012-12-04 . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ Marine Corps Warfighting Program (MCWP) 2.15.1, Remote Sensor Operations .

^ a b c d e f g h Patrick A. Rogers, Strong Men Armed: The Marine Corps 1st Force Reconnaissance Company , theaccuraterifle.com Part II: Volume 4, Number 1 (Manchester, CT: Feb 2001) ^ a b Meyers, Bruce F. (2004).

Swift, Silent, and Deadly: Marine Amphibious Reconnaissance in the Pacific, 1942-1945 . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 1-59114-484-1 .

^ a b "Chronologies - 2006" .

Marine Corps University . USMC History Division. Archived from the original on 20 March 2021.

^ Cpl. Ken Melton (11 August 2006).

"2nd MSOB activates, Force Recon evolves" .

United States Marine Corps (Press release). Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command. Archived from the original on 15 June 2008.

^ Hart, Maj. Matthew R. (4 July 2021).

Marine Corps Multi-Domain Reconnaissance in Great Power Competition (PDF) (Masters thesis). Marine Corps University. p. 13 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ "1st MSOB stand up marks evolution of 1st Force Recon" . United States Marine Corps. 2006-12-13. Archived from the original on 2008-06-15.

^ a b c Cpl. Chris Lyttle (22 December 2008).

"Force Reconnaissance Company Activates" .

United States Marine Corps (Press release). 2nd Marine Division . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ a b Capt. Byron Owen (November 2011).

"Force Reconnaissance" .

Marine Corps Gazette . Vol. 95, no. 11.

Marine Corps Association . p. 68.

ISSN 0025-3170 . Archived from the original on 2 February 2018.

^ Carr, Maj. Bardford R. (13 March 2012).

Force Reconnaissance: A Key Enabler in the Marine Air Ground Task Force & Beyond (PDF) (Masters thesis). Marine Corps University. p. 19.

OCLC 913586369 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ Davis, Maj. Daniel J. (8 April 2019).

Integrating Expeditionary Ground Reconnaissance into an Optimized Marine Expeditionary Force Information Group (PDF) (Masters thesis). Marine Corps University. pp.

17– 18 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ Carr 2012 , p. 30.

^ Davis 2019 , p. 18.

^ Barrett, Sean (December 2018).

Always Faithful, Always Forward: Marine Corps Culture and the Development of Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command (PDF) (Master's thesis). US Navy Postgraduate School. pp.

139– 148.

OCLC 1088435853 . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Walker, Robert G. (December 1998).

SPEC FI: The United States Marine Corps and Special Operations (PDF) (Master's thesis). US Navy Postgraduate School. pp.

80– 81.

OCLC 227886937 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 9, 2021 . Retrieved 24 April 2022 .

^ United States Marine Corps (19 August 2013).

Marine Corps Supplement to the Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (PDF) . MCRP 5-12C. United States Marine Corps. Section I-24. PCN 144 000056 00. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 June 2022.

^ a b Carr 2012 , p. 17.

^ a b Davis 2019 , p. 19.

^ United States Marine Corps (13 September 2019).

"Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) Pre-deployment Training Program (PTP)" (PDF) . Marine Corps Order 3502.3C. Department of Navy. 6-1 . Retrieved 24 April 2022 .

^ White, Capt. Angelica (7 July 2023).

"II MEF Certifies First Special Operations-Capable MEU in a Decade" .

Defense Visual Information Distribution Service . United States Department of Defense . Retrieved 2 January 2025 .

^ "U.S. Marines with 4th Force Reconnaissance Company held a deactivation ceremony" .

The official Facebook page for 4th Marine Division . 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 – via Facebook .

U.S. Marines with 4th Force Reconnaissance Company, 4th Marine Division, Marine Forces Reserve, held a deactivation ceremony in Alameda, California on Feb. 21, 2021.

^ Fleet Training Publication 167 ^ Stubbe, Ray W. (1990) [1981].

Aarugha!: report to Director, Historical Division, Headquarters, Marine Corps, on the history of specialized and force-level reconnaissance activities and units of the United States Marine Corps, 1900-1974 . United States Marine Corps. pp.

65– 66.

OCLC 21152949 . PCN 14012210000; FMFRP 12-21.

^ a b c Meyers, Bruce F. (2000).

Fortune Favors the Brave: The Story of First Force Recon .

Annapolis, Maryland : Naval Institute Press .

^ Waller, Douglas (2003-02-03).

"The CIA Secret Army" .

TIME . Time Inc. Archived from the original on February 1, 2003.

^ Plaster, John L. (1997).

SOG: The Secret Wars of America's Commandos in Vietnam . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0-684-81105-7 .

^ a b Lee, Alex (1995).

Force Recon Command: 3rd Force Recon Company in Vietnam, 1969—70 . New York City: Random House Publishing Group.

ISBN 0-8041-1023-9 .

^ "15th MEU detailed history" (PDF) .

15th Marine Expeditionary Unit . 2020 . Retrieved 16 December 2023 .

^ Martin, Alex (September 2020).

"Marine Force Recon Retook M/V Magellan Star 10 Years Ago Today" .

U.S. Naval Institute . Retrieved 16 December 2023 .

^ Sgt. Alex Sauceda (12 May 2010).

"U.S. Marines take first, third place at 'Warrior Competition' in Jordan" .

United States Marine Corps (Press release) . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ "NAVMC 3500.55B, Reconnaissance (Recon) Training and Readiness (T&R) Manual" (PDF) .

Official Website of the US Marine Corps . 29 May 2013 . Retrieved 5 January 2019 .

^ "MMPS Basic Course LOI 003" . April 2, 2009.

^ "Activities, Courses, Seminars & Webinars" .

Federal Aviation Administration . June 25, 2024 . Retrieved June 25, 2024 .

^ Operational Requirements Document, Underwater Reconnaissance Capability ^ MCO 3502.3A, Marine Expeditionary Unit (Special Operations Capable) Pre-deployment Training Program ^ "A-TAC 'The Essentials' Rescue Swimmer/BUDs Training Gear Pack" .

ATAC Fitness . Retrieved 2020-10-01 .

^ "USSOCOM" . 27 May 2014.

^ "Marines take 1st place" .

^ "1st Recon Battalion: Mission" .

1st Marine Division . United States Marines Corps . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

Bibliography [ edit ] This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Marine Corps .

Field Manual (FM) 7-92, The Infantry Reconnaissance Platoon and Squad (Airborne, Air Assault, Light Infantry) Marine Administrative Message (MARADMIN) 417/07, Reconnaissance Marine Lateral Move Policy and Procedures [1] Marine Corps Order (MCO) 1510.125, Individual Training Standards (ITS) Systems for Marine Combat Water Survival Training (MCWST) [2] MCO 1543.12, Material Fielding Plan for the Combat Rubber Reconnaissance Craft (CRRC) [3] MCO 3500.20B, Marine Corps Parachuting and Diving Policy and Program Administration [4] MCO 3500.42A, Marine Corps Helicopter Rope Suspension Techniques (HRST) Policy and Program Administration [5] MCO 3502.2A, Marine Expeditionary Units (Special Operations Capable) (MEU(SOC)) Special Skills Certification Program [6] MCO 3502.3A, Marine Expeditionary Unit (Special Operations Capable) Predeployment Training Program (PTP) [7] Marine Corps Reference Publication (MCRP) 2-1C, Marine Air Ground Task Force Intelligence Dissemination [8] Marine Corps Warfighting Publication (MCWP) 2–1, Intelligence Operations [9] MCWP 2–15.1, Remote Sensor Operations [10] NAVMC 3500.55B, Reconnaissance (Recon) Training and Readiness (T&R) Manual Operational Requirements Document (ORD) for an Underwater Reconnaissance Capability (URC) [11] External links [ edit ] US Marine Corps Force Recon Association SpecialOperations.com Marine Recon Page Recon Marines v t e United States Marine Corps Leadership Secretary of the Navy Under Secretary of the Navy Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Military Secretary to the Commandant of the Marine Corps Marine Corps four-star generals Marine Corps three-star generals 1942–1959 2000–2009 2010–present US Congress House Armed Services Committee Seapower and Projection Forces subcommittee Senate Armed Services Committee Seapower subcommittee Major commands Organization of the Marine Corps Headquarters Marine Corps Marine Forces Command II Marine Expeditionary Force Marine Forces Pacific I Marine Expeditionary Force III Marine Expeditionary Force Marine Forces Reserve Fleet Marine Force Atlantic Pacific Marine Corps Combat Development Command Training & Education Command (TECOM) United States Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory Marine Corps Systems Command Auxiliary Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Structure Marine air–ground task force Bases Battalions Regiments Brigades Divisions MEF/Corps Marine aviation Marine expeditionary unit Marine Security Guard Special Operations Marine Raiders Marine Raider Regiment Recon Force Division Others: List of current formation types of the United States Marine Corps Personnel and training Personnel Rank insignia MOS Notable Marines Historical Marines Marine Astronauts Criminal Investigation Division Judge Advocate Division Chaplain of the Marine Corps Associated organizations Training Recruit Training School of Infantry Officer Candidates School The Basic School Martial Arts Program Uniforms and equipment Uniforms Awards Badges Weapons Vehicles and aircraft Individual equipment History and traditions History Culture Acronyms and terms Birthday Color Sergeant of the Marine Corps Eagle, Globe, and Anchor Flag Marine Band Drum and Bugle Corps Horse Marines Marine One Color Guard Silent Drill Platoon White House Sentries Service Numbers Marine Corps War Memorial Marine Detachments " Marines' Hymn " Oorah History Division National Museum Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima Rifleman's Creed Semper Fidelis march History of Hispanics in the USMC History of women in the USMC Women's Reserve Honorary Marine Toys for Tots Gung ho Category v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐847s2
Cached time: 20250817044714
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.359 seconds
Real time usage: 1.628 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8623/1000000
Revision size: 78352/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 696418/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 22160/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 188990/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.684/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12288724/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1087.643      1 -total
 32.68%  355.491      2 Template:Reflist
 14.11%  153.445     11 Template:Cite_book
 12.48%  135.687      1 Template:Infobox_military_unit
 10.14%  110.309      1 Template:Infobox
  9.54%  103.761      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  9.20%  100.109      3 Template:Military_navigation
  9.20%  100.043      1 Template:US_Marine_Corps_navbox
  9.15%   99.480      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.33%   90.599     35 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:627695:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044714 and revision id 1303388471. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Marine_Corps_Force_Reconnaissance&oldid=1303388471 " Category : United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2021 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2025 Articles needing additional references from February 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Marine Corps This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 18:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance 9 languages Add topic

