Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Effect of death of a party 2 Uniform Vendor and Purchaser Risk Act 3 The "Massachusetts Rule" 4 References Toggle the table of contents Equitable conversion 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e Equitable doctrines Doctrines Equitable conversion Estoppel Hotchpot Knowing receipt Laches Marshalling Unconscionability Undue influence Subrogation Defences Bona fide purchaser Clean hands Equitable remedies Account of profits Constructive trust Declaratory relief Injunction Rectification Rescission Specific performance Related Court of Chancery Equitable interest History of equity Maxims of equity Tracing Trust law v t e Equitable conversion is a doctrine of the law of real property under which a purchaser of real property becomes the equitable owner of title to the property at the time they sign a contract binding them to purchase the land at a later date. The seller retains legal title of the property prior to the date of conveyance, but this land interest is considered personal property (a right to the payment of money, rather than a right to the property [ 1 ] ). The risk of loss is then transferred to the buyer – if a house on the property burns down after the contract has been signed, but before the deed is conveyed, the buyer will nevertheless have to pay the agreed-upon purchase price for the land unless the seller in possession or deemed in possession has failed to protect it.  Such issues can and should be avoided by parties by stipulating in the contract who will bear the loss in such occurrences.  The above rule varies by jurisdiction, but is the general rule.

Effect of death of a party [ edit ] If one of the parties dies after the contract for sale of the property has been executed, the doctrine will govern how that party's interest will pass to their heirs. For example, the seller wills their real property to their son, and their personal property to their daughter. If the seller dies after a contract for conveyance is signed by a buyer, the seller's interest in the land will be treated as personal property, and the proceeds of the sale will pass to their daughter. In most jurisdictions, the real property interest created by the contract will pass to the buyer's heirs, while the seller's personal property interest created by the contract will pass to the seller's estate.

The State of New York does not recognize equitable conversion. In New York, as long as the buyer is without fault, the risk of loss remains on the seller until the buyer takes title or possession.

Uniform Vendor and Purchaser Risk Act [ edit ] A growing minority of States have adopted the Uniform Vendor and Purchaser Risk Act (UVPRA) in one form or another.

[ 2 ] The UVPRA bases the legal consequences of no-fault casualty loss on the right of possession of the property at the time the loss occurs. See Brush Grocery Kart v. Sure Fine Market, 47 P. 3d 680 (Colo. 2002). Generally, the provisions of the UVPRA can be modified or avoided in the Land Sale Contract .

The "Massachusetts Rule" [ edit ] In Massachusetts and a handful of other states, the seller continues to bear the risk until the title is actually transferred to the buyer, unless there is an agreement to the contrary. See Brush Grocery Kart v. Sure Fine Market, 47 P. 3d 680 (Colo. 2002).

References [ edit ] ^ "Conveyancing Adelaide" .

E Conveyancing Adelaide . Retrieved July 18, 2014 .

^ Rabin, Edward et al. Fundamentals of Property Law. Foundation Press: New York, 2006. pp. 1128–1129.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Equitable_conversion&oldid=1283237429 " Categories : Property law Equity (law) This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 07:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Equitable conversion 1 language Add topic

