Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical sources 2 Teachings 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Origins 3.2 Catholic response 3.3 Reformation 3.3.1 Massacre of Mérindol (1545) 3.3.2 Piedmont Easter 3.4 Revocation of the Edict of Nantes and the "Glorious Return" 3.5 Religious freedom after the French Revolution 3.6 Characteristics of the modern Waldensian Church 3.7 Influence 4 Appraisal by Protestants 5 Waldensians by region Toggle Waldensians by region subsection 5.1 Italy 5.2 South America 5.3 United States 5.4 Germany 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Waldensians 49 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Ligure Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian movement "Waldensian" redirects here. For the ship, see SS Waldensian .

Waldensians Waldensian symbol Lux lucet in tenebris ("A light shines in the darkness") Classification Proto-Protestant Orientation Reformed Theology Theology of Peter Waldo and other Waldensian theologians, nowadays also that of John Calvin and other Reformed theologians Region Italy, Switzerland, France, Germany, Argentina, United States, Uruguay, and elsewhere Founder Peter Waldo Origin c. 1173 Lyon , Kingdom of Burgundy-Arles in the Holy Roman Empire (now France ) Separated from Catholic Church Part of a series on the Reformation Ninety-five Theses , written by Martin Luther in 1517 Precursors Peter Waldo and Waldensians John Wycliffe and Lollardy Jan Hus and Hussites Girolamo Savonarola and Piagnoni Arnold of Brescia and Arnoldists Peter of Bruys and Petrobrusians Henry of Lausanne and Henricians Berengar of Tours and Berengarians Friends of God Pataria Gottschalk of Orbais Ratramnus Claudius of Turin Wessel Gansfort Johann Ruchrat von Wesel Johannes von Goch Gundolfo Beginning Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Luther Bible Magisterials Radicals Contributing factors Western Schism Avignon Papacy Bohemian Reformation Northern Renaissance Christian humanism German mysticism Johannes Gutenberg and his printing press Erasmus Johann Reuchlin Theologies of seminal figures Theology of Martin Luther Theology of Huldrych Zwingli Theology of John Calvin Protestant Reformers Martin Luther Philip Melanchthon Huldrych Zwingli John Calvin Martin Bucer William Tyndale Andreas Karlstadt Theodore Beza George Buchanan Heinrich Bullinger Peter Martyr Vermigli William Farel François Hotman John Knox Hubert Languet Thomas Müntzer Balthasar Hubmaier Menno Simons Thomas Cranmer Richard Hooker Jacobus Arminius Thomas Helwys Roger Williams Henry Denne Many others By location Germany Switzerland ( Geneva / Zürich ) England Scotland Netherlands Czech Lands Hungary Romania Slovenia Denmark–Norway and Holstein Sweden and Finland Iceland Estonia and Latvia Austria France Italy Poland-Lithuania Ireland Major political leaders Henry VIII Elizabeth I Oliver Cromwell James VI and I William the Silent Gaspard II de Coligny Henry IV of France Jeanne d'Albret Stephen Bocskai Gabriel Bethlen Gustav II Adolf Frederick V, Elector Palatine Philip I of Hesse Electors of Saxony Frederick III John Frederick I Counter-Reformation Catholic Church Council of Trent Counter-Reformation § Politics Censorship of the Bible § 16th century Anti-Protestantism Criticism Holy Roman Emperors Charles V Ferdinand II Political and religious conflicts Thirty Years' War French Wars of Religion Eighty Years' War War of the Three Kingdoms German Peasants' War Wars of Kappel Schmalkaldic War Art and literature Painting and sculpture Northern Mannerism Lutheran art German Renaissance Art Swedish art English art Woodcuts Art conflicts Beeldenstorm Building Influence on church architecture Literature Elizabethan Metaphysical poets Propaganda Welsh Scottish Anglo-Irish German Czech Swiss Slovak Sorbian Romanian Danish Bohorič alphabet Faroese Norwegian Swedish Finnish Icelandic Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age Folklore of the Low Countries 16th century Renaissance humanism 16th century in poetry 16th century in literature Theater English Renaissance theatre Pastoral Morality History Tragedy Revenge Music Forms Hymnody of continental Europe Music of the British Isles Hymn tune Lutheran chorale Lutheran hymn Anglican church music Exclusive psalmody Scottish church music Normative principle Anglican chant Homophony vs.

Polyphony Falsobordone Verse anthem Liturgies Reformed worship Calvin's liturgy Formula missae Deutsche Messe Liturgical Struggle Ecclesiastical Latin Lutheran and Anglican Mass in music Cyclic mass vs.

Paraphrase mass Roman vs.

Sarum Rites Sequence (retained by Lutherans, mostly banned by Trent) Hymnals First and Second Lutheran hymnals First Wittenberg hymnal Ausbund Swenske songer Thomissøn's hymnal Book of Common Prayer Metrical psalters Book of Common Order Souterliedekens Genevan Psalter Scottish Psalter Whole Book of Psalms Conclusion and commemorations Conclusion Confessionalization with subsequent Protestant orthodoxy Peace of Westphalia Simultaneous rise of Pietism and Rationalism Monuments Reformation Wall Luther Monuments Calendrical commemoration Reformation Day Lutheran Anglican Protestantism v t e The Waldensians , also known as Waldenses ( / w ɔː l ˈ d ɛ n s iː z , w ɒ l -/ ), Vallenses , Valdesi , or Vaudois , are adherents of a church tradition that began as an ascetic movement within Western Christianity before the Reformation. Originally known as the Poor of Lyon in the late twelfth century, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] the movement spread to the Cottian Alps in what is today France and Italy . The founding of the Waldensians is attributed to Peter Waldo , a wealthy merchant who gave away his property around 1173, [ 4 ] [ 2 ] preaching apostolic poverty as the way to perfection .

Waldensian teachings came into conflict with the Catholic Church and by 1215 the Waldensians were declared heretical , not because they preached apostolic poverty, which the Franciscans also preached, but because they were not willing to recognize the prerogatives of local bishops over the content of their preaching, nor to recognize standards about who was fit to preach.

Pope Innocent III offered the Waldensians the chance to return to the Church, and many did, taking the name " Poor Catholics ".

[ 5 ] However, many did not, and were subjected to intense persecution and were confronted with organised and general discrimination in the following centuries. In the sixteenth century, the Waldensians were absorbed into the Protestant movement, under the influence of early Swiss reformer Heinrich Bullinger .

In some aspects the Waldensians of the Middle Ages could be seen as proto-Protestants , but they mostly did not raise the doctrinal objections characteristic of sixteenth-century Protestant leaders.

[ 6 ] They came to align themselves with Protestantism: with the Resolutions of Chanforan [ fr ] on 12 September 1532, they formally became a part of the Calvinist tradition. They are members of the Community of Protestant Churches in Europe and its affiliates worldwide. They were nearly annihilated in the seventeenth century .

The main denomination within the movement was the Waldensian Evangelical Church , the original church in Italy . In 1975, it merged with the Methodist Evangelical Church to form the Union of Methodist and Waldensian Churches —a majority Waldensian church, with a minority of Methodists.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Another large congregation is the Evangelical Waldensian Church of Río de la Plata in Argentina , Paraguay , and Uruguay .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Congregations continue to be active in Europe (particularly in the Piedmont region of Northern Italy ), South America, and North America. Organizations, such as the American Waldensian Society, [ 11 ] maintain the history of the movement and declare their mission as "proclaiming the Christian Gospel, serving the marginalized, promoting social justice , fostering inter-religious work, and advocating respect for religious diversity and freedom of conscience." [ 12 ] Historical sources [ edit ] Statue of Peter Waldo at the Luther Monument in Worms Most modern knowledge of the medieval history of the Waldensians originates almost exclusively from the records and writings of the Roman Catholic Church, the same body that was condemning them as heretics .

[ 13 ] : 66 Because of "the documentary scarcity and unconnectedness from which we must draw the description of Waldensian beliefs", [ 13 ] : 87 much of what is known about the early Waldensians comes from reports like the Profession of faith of Valdo of Lyon (1180); Liber antiheresis by Durando d'Osca (c.

1187–1200); and the Rescriptum of Bergamo Conference (1218).

Earlier documents that provide information about early Waldensian history include the Will of Stefano d'Anse (1187); the Manifestatio haeresis Albigensium et Lugdunensium (c.

1206–1208); and the Anonymous chronicle of Lyon (c.

1220). There are also the two reports written for the Inquisition by Reinerius Saccho (died 1259), a former Cathar who converted to Catholicism, published together in 1254 as Summa de Catharis et Pauperibus de Lugduno ( On the Cathars and the Poor of Lyon ).

[ 14 ] Teachings [ edit ] The Waldensians were associated by councils and papal decrees with the Cathars ; however they differed radically from them: the Waldensians never espoused gnostic or dualist views or mysticism , and they did not reject the sacraments in total.

[ 15 ] The Waldensians initially saw themselves as a "church within the Church".

[ 16 ] The Waldensians taught certain doctrines also held by the Catholic Church: they accepted the Trinity , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] and the earliest Waldensians staunchly defended the Eucharist.

[ 19 ] However, at least some of them later began to develop a more symbolic view of the bread and wine.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] The earliest Waldensians taught the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist and affirmed the necessity of priests for the offering of the Mass .

[ 19 ] However they denied the right of sinful priests to give the Eucharist.

[ 22 ] Early forms of the Waldensian Mass sought to recover the early Christian liturgy and contained a sevenfold repetition of the Lord's Prayer , with the Eucharistic elements being consecrated through the sign of the cross .

[ 1 ] The Waldensians observed the forty-day fast of Lent and practiced Friday abstinence .

[ 23 ] Both Waldensian and Catholic sources, however, imply that the Waldensians rejected infant baptism, at least to some extent. This is seen from The Noble Lesson , which refers to Christ specifically calling to baptize those who believed, and Reinerius Saccho mentioning how the Waldensians believed that the "ablution which is given to infants profits nothing".

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 18 ] Thus there seems to have been an understanding among the Waldensians that infants could be saved without baptism.

[ 22 ] They rejected confession to priests, the practice of venerating the saints, the use of oaths, secular courts and prayers for the dead.

[ 26 ] Waldensians held and preached a number of doctrines as they read from the Bible. These included: The atoning death and justifying righteousness of Christ; The Godhead ; The fall of man; The incarnation of the Son; A denial of purgatory ; [ 27 ] The value of voluntary poverty ; Perhaps, the universal priesthood of believers, [ 28 ] as according to de Bourbon they claimed that all good men are priests.

[ 29 ] They also rejected a number of concepts that were widely held in Christian Europe of the era. For example, the Waldensians held that temporal offices and dignities were not meant for preachers of the Gospel; that relics were no different from any other bones and should not be regarded as special or holy; that pilgrimage served only to spend one's money; that meat might be eaten any day if one's appetite served one; that holy water was no more efficacious than rain water; and that prayer was just as effectual if offered in a church or a barn. They were accused, moreover, of speaking blasphemously of the Catholic Church as the harlot of the Apocalypse .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] They rejected what they perceived as the idolatry of the Catholic Church and considered the papacy as the Antichrist of Rome.

[ 32 ] La nobla leyczon ( The Noble Lesson ), written in the Occitan language, gives a sample of the medieval Waldensian belief. Once it was believed that this poem dated between 1190 and 1240, [ 33 ] [ 34 ] but there is evidence that it was written in the first part of the fifteenth century.

[ 35 ] The poem exists in four manuscripts: two are housed at the University of Cambridge, one at Trinity College in Dublin, and another in Geneva.

[ 36 ] Reinerius Saccho gave the following charges against the Waldensians: [ 24 ] The Pope is the head of all errors The Monks are Pharisees Christians should obey God instead of the Prelates That no one is above one another in the church No one should kneel before a priest Tithes should not be given Bishops should not have royal rights They condemn the Catholic sacraments The Church has erred by prohibiting the marriage of the clergy [ 24 ] The Waldensians would, later in their history, adopt a number of doctrines from the Reformed churches due to the French Reformer Guillaume Farel , who introduced Reformation theology to Waldensian leaders. They officially adopted Reformed theology at a conference at Cianforan 1532. As a result of the conference, the Waldensians officially modified some of their previous positions such as their rejection of secular courts.

[ 37 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] According to legend, Peter Waldo renounced his wealth as an encumbrance to preaching, [ 38 ] [ full citation needed ] which led other members of the Catholic clergy to follow his example. Because of this shunning of wealth, the movement was early known as The Poor of Lyon and The Poor of Lombardy.

[ 39 ] Although they rose to prominence in the twelfth century, some evidence suggests that the Waldenses may have existed even before the time of Peter Waldo , perhaps as early as 1100.

[ 40 ] In 1179, at the Third Council of the Lateran , Pope Alexander III lamented that the Waldenses were a "pest of long existence".

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] While the Inquisitor Reinerius Saccho in the thirteenth century also spoke about the dangers of the Waldenses for among other reasons its antiquity "some say that it has lasted from the time of Sylvester , others, from the time of the Apostles." [ 43 ] In the seventeenth century, Waldensian Pastor Henri Arnaud stated that "the Vaudois are, in fact, descended from those refugees from Italy, who, after St Paul had there preached the gospel abandoned their beautiful country, like the woman mentioned in the apocalypse and fled to those wild mountains where they have to this day, handed down the gospel from father to son in the same purity and simplicity as it was preached by St Paul.

[ 44 ] The Waldensian movement was characterized from the beginning by lay preaching, voluntary poverty, and strict adherence to the Bible. Between 1175 and 1185, Waldo either commissioned a cleric from Lyon to translate the New Testament into the vernacular—the Arpitan (Franco-Provençal) language [ 45 ] —or was himself involved in this translation work.

[ citation needed ] In 1179, Waldo and one of his disciples went to Rome, where Pope Alexander III and the Roman Curia welcomed them. They had to explain their faith before a panel of three clergymen, including issues that were then debated within the Church, such as the universal priesthood, the gospel in the vulgar tongue, and the issue of voluntary poverty. The results of the meeting were inconclusive; in that same year, the Third Lateran Council condemned Waldo's ideas, but not the movement itself, while the leaders of the movement were not excommunicated for the moment.

[ 46 ] The Waldensians proceeded to disobey the Third Lateran Council and continued to preach according to their own understanding of the Scriptures. In 1184, Waldo and his followers were excommunicated and forced from Lyon. The Catholic Church declared them heretics , stating that the group's principal error was contempt for ecclesiastical power. Rome also accused the Waldensians of teaching innumerable errors.

[ 47 ] Waldo and his followers developed a system whereby they would go from town to town and meet secretly with small groups of Waldensians. There they would confess sins and hold service. A traveling Waldensian preacher was known as a barba . The group would shelter the barba and help make arrangements to move on to the next town in secret.

[ 48 ] Waldo possibly died in the early thirteenth century, possibly in Germany; he was never captured, and his fate remains uncertain.

[ 49 ] Early Waldensians belonged to one of three groups: [ 50 ] [ not specific enough to verify ] Sandaliati (those with sandals) received sacred orders and were to prove the heresiarchs wrong; Doctores instructed and trained missionaries; Novellani preached to the general population.

They were also called Insabbatati , Sabati , Inzabbatati , or Sabotiers —Some historians such as the Jesuit Jacob Gretser claimed this designation arose from the unusual type of sabot they used as footwear.

[ 51 ] However, he admitted that his reasoning on this etymology did not have the support of the literature of his day because these sources, he said, contained many errors.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] : 247 Other historians such as Melchior Goldast stated that the name insabbatati was because of Sabbath keeping in the manner of Jews.

[ 54 ] Jesuit Inquisitor Francis Pegne cited in Nicholas Eymerich famous work the Directorium Inquisitorium stated that "many used to think it [insabbatati] came from Sabbath, and that they [Waldenses] observed the Sabbath according to the custom of the Jews." [ 55 ] Likewise in the twelfth century, Inquisitor Moneta of Cremona railed against the Waldenses for seventh day sabbath keeping after the manner of Jews.

[ 56 ] Johann Gottfried Hering in 1756 in his Compendieuses Church and Heretic Lexicon defined Sabbatati (a sect of the Waldenses) as those who kept the sabbath with the Jews.

[ 57 ] In the early Waldenses prose tracts there existed an exposition on the 10 commandments which put forth their own explanation on the 4th commandment which defended sabbath keeping.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Many among the Waldensians claimed that people such as Claudius of Turin and Berengar of Tours were first representatives of the sect, but in modern times claims of the Waldenses to high antiquity are no longer accepted.

[ 60 ] One school of thought attempts to associate Vigilantius with proto-Waldensians in the European Alps.

[ 61 ] Catholic response [ edit ] Illustrations depicting Waldensians as witches in Le champion des dames , by Martin Le France, 1451 Piedmontese children forced from their parents [ 62 ] The Catholic Church viewed the Waldensians as unorthodox, and in 1184 at the Synod of Verona , under the auspices of Pope Lucius III , they were excommunicated.

Pope Innocent III went even further during the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215, officially denouncing the Waldensians as heretics .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] In 1211 more than 80 Waldensians were burned as heretics at Strasbourg ; this action launched several centuries of persecution that nearly destroyed the movement.

[ 65 ] Waldensians briefly ruled Buda, the capital of Hungary from 1304 to 1307. The Waldensians in turn excommunicated Pope Benedict XI .

[ 66 ] In 1487 Pope Innocent VIII issued a bull [ 67 ] Id Nostri Cordis for the extermination of the Vaudois.

Alberto de' Capitanei , archdeacon of Cremona , responded to the bull by organizing a crusade to fulfill its order and launched a military offensive in the provinces of Dauphiné and Piedmont .

[ 68 ] Charles I, Duke of Savoy , eventually interfered to save his territories from further turmoil and promised the Vaudois peace, but not before the offensive had devastated the area and many of the Vaudois had fled to Provence or south to Italy.

The theologian Angelo Carletti di Chivasso , whom Innocent VIII in 1491 appointed Apostolic Nuncio and Commissary conjointly with the Bishop of Mauriana , was involved in reaching a peaceful agreement between Catholics and Waldensians.

[ 69 ] Reformation [ edit ] When the news of the Reformation reached the Waldensian Valleys, the Tavola Valdese decided to seek fellowship with the nascent Protestantism. At a meeting held in 1526 in Laus, a town in the Chisone valley, it was decided to send envoys to examine the new movement. In 1532, they met with German and Swiss Protestants and ultimately adapted their beliefs to those of the Reformed Church.

The Swiss and French Reformed churches sent William Farel and Anthony Saunier to attend the meeting of Chanforan, which convened on 12 October 1532. Farel invited them to join the Reformation and to emerge from secrecy. A Confession of Faith, with Reformed doctrines, was formulated and the Waldensians decided to worship openly in French.

The French Bible, translated by Pierre Robert Olivétan with the help of Calvin and published at Neuchâtel in 1535, was based in part on a New Testament in the Waldensian vernacular. The churches in Waldensia collected 1500 gold crowns to cover the cost of its publication.

[ 70 ] Massacre of Mérindol (1545) [ edit ] Main article: Massacre of Mérindol Massacre of the Mérindol Waldensians in 1545 Outside the Piedmont, the Waldenses joined the local Protestant churches in Bohemia, France, and Germany. After they came out of seclusion and reports were made of sedition on their part, French King Francis I on 1 January 1545 issued the "Arrêt de Mérindol", and assembled an army against the Waldensians of Provence . The leaders in the 1545 massacres were Jean Maynier d'Oppède , First President of the parliament of Provence , and the military commander Antoine Escalin des Aimars , who was returning from the Italian Wars with 2,000 veterans, the Bandes de Piémont . Deaths in the Massacre of Mérindol ranged from hundreds to thousands, depending on the estimates, and several villages were devastated.

[ 71 ] The treaty of 5 June 1561 granted amnesty to the Protestants of the Valleys, including liberty of conscience and freedom to worship . Prisoners were released and fugitives permitted to return home, but despite this treaty, the Vaudois, with the other French Protestants, still suffered during the French Wars of Religion in 1562–1598.

As early as 1631, Protestant scholars began to regard the Waldensians as early forerunners of the Reformation, in a manner similar to the way the followers of John Wycliffe and Jan Hus , also persecuted by authorities, were viewed.

Although the Waldensian church was granted some rights and freedoms under French King Henry IV, with the Edict of Nantes in 1598, persecution rose again in the seventeenth century, with an extermination of the Waldensians attempted by the Duke of Savoy in 1655. This led to the exodus and dispersion of the Waldensians to other parts of Europe and even to the Western Hemisphere.

Piedmont Easter [ edit ] Main articles: Piedmontese Easter and Savoyard–Waldensian wars In January 1655, the Duke of Savoy commanded the Waldensians to attend Mass or remove to the upper valleys of their homeland, giving them twenty days in which to sell their lands. Being in the midst of winter, the order was intended to persuade the Vaudois to choose the former; however, the bulk of the populace instead chose the latter, abandoning their homes and lands in the lower valleys and removing to the upper valleys. It was written that these targets of persecution, including old men, women, little children and the sick "waded through the icy waters, climbed the frozen peaks, and at length reached the homes of their impoverished brethren of the upper Valleys, where they were warmly received." [ 72 ] By mid-April, when it became clear that the Duke's efforts to force the Vaudois to conform to Catholicism had failed, he tried another approach. Under the guise of false reports of Vaudois uprisings, the Duke sent troops into the upper valleys to quell the local populace. He required that the local populace quarter the troops in their homes, which the local populace complied with. But the quartering order was a ruse to allow the troops easy access to the populace. On 24 April 1655, at 4 a.m., the signal was given for a general massacre.

Print illustrating the 1655 massacre in La Torre, from Samuel Moreland 's History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont , published in London in 1658 The Duke's forces did not simply slaughter the inhabitants. They are reported to have unleashed an unprovoked campaign of looting, rape, torture, and murder. According to one report by a Peter Liegé: Little children were torn from the arms of their mothers, clasped by their tiny feet, and their heads dashed against the rocks; or were held between two soldiers and their quivering limbs torn up by main force. Their mangled bodies were then thrown on the highways or fields, to be devoured by beasts. The sick and the aged were burned alive in their dwellings. Some had their hands and arms and legs lopped off, and fire applied to the severed parts to staunch the bleeding and prolong their suffering. Some were flayed alive, some were roasted alive, some disemboweled; or tied to trees in their own orchards, and their hearts cut out. Some were horribly mutilated, and of others the brains were boiled and eaten by these cannibals . Some were fastened down into the furrows of their own fields, and ploughed into the soil as men plough manure into it. Others were buried alive. Fathers were marched to death with the heads of their sons suspended round their necks. Parents were compelled to look on while their children were first outraged [raped], then massacred, before being themselves permitted to die.

[ 73 ] This massacre became known as the Piedmont Easter. An estimate of some 1,700 Waldensians were slaughtered; the massacre was so brutal it aroused indignation throughout Europe. Protestant rulers in northern Europe offered sanctuary to the remaining Waldensians.

Oliver Cromwell , then ruler in England, began petitioning on behalf of the Waldensians, writing letters, raising contributions, calling a general fast in England and threatening to send military forces to the rescue. The massacre prompted John Milton 's poem on the Waldenses, " On the Late Massacre in Piedmont ".

[ 74 ] Swiss and Dutch Calvinists set up an "underground railroad" to bring many of the survivors north to Switzerland and even as far as the Dutch Republic, where the councillors of the city of Amsterdam chartered three ships to take some 167 Waldensians to their City Colony in the New World (Delaware) on Christmas Day 1656.

[ 75 ] Those that stayed behind in France and the Piedmont formed a guerilla resistance movement led by a farmer, Joshua Janavel , which lasted into the 1660s.

[ 76 ] Waldensian Church of Florence, Italy Revocation of the Edict of Nantes and the "Glorious Return" [ edit ] In 1685 Louis XIV revoked the 1598 Edict of Nantes , which had guaranteed freedom of religion to his Protestant subjects in France. French troops sent into the French Waldensian areas of the Chisone and Susa Valleys in the Dauphiné forced 8,000 Vaudois to convert to Catholicism and another 3,000 to leave for Germany.

In the Piedmont, the cousin of Louis, the newly ascended Duke of Savoy, Victor Amadeus II , followed his uncle in removing the protection of Protestants in the Piedmont . In the renewed persecution, and in an echo of the Piedmont Easter Massacre of only three decades earlier, the Duke issued an edict on 31 January 1686 that decreed the destruction of all the Vaudois churches and that all inhabitants of the Valleys should publicly announce their error in religion within fifteen days under penalty of death and banishment. But the Vaudois remained resistant. After the fifteen days, an army of 9,000 French and Piedmontese soldiers invaded the Valleys against the estimated 2,500 Vaudois, but found that every village had organized a defense force that kept the French and Piedmontese soldiers at bay.

On 9 April, the Duke of Savoy issued a new edict, enjoining the Waldensians to put down their arms within eight days and go into exile between 21 and 23 April. If able, they were free to sell their land and possessions to the highest bidder.

Waldensian pastor Henri Arnaud (1641–1721), who had been driven out of the Piedmont in the earlier purges, returned from Holland. On 18 April he made a stirring appeal before an assembly at Roccapiatta, winning over the majority in favor of armed resistance. When the truce expired on 20 April, the Waldensians were prepared for battle.

They put up a brave fight over the next six weeks, but by the time the Duke retired to Turin on 8 June, the war seemed decided: 2,000 Waldensians had been killed; another 2,000 had "accepted" the Catholic theology of the Council of Trent. Another 8,000 had been imprisoned, more than half of whom died of deliberately imposed starvation, or of sickness within six months.

But about two or three hundred Vaudois fled to the hills and began carrying out a guerilla war over the next year against the Catholic settlers who arrived to take over the Vaudois lands. These "Invincibles" continued their assaults until the Duke finally relented and agreed to negotiate. The "Invincibles" won the right for the imprisoned Vaudois to be released from prison and to be provided safe passage to Geneva. But the Duke, granting that permission on 3 January 1687, required that the Vaudois leave immediately or convert to Catholicism. This edict led to some 2,800 Vaudois leaving the Piedmont for Geneva, of whom only 2,490 survived the journey.

Arnaud and others now sought help of the allied European powers. He appealed to William of Orange directly from Geneva, while others, amongst whom was the young L'Hermitage , were sent to England and other lands to canvas for support. Orange and the allies were glad of any excuse to antagonise France, whose territorial encroachments on all fronts were intolerable. The League of Augsburg was formed in 1686 under Orange, who promised support to Arnaud. In August 1689, in the midst of the wars between the League of Augsburg and France, Arnaud led 1,000 Swiss exiles, armed with modern weaponry provided by the Dutch, back to the Piedmont. Over a third of the force perished during the 130-mile trek. They successfully re-established their presence in the Piedmont and drove out the Catholic settlers, but they continued to be besieged by French and Piedmontese troops.

By 2 May 1689, with only 300 Waldensian troops remaining, and cornered on a high peak called the Balsiglia , by 4,000 French troops with cannons, the final assault was delayed by storm and then by cloud cover. The French commander was so confident of completing his job the next morning that he sent a message to Paris that the Waldensian force had already been destroyed. However, when the French awoke the next morning they discovered that the Waldensians, guided by one of their number familiar with the Balsiglia, had already descended from the peak during the night and were now miles away.

The French pursued, but only a few days later a sudden change of political alliance by the Duke, from France to the League of Augsburg, ended the French pursuit of the Waldensians. The Duke agreed to defend the Waldensians and called for all other Vaudois exiles to return home to help protect the Piedmont borders against the French, in what came to be known as the "Glorious Return".

[ 77 ] Religious freedom after the French Revolution [ edit ] Waldensian Church entrance in Rome, Italy After the French Revolution , the Waldenses of Piedmont were assured liberty of conscience and, in 1848, the ruler of Savoy, King Charles Albert of Sardinia , granted them civil rights.

Enjoying religious freedom, the Waldensians began migrating outside their valleys. By the time of Italian unification , the Waldensian had congregations throughout the peninsula, some originated by preaching, others by migration.

[ 78 ] However, poverty, societal discrimination, and demographic pressure led the Waldensians to emigrate, first as seasonal workers to the French Riviera and Switzerland, and later to Colonia Valdense in Uruguay, Jacinto Aráuz in La Pampa , Argentina and ultimately, to the United States.

[ 79 ] Those who remained in Italy have experienced upward social mobility. Waldensian companies dominated Turin's chocolate industry for the latter half of the nineteenth century and are generally credited with the invention of gianduja (hazelnut chocolate).

[ 80 ] Waldensian scholarship also flourished in the nineteenth century. Copies of the Romaunt version of the Gospel of John were preserved in Paris and Dublin. The manuscripts were used as the basis of a work by William Stephen Gilly published in 1848, in which he described the history of the New Testament in use by the Waldensians.

[ 81 ] The Waldensian College began training ministers in 1855, first in Torre Pellice . A few years later, the Waldensian College relocated to Florence and, in 1922, to Rome. Economic and social integration have eased acceptance of ethnic Waldensians into Italian society.

[ citation needed ] Writers like Italo Calvino and politicians like Domenico Maselli and Valdo Spini are of Waldensian background. The church has also attracted intellectuals as new adherents and supporters and enjoys significant financial support from non-adherent Italians.

In 2015, after a historic visit to a Waldensian Temple in Turin , Pope Francis , in the name of the Catholic Church, asked Waldensian Christians for forgiveness for their persecution. The Pope apologized for the Church's "un-Christian and even inhumane positions and actions".

[ 82 ] Characteristics of the modern Waldensian Church [ edit ] Further information: Calvinism The present Waldensian Church considers itself to be a Protestant church of the Reformed tradition originally framed by Huldrych Zwingli and John Calvin .

[ 46 ] It recognizes as its doctrinal standard the confession of faith published in 1655 and based on the Reformed confession of 1559. It admits only two ceremonies, baptism and the Lord's Supper.

[ 46 ] Supreme authority in the body is exercised by an annual synod, and the affairs of the individual congregations are administered by a consistory under the presidency of the pastor.

[ 46 ] Over the centuries, Waldensian churches have been established in countries as far away from France as Uruguay and the United States where the active Waldensian congregations continue the purpose of the Waldensian movement. The contemporary and historic Waldensian spiritual heritage describes itself as proclaiming the Gospel, serving the marginalized, promoting social justice, fostering inter-religious work, and advocating respect for religious diversity and freedom of conscience.

[ 11 ] Today, the Waldensian Church is member of the World Communion of Reformed Churches , the World Methodist Council , the Federation of Evangelical Churches in Italy , and the World Council of Churches .

Influence [ edit ] The Waldensians were influences to the Zwickau Prophets who came out in support of believer's baptism.

[ 83 ] The Waldensians also influenced some in the Bohemian reformation , especially Petr Chelčický .

[ 84 ] Petr Chelčický was influenced by the Waldensians very early in his life, as there existed Waldensian congregations in the area of his birth.

[ 85 ] However, on the other hand, some Hussites rejected Waldensian doctrines, including Jacob of Miles .

[ 84 ] Appraisal by Protestants [ edit ] Part of a series on Protestantism Outline Concepts Anti-Protestantism Bible Criticism Culture Demographics Ecclesiology Liturgy Relations with Catholics Theologies Five Solas History Proto-Protestantism Bohemian Reformation Reformation Magisterial Radical Counter Martin Luther Ninety-five Theses Augsburg Confession Huldrych Zwingli John Calvin Arminianism Crypto-Protestantism Nonconformists Dissenters Puritans John Wesley Pietism Great Awakenings in America Revival meetings Branches Proto-Protestants Hussites Waldensians Lutherans Reformed Continental Presbyterians Congregational Anglicans Continuing Anabaptists Amish Hutterites Mennonites Quakers Baptists Black church Methodists Radical Pietism Shakers Stone-Campbell Plymouth Brethren Adventist Irvings Holiness Keswickians Eastern Protestant Pentecostals United and uniting churches Nondenominational Movements Augsburg Catholics Charismatics Confessionalism Confessing Movement Convergence Church Growth Ecumenism Emerging church Evangelicalism Fundamentalism High church Liberalism Mainlines Neo-charismatics Neo-orthodoxy New Calvinism Paleo-orthodoxy Progressivism Spiritual Christianity Christianity portal v t e The Vaudois taking their oath . Anonymous illustration published in 1886.

Some Protestants have considered the Waldensians to be the oldest Non-Catholic Christian community in Western and Central Europe, and the oldest Protestant denomination.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Early Protestants felt a spiritual kinship to the Waldensians and wrote positively about them.

John Milton , for example, wrote in his sonnet " On the Late Massacre in Piedmont " of the 1655 massacre and persecution of the Waldensians.

It was once held that the Waldenses were first taught by Paul the Apostle who visited Spain and then allegedly traveled on to Piedmont. As the Catholic Church indulged in excesses in the time of Constantine (Roman Emperor from 306 to 337) – the account tells – the Waldenses held true to their apostolic faith of poverty and piety. These claims were discounted in the nineteenth century.

[ 89 ] There were also other claims that the Waldensians predated Peter Waldo's activities in the late twelfth century. In his A History of the Vaudois Church (1859), [ 90 ] Antoine Monastier quotes Bernard, abbot of Foncald, who wrote at the end of the twelfth century that the Waldensians arose during the papacy of Lucius.

[ 91 ] Monastier takes Bernard to mean Lucius II , in office from 1144 to 1145, and concludes that the Waldenses were active before 1145. Bernard also says that the same Pope Lucius condemned them as heretics, but they were condemned by Pope Lucius III in 1184.

[ 92 ] Monastier also says that Eberard de Béthune , writing in 1210 (although Monastier says 1160), claimed that the name Vaudois meant "valley dwellers" or those who "dwell in a vale of sorrow and tears", and was in use before the times of Peter Waldo.

Waldensians feature in the theories of Baptist successionism and Landmarkism concerning an alleged continuous tradition of practices and beliefs from John the Baptist onwards.

[ 93 ] Some historical writers suggest Waldensian beliefs came from missionaries from the early church and that their history may have its origins in the apostolic age, [ 94 ] though this idea itself stems from Baptist Successionism , an idea that was very popular among some nineteenth-century church historians but has been largely rejected by modern scholars in the field. The Roman Inquisitor Reinerus Sacho, writing c.

1230, held the sect of the Vaudois to be of great antiquity, thus preceding Waldo by centuries. According to some early baptist sources there are also accounts of Paulicians , Petrobusians , and Pasaginians , along with the Waldenses of the Alps, who kept Saturday as the Lord's day.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Some Anabaptist and Baptist authors have pointed to the Waldensians as an example of earlier Christians who were not a part of the Catholic Church, and who held beliefs they interpreted to be similar to their own. In the seventeenth to the nineteenth century, Dutch and German Mennonite writers like van Braght , Martyrs Mirror (1660) [ 97 ] and Steven Blaupot ten Cate, Geschiedkundig onderzoek (1844), [ 98 ] [ 99 ] linked Anabaptist origins to the Waldensians. Baptist authors like John L. Waller also linked their origins to the Waldensians.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ self-published source?

] James Aitken Wylie (1808–1890) likewise believed the Waldensians preserved the apostolic faith and its practices during the Middle Ages .

[ 107 ] Still later, Seventh-day Adventist Ellen G. White taught that the Waldenses were preservers of biblical truth during the Great Apostasy of the Catholic Church .

[ 108 ] She claimed the Waldenses kept the seventh-day Sabbath , [ 109 ] engaged in widespread missionary activity, and "planted the seeds of the Reformation" in Europe.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Despite the claims of that the Waldensians were observant of resting on the Sabbath, Waldensians historians like Emilio Comba, Giorgio Spini, and Gabriel Audisio [ 112 ] have stated the confusion is due to either the name of shoes worn by their travelling preachers or of their accusation's of holding Witches' Sabbath , as the inquisitors often charged heretics in general.

[ 113 ] Though other Waldenses sources do suggest there were groups who kept the sabbath.

[ 53 ] Scholar Michael W. Homer links the belief in an ancient origin of the Waldensians to three seventeenth-century pastors, Jean-Paul Perrin of the Reformed Church of France and the Waldensian pastors Pierre Gilles and Jean Léger, who posited that the Waldensians were descendants of Primitive Christianity .

[ 114 ] Some authors [ 115 ] [ 116 ] try to date a Reformation-era Waldensian confession of faith back into the Middle Ages in 1120 to assert their claim of doctrinal antiquity.

[ 117 ] However, in the current historiography from the Waldensians themselves it is asserted that this confession was drafted in 1531.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Protestant theology in Germany was interested in the doctrinal antiquity and apostolic continuity being expressed by the Waldensian faith. The high independence of the communities, lay preaching, voluntary poverty, and strict adherence to the Bible and its early translation through Peter Waldo have been credited to prove an ancient origin of Protestantism as the true interpretation of the faith. Mere anti-Catholic sentiments and controversies, for example in the Kulturkampf , played a role. Heinrich Gottlieb Kreussler's 1830 History of the Reformation contains a ballade about the fate of the Waldensians and quotes Jean Léger's [ fr ] History of the Waldenians (1750) (authored with Siegmund Jakob Baumgarten , published by Johann Jacob Korn ) as proof of an early origin of the Waldensians.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] The strong German Protestant support for the Waldensian diaspora community in Italy—leading staff of the Gustavus Adolphus Union (GAW) praised them as one of the most interesting churches of all [ 123 ] —was not confined to a theological fascination. It led to extensive financial support, loans, exchange of priesters and communities, aid missions and political interventions for the Italian Waldensians and their charitable efforts, starting from the seventeenth century.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] After World War II, the Evangelical Church in Germany actively contributed to reconciliation efforts with Italy and France based on its relationship with the Waldensian community.

[ 123 ] The GAW has ongoing links with the Waldensians in Italy.

Waldensians by region [ edit ] Italy [ edit ] The Waldensian Church in Milan, built in 1949, incorporates materials from the demolished gothic church of San Giovanni in Conca .

In 1848, after many centuries of harsh persecution, the Waldensians acquired legal freedom in the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia as a result of the liberalising reforms which followed Charles Albert of Sardinia 's granting a constitution (the Statuto Albertino ). Subsequently, the Waldensian Evangelical Church , as it became known, developed and spread through the Italian peninsula.

The Waldensian church was able to gain converts by building schools in some of the poorer regions of Italy, including Sicily. There is still a Waldensian church in the town of Grotte , at the southwest of the island.

[ 125 ] German Protestants have been supportive of the Waldensians in Italy since the seventeenth century.

During the Nazi occupation of North Italy in the Second World War , Italian Waldensians were active in saving Jews faced with imminent extermination, hiding many of them in the same mountain valley where their own Waldensian ancestors had found refuge in earlier generations.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] After 1945, the Evangelical Church in Germany led by Theophil Wurm (who was also Bishop of Württemberg) issued the Stuttgart Declaration of Guilt and actively contributed to reconciliation efforts with Italy (and France) based on relationships with the diaspora. The 1948 centenary festivities of the Savoy civil rights declaration were used for efforts of EKD leading staff to support German Italian reconciliation after World War II.

[ 123 ] A most fruitful cooperation was established at the community level, with Waldensian delegates from both sides pioneering.

[ 123 ] 1949, Guglielmo Del Pesco (1889–1951), moderator of the Tavola Valdese (Waldensian round table), was invited back to Maulbronn , celebrating the 250th anniversary of the Waldensian emigration to Germany.

[ 123 ] He was unable to come for reasons of health but sent A. Jalla, a teacher, described as being full of spite and hatred against all things German after 1945, but who joined in the effort for reconciliation 1949.

[ 123 ] Based on these experiences, the first town-twinning partnership between Germany and France was signed 1950 between Ludwigsburg and the Protestant exclave Montbéliard , again based on a special connection of the Württemberg Landeskirche. The German Gustavus Adolphus Union is supportive of Waldesian projects and charitable efforts in Italy till the present.

[ 128 ] In 1975, the Waldensian Church joined the Methodist Evangelical Church in Italy to form the Union of Waldensian and Methodist Churches . It has 50,000 members (45,000 Waldensians, of whom 30,000 in Italy and some 15,000 divided between Argentina and Uruguay, and 5,000 Methodists).

The eight per thousand tax ( Italian : otto per mille ) introduced 1985 in Italy greatly helped the Waldensian community. The eight per thousand law allows taxpayers to choose to whom they devolve a compulsory 8 ‰ = 0.8% ('eight per thousand') from their annual income tax return. They may choose an organised religion recognised by Italy or a social assistance scheme run by the Italian State. While the Waldensians have only about 25,000 enlisted members, more than 600,000 Italians are willing to support the Waldensian community and its charitable works.

[ 129 ] The ordination of women and, since 2010, the blessing of same-sex unions [ 130 ] [ 131 ] are allowed.

South America [ edit ] Festivities celebrating the 150th anniversary of Italian immigration to Colonia Valdense , Uruguay .

The first Waldensian settlers from Italy arrived in South America in 1856. From that date there have been several migrations, especially to Argentina, such as the town of Jacinto Aráuz in the southern part of the province of La Pampa, where they arrived around 1901. As of 2016 [update] the Waldensian Church of the Río de La Plata (which forms a united church with the Waldensian Evangelical Church) has approximately 40 congregations and 15,000 members shared between Uruguay and Argentina .

[ 132 ] The Uruguayan town of Colonia Valdense, in the department of Colonia , is the administrative center of the Waldensian Evangelical Church of the River Plate. In 1969, the Church established a mission in Barrio Nuevo, which became a soup kitchen for Saturdays and Sundays, for 500 poor families. Missionary activity has led to the conversion of new people without Waldensian ancestry, who are called "new Waldensian".

[ 133 ] From Uruguay or directly from Italy, some Waldensian families also found a home in Brazil. There, they ended up joining the local Protestant churches.

[ 134 ] United States [ edit ] The Waldensian Presbyterian Church in the town of Valdese, North Carolina . This congregation belongs to the Presbyterian Church (USA) .

Since colonial times there have been Waldensians who sailed to America, as marked by the presence of them in New Jersey and Delaware . Many Waldensians, having escaped persecution in their homelands by making their way to the tolerant Dutch Republic, crossed the Atlantic to start anew in the New Netherland colony, establishing the first church in North America on Staten Island in 1670.

[ 135 ] In the late nineteenth century many Italians, among them Waldensians, emigrated to the United States. They founded communities in New York City; Boston; Chicago ; Monett, Missouri ; Galveston, Texas ; Rochester, New York ; Hunter, Utah ; and Ogden, Utah .

[ 136 ] The Monett congregation was among the first to be established in the United States, in 1875, by some 40 settlers who had formed the original South American settlement in Uruguay in the 1850s. With the outbreak of the Uruguayan Civil War they had fled violence in the Uruguayan countryside, traveling first back to Europe then across the Northern Atlantic to New York and by train to southern Missouri. Waldensians living in the Cottian Alps region of Northern Italy continued to migrate to Monett until the early 1900s, augmenting the original colony, and founded another, larger settlement in Valdese, North Carolina , in 1893. The first Waldenses settled in North Carolina in 1893.

[ 137 ] Both the Monett and Valdese congregations use the name Waldensian Presbyterian Church .

In 1853 a group of approximately 70 Waldensians, including men, women, and children, left their homes in the Piedmont Valleys and migrated to Pleasant Green, Hunter, and Ogden, Utah , after being converted to Mormonism by Lorenzo Snow . These Waldensians maintained their cultural heritage, while passing on their mixture of Mormon and Waldensian faiths to their descendants. Their descendants still consider themselves both Mormon and Waldensian, and have met occasionally over the many decades to celebrate both heritages.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] In 1906, through the initiative of church forces in New York City, Waldensian interest groups were invited to coalesce into a new entity, The American Waldensian Aid Society (AWS), organized "to collect funds and apply the same to the aid of the Waldensian Church in Italy and elsewhere ... and to arouse and maintain interest throughout the US in the work of said Church." Today, this organization continues as the American Waldensian Society. The American Waldensian Society recently marked its Centennial with a conference and celebrations in New York City.

By the 1920s most of the Waldensian churches and missions merged into the Presbyterian Church due to the cultural assimilation of the second and third generations.

The work of the American Waldensian Society continues in the United States today. The American Waldensian Society aims to foster dialogue and partnership among Waldensian Churches in Italy and South America and Christian churches within North America in order to promote a compelling vision of Waldensian Christian witness for North America. Thus, the American Waldensian Society makes public the contemporary and historic heritage to which Waldensian spirituality is committed: Tell the Story; Encourage "Crossings"; and Provide Financial Support.

[ 142 ] The best known Waldensian Churches in America were in New York, Monett, Missouri and in Valdese, North Carolina. The church in New York City was disbanded by the mid-1990s.

[ 143 ] The American Waldensian Society assists churches, organizations and families in the promotion of Waldensian history and culture. The society allies with those who work to preserve their millennial heritage among their descendants. For example, since 1968, the Old Colony Players in Valdese, North Carolina , have staged From This Day Forward , an outdoor drama telling the story of the Waldenses and the founding of Valdese.

[ 137 ] [ 144 ] The Waldensian Presbyterian churches in the United States and the American Waldensian Society have links with the Italian-based Waldensian Evangelical Church , but, unlike the South American Waldensian communities, today they are independent institutions from the European organization.

Germany [ edit ] Coat of arms of Le Bourcet (part of Althengstett ) in Württemberg Arnaud's fountain in Perouse (Württemberg) Several thousand Waldenses fled from Italy and France to Germany.

Henri Arnaud (1641–1721), pastor and leader of the Piedmont Waldensians, rescued his co-religionists from their dispersion under the persecution of Victor Amadeus II the Duke of Savoy .

Eberhard Louis, Duke of Württemberg invited the Waldensians to his territory. When the Waldensians were exiled a second time, Arnaud accompanied them in their exile to Schönenberg , and continued to act as their pastor until his death.

Those who remained in Germany were soon assimilated by the State Churches (Lutheran and Reformed) and they are a part of various Landeskirchen in the Evangelical Church in Germany . The new settlers were free in their religious services, and kept holding them in French till the nineteenth century. The Waldensian community is often overlooked, as the Huguenots were larger in number. Henri Arnaud's home in Schönenberg close to Ötisheim is a Museum today. A memorial plate refers to the introduction of potatoes in Württemberg by the Waldensians.

The Waldensian stone was erected north of Le Bourcet (now part of Althengstett ) to commemorate the original settler families.

Main parts of the Waldensian refugees found a new home in Hessen-Darmstadt , Kassel , Homburg , Nassau-Dillenburg and in the then Grand Duchée Württemberg . The founded new communities in Rohrbach, Wembach und Hahn (today part of Ober-Ramstadt ), Walldorf (today Mörfelden-Walldorf ), Bad Homburg -Dornholzhausen, Gottstreu and Gewissenruh ( Oberweser ), Charlottenberg . Still today, French family names (Gille, Roux, Granget, Conle, Gillardon, Common, Jourdan, Piston, Richardon, Servay, Conte, Baral, Gay, Orcellet or Salen) show the Savoyard background. Stuttgart hosts as well an Italian Waldensian community with about 100 members.

Municipality names like Pinache, Serres (both now part of Wiernsheim ), Großvillars (part of Oberderdingen ), Kleinvillars , Perouse show the French heritage, the latter communities are close to Maulbronn and its UNESCO world heritage site monastery and school. Maulbronn was the place of the festivities for the 250th anniversary of the Waldensian emigration to Germany, [ 123 ] which played as well an important role in German Italian reconciliation after World War II.

[ 123 ] The Waldensian community is active and has various associations maintaining the specific heritage and keep relationships with their counterparts in Italy and South America.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] That includes as well a close watch on the ecumene, with the Waldensian-influenced theologians being more doubtful about a stronger cooperation with the Catholic Church than others.

See also [ edit ] Peter Waldo Arnoldists Czech reformers Petr Chelčický , Jan Hus , Jerome of Prague and Hussitism Durand of Huesca (later re-converted to Catholicism), early Spanish follower of Peter Waldo Frederick Henry Snow Pendleton , Anglican protector who worked with the Waldensians in South America Henri Arnaud , a Waldensian writer, pastor, and soldier List of Italian religious minority politicians Lollards Proto-Protestantism Restorationism Waldensian Evangelical Church John Charles Beckwith Luserna San Giovanni Val Pellice Waldensian valleys References [ edit ] ^ a b Macy, Gary (1984).

The Theologies of the Eucharist in the Early Scholastic Period: A Study of the Salvific Function of the Sacrament According to the Theologians, C. 1080-c. 1220 . Clarendon Press. p. 57.

ISBN 978-0-19-826669-3 .

^ a b Weber, N. (1912).

"Waldenses" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New Advent . Retrieved 28 January 2019 .

The real founder of the sect was a wealthy merchant of Lyons who in the early documents is called Waldes (Waldo) ... On the feast of the Assumption, 1176, he disposed of the last of his earthly possessions and shortly after took the vow of poverty.

^ "A History of the Waldensians" .

^ "Waldenses" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 28 January 2019 .

little is known with certainty about the reputed founder, Valdes (also called Peter Waldo, or Valdo). As a layman, Valdes preached (1170–1176) in Lyon, France ^ E. Cameron, Waldenses: Rejection of the Holy Church in Medieval Europe (Oxford, 2000), pp. 49–62 ^ Cameron 2000, pp. 264–284 ^ "Patto di integrazione globale tra le chiese metodiste e valdesi" . Chiesa Evangelica Valdese – Unione delle chiese Metodiste e Valdesi. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 23 March 2014 .

^ "Per un patto tra la Chiesa Assemblee di Dio e la Chiesa valdese" (PDF) . 20 September 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 23 March 2014 .

^ "Quienes somos – IEVRP" (in Spanish) . Retrieved 9 April 2019 .

^ "South America" .

www.waldensian.org . Retrieved 9 April 2019 .

^ a b "American Waldensian Society" . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ Stroud, James Edward (October 2011).

The Knights Templar & the Protestant Reformation . Xulon Press. p.

70 .

ISBN 978-1-61904-906-2 .

^ a b Pita, Gonzalo (2014). "Waldensian and Catholic Theologies of History in the XII–XIV Centuries: Part I".

Journal of the Adventist Theological Society 25.2: 65–87.

^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Accusations against the Waldensians" . Fordham University . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ Schaff, Philip.

"History of the Christian Church, Volume V: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1049–1294 – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ "Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, Volume V: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1049–1294 – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 11 November 2023 .

^ "Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, Volume V: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1049–1294 – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 29 July 2022 .

^ a b "Waldenses: Description, History, & Beliefs" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 22 January 2023 .

^ a b Alvarez, Sandra (15 November 2012).

"The Eucharist and the Negotiation of Orthodoxy in the High Middle Ages" . Medievalists . Retrieved 21 May 2023 .

The earliest Waldensian sources show a strong belief in the presence of Christ in the Eucharist. They drew on Peter Lombards' "Sentences" to respond to the Cathars and explain how evil men could consume the Eucharist. Nothing here was heretical or deviated from Orthodoxy.

^ "Waldenses | Description, History, & Beliefs | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 10 November 2023 .

^ Audisio, Gabriel (2007).

Preachers by Night – The Waldensian Barbes (15th – 16th Centuries) . Leiden – Boston: Brill. p. 44.

ISBN 9789004154544 .

^ a b Schaff, Philip.

"History of the Christian Church, Volume V: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1049–1294 – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 29 July 2022 .

^ Audisio, Gabriel (2007).

Preachers by Night: The Waldensian Barbes (15th-16th Centuries) . BRILL. p. 192.

ISBN 978-90-04-15454-4 .

^ a b c Anderson, Roberta; Bellenger, Dominic (17 June 2013).

Medieval Worlds: A Sourcebook . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-136-40513-6 .

^ William, Jones.

History of the Christian Church: From the Birth of Christ to the 18th Century . Delmarva Publications, Inc.

^ "Waldenses | Description, History, & Beliefs | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 22 January 2023 .

^ Moreland, Samuel (1658).

History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont . Henry Hills.

^ Vos, J. G. (April 1996).

"The Use and Abuse of Church History" .

Ordained Servant .

5 (2).

^ "Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, Volume V: The Middle Ages. A.D. 1049–1294 – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ Inquisitor Reyenerious, A. D. 1250, and extracted by Allix (Chap. 22) ^ Morland, Samuel (1658).

The history of the Evangelical churches of the valleys of Piemont : containing a most exact geographical description of the place, and a faithfull account of the doctrine, life, and persecutions of the ancient inhabitants; Together, with a most naked and punctual relation of the late bloudy massacre, 1655; And a narrative of all the following transactions, to the year of Our Lord, 1658 .

Princeton Theological Seminary Library. London : Printed by Henry Hills for Adoniram Byfield. p. 143.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Lawrence, Eugene (1876).

Historical Studies . pp.

202 –204.

^ Bosio, Enrico, " La Nobla Leyczon considérée au point de vue de la doctrine, de la morale et de l'histoire" (in French), Bulletin de la Société d'Histoire Vaudoise , no. 2 (dic.

1885), pp.

20–36.

^ TAYLOR, Daniel T. (1856).

The Voice of the Church on the Coming and Kingdom of the Redeemer; Or, a History of the Doctrine of the Reign of Christ on Earth. Revised and Edited with a Preface by H. L. Hastings. Third Edition . p. 129.

^ Montet, Edouard, La noble leçon, texte original d'après le manuscrit de Cambridge , 1888, pp.

19–26.

^ Montet, Edouard, La noble leçon, texte original d'après le manuscrit de Cambridge , 1888, p.

19.

^ "Waldenses | Description, History, & Beliefs | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .

^ Liber visionum et miraculorum , Anonymous Chronicles of Lyon ^ Tourn, Giorgio (1999).

Les Vaudois, l’étonnante aventure d’un peuple-église . Claudiana.

^ Minahan, J. (2002).

Encyclopedia of the Stateless Nations: S-Z . Encyclopedia of the Stateless Nations: Ethnic and National Groups Around the World. Greenwood Press. p. 2031.

ISBN 978-0-313-32384-3 . Retrieved 11 August 2023 .

^ Leger, Jean (1669).

Histoire générale des Eglises evangeliques des vallees de Piemont; ou vaudoises. divisée en deux livres,...par Jean Leger, Pasteur & Moderateur des Eglises des Vallées, & depuis la violence de la Persecution, appelé à l'Eglise Wallonne de Leyde. Le tout enrichi de Tailles douces (in French). chez Jean Le Carpentier. p. 155.

^ Gilly, William Stephen (1831).

Waldensian Researches During a Second Visit to the Vaudois of Piemont: With an Introductory Inquiry Into the Antiquity and Purity of the Waldensian Church ...

C. J. G. & F. Rivington.

^ Tuy, Lucas de (1613).

Lucae Tudensis Episcopi scriptores aliquot succedanei contra sectam Waldensium: nunc primum in lucem editi cum prolegomenis et notis ...

(in Latin). excudebat Andreas Angermarius. p. 54.

^ Arnaud, Henri (1710).

Histoire de la glorieuse rentrée des Vaudois (in French).

^ Harris, M. Roy (1984). "Old Waldensian: Some linguistic and editorial observations".

Romance Philology 38(2), pp. 200–225.

^ a b c d "Waldenses" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . 1 October 1912 . Retrieved 26 February 2014 – via New Advent.

^ Brooke, Rosalind B. (1975), The Coming of the Friars , New York: Routledge, pp.

72–73 ^ Comba, Emilio (1978) History of the Waldenses of Italy, from their origin to the Reformation . New York: AMS Press, ISBN 978-0-4041-6119-4 ^ Biller, Peter (August 2006).

"Goodbye to Waldensianism?" .

Past & Present (192): 3– 33.

doi : 10.1093/pastj/gtl004 .

ISSN 0031-2746 .

JSTOR 4125197 .

^ Herbermann, Charles George (1913).

The Catholic Encyclopedia , p.

250. Universal Knowledge Foundation ^ Gretser, J. (1738). Opera omnia antehac ab ipsomet auctore accurate recognita, opusculis multis, notis, et paralipomenis pluribus, propriis locis in hac editione insertis aucta et illustrata nunc selecto ordine ad certos titul: Lutherus academicus, et Waldenses sumptibus Joannis Conradi Peez. (p.112) [1] ^ Gretser, Jacob (1738).

Opera omnia, antehac ab ipsomet auctore accurate recognita, opusculis multis, notis, et paralipomenis pluribus, propriis locis in hac editione insertis, aucta et illustrata, nunc selecto ordine ad certos titulos revocata (in Latin). p. 112.

^ a b Damstegt, Gerard (Autumn 2016).

"Decoding Ancient Waldenses Names: New Discoveries" .

Andrews University Seminary Studies .

54 (2).

^ Goldast, Melchior (1607).

Melchioris Haiminsfeldii Goldasti Rationale Constitutionum Imperialium, Autoschediasthen Sive Extemporale: In quo cum ipsis Constitutionibus argumenta dicuntur, tum Sacri Romani Imperii iura aduersus Caesaris Baronii Cardinalis Romani Annales elenchos praescribuntur (p. 78) (in Latin).

^ Eymerich (O.P.), Nicolau (1595).

Directorium Inquisitorum (in Latin). sumptibus Simeonis Vasalini. p. 225.

^ Moneta, of Cremona; Ricchini, Tommaso Agostino; Sintes, Giovanni Battista; Fratta, Domenico Maria; Pomarede, Silvio; Palearini, Nicolò; Palearini, Marco (1743).

Venerabilis patris Monetae Cremonensis ordinis praedicatorum S.P. dominico aequalis Adversus Catharos et Valdenses libri quinque : quos ex manuscriptis codd. Vaticano, Bononiensi, ac Neapolitano . Getty Research Institute. Romae : Ex typographia Palladis : Excudebant Nicolaus, et Marcus Palearini. pp.

475– 476.

^ Hering, Johann Gottfried (1756).

Compendieuses Kirchen- und Ketzer-Lexicon: In welchem Alle Ketzereyen und Secten, und deren Urheber und Stiffter, von derer Apostel Zeiten her, wie auch die meisten geistlichen Orden angezeiget und beschrieben, darnebst auch viele zur Kirchen-Historie dienende Termini und Sachen angeführet und erklähret werden (in German). Fulde. p. 537.

^ Unattributed (1524).

Waldensian prose tracts. IE TCD MS 260 (in Latin). France?: Dominique Vigneaux d’’Angrogne. pp. f.209 r.

^ Blair, Adam (1832).

History of the Waldenses: With an Introductory Sketch of the History of the Christian Churches in the South of France and North of Italy, Till These Churches Submitted to the Pope, when the Waldenses Continued as Formerly Independent of the Papal See . A. Black. p. 527.

^ "Waldenses" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Retrieved 5 November 2021 – via New Advent.

^ "Accounts of the Waldenses".

Sketches of the Waldenses . Religious Tract Society. 1846. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-02-236632-9 . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

[...] returning to the region of the Alps, he [Vigilantius] found a body of Christians like-minded with himself; with these he gladly united, and laboured.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Piedmontese Children Forced from their parents" .

The Wesleyan Juvenile Offering: A Miscellany of Missionary Information for Young Persons .

X . Wesleyan Missionary Society: 108. October 1853 . Retrieved 29 February 2016 .

^ Audisio, Gabriel (1999).

The Waldensian Dissent: Persecution and Survival c. 1170 – c. 1570 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 14, 16, 22.

ISBN 978-0-521-55984-3 .

^ Compare: Blainey, Geoffrey (26 October 2011).

A Short History of Christianity . Camberwell, Victoria: Penguin (published 2011). p. 430.

ISBN 9780857962553 . Retrieved 17 February 2018 .

The Waldensians eschewed the Cathars, who were busy in the same regions at the same time. While the Cathars were heretics, the Waldensians generally were not. Their real act of defiance was quietly to deny the existence of purgatory.

^ Ellwood, R. S.; Alles, G. D. (2007). "Waldensians".

The Encyclopedia of World Religions . New York: Facts on File. p. 471.

ISBN 978-1-4381-1038-7 .

^ Galambosi, Péter (2018). "A budai eretnekmozgalom (1304–1307)" [The Heretical Movement in Buda (1304–1307)]. In Kádas, István; Skorka, Renáta; Weisz, Boglárka (eds.).

Veretek, utak, katonák. Gazdaságtörténeti tanulmányok a magyar középkorról (in Hungarian). MTA Bölcsészettudományi Kutatóközpont. pp.

223– 245.

ISBN 978-963-416-124-0 .

^ Innocent VIII (1669).

Id nostri cordis . Histoire générale des Eglises Evangeliques des Vallées du Piemont ou Vaudoises. Vol. 2. p. 8.

^ Baronio, Cesare (1663).

Annales ecclesiastici (in Latin). Mascardus.

^ "Bl. Angelo Carletti di Chivasso" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

^ Wylie, J. A. (1888).

History of the Waldenses . Dalcassian Publishing Company. p. 62.

^ Knecht, R. J. (1984).

Francis I . Cambridge University Press. p. 405.

ISBN 978-0-5212-4344-5 .

^ James Dabney McCabe (1874).

Cross and crown: or, The sufferings and triumphs of the heroic men and women who were persecuted for the religion of Jesus Christ . National Pub. Co. p.

66 . Retrieved 16 November 2018 .

^ Wylie, J. A.

(1996) [1860].

History of the Waldenses . Hartland. p. 132.

ISBN 9780923309305 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Milton: Sonnet 18" . Dartmouth.edu. Archived from the original on 25 July 2008 . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ Scharf, Thomas J. (1888), History of Delaware, 1609–1888 , L. J. Richards & Co., Philadelphia Vol. 1 Vol. 2 ^ "Janavel" . Regard.eu.org . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ Stephens, Prescot (1998), The Waldensian Story: A Study in Faith, Intolerance and Survival , Lewes, Sussex: Book Guild, ISBN 978-1-8577-6280-8 ^ Giorgio Spini (1971), L'Evangelo e il berretto frigio (Storia del movimento evangelico in Italia, Vol.

I), Claudiana, Turin ^ Watt, George B. (1941), Waldenses in the New World , Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press ^ Bächstädt-Malan Camusso, Christian (2002), "Per Una Storia dell'Industria Dolciaria Torinese: il Caso Caffarel", p.

63, Doctoral thesis (Economics and Business), Universitá degli Studi di Torino ^ Gilly, William Stephen (1848).

The Romaunt Version of the Gospel According to St. John... with an Introductory History of the Version of the New Testament, Anciently in Use Among the Old Waldenses...

London: J. Murray.

^ "Francis asks forgiveness for Waldensian persecutions, killings" .

National Catholic Reporter . 22 June 2015 . Retrieved 14 February 2021 .

^ Brackney, William H. (3 May 2012).

Historical Dictionary of Radical Christianity . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7365-0 .

^ a b David, Zdeněk V. (29 July 2003).

Finding the Middle Way: The Utraquists' Liberal Challenge to Rome and Luther . Woodrow Wilson Center Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-7382-9 .

^ Brock, Peter (8 March 2015).

Pacifism in Europe to 1914 . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-6749-3 .

^ Adogame, A.; Shankar, S. (2012).

Religion on the Move!: New Dynamics of Religious Expansion in a Globalizing World . International Studies in Religion and Society. Brill. p. 208.

ISBN 978-90-04-24337-8 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

^ Prudlo, D. S. (2016).

Certain Sainthood: Canonization and the Origins of Papal Infallibility in the Medieval Church . Cornell University Press. p. 59.

ISBN 978-1-5017-0152-8 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

^ Kim, E. J. F.; Bush, L. (2012).

The Rise of the Global South: The Decline of Western Christendom and the Rise of Majority World Christianity . Wipf & Stock. p. 196.

ISBN 978-1-61097-970-2 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

^ Weber, N. (1912).

"Waldenses" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New Advent . Retrieved 28 January 2019 .

The first Waldensian congregations, it was maintained, were established by St. Paul who, on his journey to Spain, visited the valleys of Piedmont ... In the nineteenth century, however, it became evident to critics that the Waldensian documents had been tampered with.

^ See also: Monastier, Antoine (1847).

A History of the Vaudois Church from Its Origin: And of the Vaudois of Piedmont to the Present Day [ Histoire de l'Église vaudoise, depuis son origine et des vaudois du Piémont jusqu'à nos jours ] (translated from the French ed.). London: Religious Tract Society (published 1848) . Retrieved 25 February 2019 .

^ Monastier, Antoine (1859).

A History of the Vaudois Church from Its Origin . London: Religious Tract Society. p.

58 .

^ Weber, N. (1912).

"Waldenses" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New Advent . Retrieved 28 January 2019 .

Pope Lucius III consequently included them among the heretics against whom he issued a Bull of excommunication at Verona in 1184.

^ Garrett, James Leo (2009). "6: Baptist Landmarkism".

Baptist Theology: A Four-century Study . Baptist Series (reprint ed.). Macon, Georgia: Mercer University Press. p. 216.

ISBN 9780881461299 . Retrieved 25 February 2019 .

George Herbert Orchard (1796–1861), an English Baptist pastor in Bedfordshire ... sought to trace Baptist churches from the time of John the Baptist through such groups as the Montanists, Novationists, Donatists, Paulicians, Patarines, Petrobrusians, Arnoldists, Albigenses, Waldenses, Unitas Fratrum , Lollards, and Anabaptists. Thereby Baptist church successionism was added to the body of Landmark beliefs.

^ Lawrence, Eugene (1876).

Historical Studies . p.

199 .

^ Benedict, David (1813).

A General History of the Baptist Denomination in America: And Other Parts of the World . Lincoln & Edmands, no. 53, Cornhill. p. 413.

^ Luc : d' Achery (1723).

Spicilegium sive collectio veterum aliquot scriptorum qui in Galliae bibliothecis delituerant. Olim editum opera ac studio d. Lucae d'Achery, .

(in Latin). National Central Library of Rome. p. 210.

^ Theileman van Braght (2009).

Martyrs Mirror . Scottdale, Pennsylvania: Herald Press. p. 287.

^ Steven Blaupot ten Cate (1844), Geschiedkundig onderzoek naar den Waldenzischen oorsprong van de Nederlandsche Doopsgezinden , Amsterdam: Frederik Muller ^ Geschiedkundig onderzoek at the Internet Archive ^ Waller, John L. (1847).

The Western Baptist Review "Were the Waldenses Baptists or Pedo-Baptists?

. A. G. Hodges and Company, printers. pp.

30– 32.

^ "Lateran 4 – 1215" . Ewtn.com . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ Brian Tierney (1970), The Middle Ages , Volume 1, p. 223: Sources of Medieval History, New York, Alfred Knopf, quoted from S. R. Maitland (1832), History of the Albigenses and Waldenses ^ G. H. Orchard (1987), A Concise History of Baptists , p. 180, Texarkana: Bogard Press ^ Thomas Armitage (1988), A History of the Baptists , pp. 302–303, Watertown, Wisconsin: Baptist Heritage Press ^ Greg Wilson (1 September 1988).

"Waldenses Were Independent Baptists" . Landmark Independent Baptist Church . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ "waldenses confessions of faith" . Baptistdocuments.tripod.com . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ Wylie, J. A.

(1882).

The History of Protestantism .

^ White, Ellen G.

(1870). "Chapter 4: The Waldenses".

The Great Controversy .

^ Dollinger, Johann (1890).

Beitrage zur Sektengeschichte Des Mittelalters (in German) (2nd ed.). Munich. p.

661 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Andrews, J. N.

(1873). "Chapter 21–The Sabbath During the Dark Ages".

History of the Sabbath .

^ Andrews, J. N.

(1873). "Chapter 25: Sabbath Keepers During The Reformation Times From The Fifteenth To The Seventeenth Century".

History of the Sabbath .

^ Audisio, Gabriel.

The Waldensian dissent: persecution and survival, c. 1170 – c. 1570 . Cambridge University Press, 1999. pp. 72–77 ^ The first historian on the Waldensians, Gerolamo Miolo in his Historia breve et vera de gl'affari de i valdesi delle Valli (1587), explicitly stated that "Thus began the appellation of Poors of Lyon, also called Waldensians, Lyonists, insabbati , because they did not observe either the Sabbath nor any feasts." p. 84 ^ Homer, Michael W. (May 2006). "Seeking Primitive Christianity in the Waldensian Valleys: Protestants, Mormons, Adventists and Jehovah's Witnesses in Italy".

Nova Religio .

9 (4).

University of California Press : 8.

doi : 10.1525/nr.2006.9.4.005 .

JSTOR 10.1525/nr.2006.9.4.005 .

^ William Jones (1832), The History of the Christian Church Archived 24 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine , The Ages Digital Library ^ Perrin, Jean Paul (1847), History of the Ancient Christians (PDF) , retrieved 26 February 2014 ^ "La 'Confesion de fé' de los Valdenses llamada del ano 1120" (August 1935).

Boletin de la Sociedad Sudamericana de Historia Valdense , p.

58 ^ "La 'Confesion de fé' de los Valdenses llamada del ano 1120" (August 1935), Boletin de la Sociedad Sudamericana de Historia Valdense , pp.

57–60 ^ Vinay, Valdo (December 1972), "Mémoires de George Morel : l'importanza del codice valdese c-5-18 (Ms.

259) del Trinity College di Dublino per la storia dell'adesione dei Valdesi alla Riforma", Bollettino della Società di Studi Valdesi – Bulletin de la Société d'Histoire Vaudoise, pp.

93, 132.

^ Jean Léger, Siegmund Jacob Baumgartens, Johann Jacob Korn (1750), Algemeine Geschichte der Waldenser oder der evangelischen Kirchen in den Thälern von Piemont ^ Heinrich Gottlieb Kreussler (1830), Rückblicke auf die Geschichte der Reformation, oder, Luther in Leben und That: zur Erinnerung an die dreihundertjährige Augsburgische Confessions ^ similar in: F. Bender (1850) Geschichte der Waldenser [History is the Waldensians] ^ a b c d e f g h i Barbro Lovisa (1994), Italienische Waldenser und das protestantische Deutschland 1655 bis 1989 [Italian Waldensianism and protestant Germany 1655 to 1989], Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen ISBN 978-3-5255-6539-1 ^ Paul R. Tarmann (2010) Der Armutsbegriff der Waldenser: eine sozialphilosophische Annäherung , Frankfurt am Main: Lang ISBN 978-3-6316-0203-4 ^ "Chiesa Evangelica Pentecostale 'L'Eterno Nostra Giustizia' " . Grotte.info. 26 December 2012 . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ Scotland, Nigel (2012).

Christianity Outside the Box: Learning from Those Who Rocked the Boat . Wipf & Stock Publishers. p. 72.

^ Whittaker, Andrew (2010).

Italy: Be Fluent in Italian Life and Culture . Thorogood Publishing. p. 280.

^ Gustavus Adolphus Union website Common projects (in German) GAW Waldenser entries ^ Valdese, OPM-Tavola.

"otto per mille della dichiarazione irpef alla chiesa valdese" .

www.ottopermillevaldese.org . Archived from the original on 12 January 2019 . Retrieved 15 March 2016 .

^ "Italian Protestants approve same-sex blessings" .

Presbyterian Church (U.S.A) . 7 September 2010. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 May 2016 .

^ Gaetano Pecoraro (27 August 2010).

"Coppie gay, storica apertura della Chiesa valdese. Ma si aspetta ancora una legge" .

Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

^ "South America" . American Waldensian Society. 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 .

^ Geymonat, Roger.

El templo y la escuela: los valdenses en el Uruguay.

Cal y Canto, 1994.

^ "Valdenses no Brasil" .

Ensaios e Notas (in Brazilian Portuguese). 17 February 2017 . Retrieved 20 May 2023 .

^ Morris, Ira.

Morris's Memorial History of Staten Island, New York , Volume 1. 1898, page 40 ^ "Regions: Europe: Countries: Italy" , Global Mormonism Project , Brigham Young University, archived from the original on 2 January 2009 , retrieved 22 December 2011 ^ a b "Waldenses Settle in Burke County" .

This Day in North Carolina History . N.C. Department of Natural & Cultural Resources. 29 May 2016 . Retrieved 29 May 2019 .

^ Homer, Michael W. (Fall 2000), " 'Like the Rose in the Wilderness': The Mormon Mission in the Kingdom of Sardinia" (PDF) , Mormon Historical Studies , 1 (2), Mormon Historic Sites Foundation : 25– 62 ^ Homer, Michael W. (2002), "Il Libro di Mormon: Anticipating Growth beyond Italy's Waldensian Valleys" , Journal of Book of Mormon Studies , 11 (1), Maxwell Institute For Religious Scholarship, Brigham Young University : 40– 44, JSTOR 10.5406/jbookmormstud.11.1.0040 , S2CID 193621954 , archived from the original on 1 July 2013 , retrieved 22 December 2011 ^ Stoke, Diane (1985).

The Mormon Waldensians (PDF) ( MA ). Department of History, Brigham Young University ; Harold B. Lee Library Digital Collections.

^ Platene, Giuseppe (1 April 1989), "To A Home in the Land of the Free" , Christianity Today , archived from the original on 21 October 2013 , retrieved 22 December 2011 ^ "Who We Are" . Waldensian.org . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ "Medieval New York: Waldensians in New York City" . Fordham University. 3 May 1998 . Retrieved 26 February 2014 .

^ "Outdoor Drama At Valdese Has Long Run" .

Charlotte Observer . 3 June 1973. p. 17E.

^ "Deutsche Waldenservereinigung" .

www.waldenser.de (in German) . Retrieved 20 May 2023 .

^ "Deutsche Waldenserorte" . Archived from the original on 1 June 2017 . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

^ Weidenmann.

"Waldenserort Nordhausen" . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

^ "Waldenserkirche" .

Evangelische Waldenser-Kirchengemeinde . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Arnold, Eberhard (1984) The Early Anabaptists , Plough Publishing House ISBN 978-0-87486-192-1 Audisio, Gabriel (2007), Preachers by Night The Waldensian Barbes (15th–16th Centuries) , ISBN 978-90-04-15454-4 Audisio, Gabriel (1999) The Waldensian Dissent: Persecution and Survival, c.1170–c.1570 , Cambridge Medieval Textbooks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-55984-7 Bellito, Christopher M., (Ed.), A Companion to the Waldenses in the Middle Ages ISBN 9789004420410 Bost, Ami (1848) History of the Bohemian and Moravian Brethren , pp. 4–5, Religious Tract Society of London Cameron, Euan (2001) The Waldenses: Rejections of Holy Church in Medieval Europe ISBN 0-631-22497-1 , ISBN 978-0-631-22497-6 Comba, Emilio (1978) History of the Waldenses of Italy, from their origin to the Reformation ISBN 0-404-16119-7 Jones, William (1816), The History of the Waldenses: Connected with a Sketch of the Christian Church from the Birth of Christ to the Eighteenth Century (Vol. 2, 2nd ed.), London: Gale and Fenner Muston, Alexis (1978) The Israel of the Alps : a complete history of the Waldenses and their colonies : prepared in great part from unpublished documents ISBN 0-404-16140-5 Sossi, Andrea (2010), Medioevo Valdese 1173–1315. Povertà, Eucarestia e Predicazione: Tra identità minoritaria e rappresentazione cifrata del rapporto tra l'uomo e l'Assoluto , UNI Service Editrice, Trento.

Wylie, James Aitken (c.1860) History of the Waldenses ISBN 1-57258-185-9 online ebook ( Gutenberg ) External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of a 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article about Waldensians .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Waldensians .

Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of Piedmont An Inquiry into the History and Theology of the Ancient Vallenses and Albigenses The Waldensian Church in the valleys of Piedmont American Waldensian Society , North America Waldenses at Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online The Waldensian Movement From Waldo to the Reformation v t e Beliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church ( list ) Antiquity Adoptionism Apollinarism Arianism Anomoeanism Semi-Arianism Antidicomarianites Audianism Docetism Donatism Circumcellions Collyridianism Dualism Ebionites Euchites Gnosticism Manichaeism Paulicianism Priscillianism Naassenes Ophites Sethianism Valentinianism Iconoclasm Luciferianism Macedonianism Marcionism Melchisedechians Modalism Monarchianism Athinganoi Modalistic Monophysitism Monothelitism Montanism Nestorianism Novatianism Patripassianism Pelagianism Semipelagianism Pneumatomachians Psilanthropism Sabellianism Subordinationism Valentinianism Middle Ages Arnoldism Bogomilism Bosnian Church Catharism Conciliarism Dulcinians Fraticelli Free Spirits Henricians Humiliati Hussites Impanation Josephines Lollardy Migetians Pasagians Spanish Adoptionism Taborites Waldensians Early modernity Antinomianism Consubstantiation Febronianism Gallicanism Jansenism Josephinism Pantheism Protestantism Anabaptism Arminianism Calvinism Lutheranism Quietism Modernity Americanism Community of the Lady of All Nations Feeneyism Indifferentism Jehovah's Witnesses Modernism Mormonism Narco-saints Maximón Santa Muerte Positive Christianity Reincarnationism Catholic Church portal v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e Anabaptism Background Protestant Reformation Radical Reformation Waldensians Petr Chelčický Moravian Church German mysticism Zwickau prophets Congregationalism Groups Swiss Brethren Hutterites Batenburgers Mennonites Old Order Mennonites Conservative Mennonites Russian Mennonites Amish New Order Amish Beachy Amish Amish Mennonites Abecedarians Schwenkfelders Schwarzenau (German Baptist) Brethren River Brethren Old Order River Brethren Brethren in Christ Church Bruderhof Apostolic Christian Church Peace churches History German Peasants' War Münster rebellion Martyrs Mirror Schleitheim Confession Dordrecht Confession of Faith Ausbund Old Order Movement Anabaptist–Jewish relations Settler colonialism Theology Theology of Anabaptism Church discipline Christian communism Freedom of religion Great Apostasy Memorialism Nonconformity to the world Nonresistance Pacifism Priesthood of all believers Separation of church and state – free church Sola scriptura Practices Agape feast Believer's baptism Closed communion Foot washing Ordnung Plain dress Shunning Simple living Singings Notable Anabaptists Felix Manz Conrad Grebel Pilgram Marpeck Michael Sattler Hans Denck Jakob Hutter Balthasar Hubmaier Bernhard Rothmann Dirk Philips Menno Simons Jakob Ammann Alexander Mack Samuel Heinrich Fröhlich Christianity portal v t e Proto-Protestantism 400–1100 AD People Jovinian Claudius of Turin Gottschalk of Orbais Ratramnus Berengar of Tours Sects and groups Pataria Berengarians 1100–1400 AD People Tanchelm Peter of Bruys Henry of Lausanne Arnold of Brescia Peter Waldo Milíč of Kroměříž John Wycliffe Matthias of Janov Marsilius of Padua Sects and groups Arnoldists Waldensians Lollardy Strigolniki Friends of God Petrobrusians 1400–1500 AD People Jan Hus Jan Žižka Mikuláš of Pelhřimov Petr Chelčický Johannes von Goch Johann Ruchrat von Wesel Wessel Gansfort Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples Lorenzo Valla Girolamo Savonarola Luke of Prague Sects and groups Bohemian Reformation Hussites Taborites Utraquism Czech Brethren Piagnoni Events Oldcastle Revolt Hussite Wars Compacts of Basel Peace of Kutná Hora Mérindol massacre Savoyard–Waldensian wars Piedmontese Easter Literature Wycliffe Bible Hussite Bible Jistebnice hymn book Ecclesiae Regimen Twelve Conclusions of the Lollards Triumph of the Cross (Girolamo Savonarola) Other Comparison of Catharism and Protestantism Italics indicate their inclusion to be controversial or disputed.

Portals : Christianity France Italy History Religion Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Waldensians&oldid=1302495619 " Categories : Waldensianism 1173 establishments in Europe Christian denominations founded in France Protestantism in Argentina Protestantism in Uruguay Protestantism in the United States History of Catholicism in Italy Protestantism in Italy Christian denominations established in the 12th century Christian terminology Christian radicalism Protestant third orders 1170s establishments in France 12th-century Christianity Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2022 Articles with Internet Archive links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles containing Italian-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2015 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Occitan (post 1500)-language text All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from May 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from May 2022 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 19:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Waldensians 49 languages Add topic

