Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Music 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Michelagnolo Galilei 12 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian lutenist and composer (1575–1631) Michelagnolo Galilei (sometimes spelled Michelangelo ; 18 December 1575 – 3 January 1631) was an Italian composer and lutenist of the late Renaissance and early Baroque eras, active mainly in Bavaria and Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth . He was the son of music theorist and lutenist Vincenzo Galilei , and the younger brother of the scientist Galileo Galilei .

Life [ edit ] Galilei was born in Florence , Grand Duchy of Tuscany . He learned to play the lute at an early age, like his father. Most likely he was destined for a career in Florence, but when his father died in 1591, the sixteen-year-old lutenist was put in the charge of his older brother Galileo Galilei , who was in Padua .

Some other employment had to be found for Michelagnolo, so in 1593 he went to the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , where foreign musicians were much in demand.

[ 1 ] Most likely he went there with the powerful Lithuanian Radziwiłł family. The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had several sophisticated musical establishments at the end of the 16th and beginning of the 17th centuries, especially at Kraków : Luca Marenzio , one of Italy's most famous madrigal composers, went there for a time, as did lutenists Diomedes Cato and Valentin Bakfark . Lutenists were particularly in demand, and a considerable quantity of lute music was printed in Poland and Lithuania, in cities such as Kraków, Gdańsk , Toruń and Vilnius .

[ 2 ] Michelagnolo came back from Poland in 1599, in a second failed attempt to gain employment in Florence in the court of Grand Duke Ferdinando de' Medici , but returned in 1600 to his previous employer in Poland–Lithuania.

[ 3 ] He stayed there until 1607, at which time he was hired by the Munich Hofkapelle of Duke Maximilian I .

Munich had one of the most progressive musical establishments in the region since the mid-16th century, having employed Orlande de Lassus ; Galilei was another of many talented Italian musicians who went there to live and work. He remained in Munich for the rest of his life, fathering eight children, at least three of whom also became lutenists.

[ 4 ] His relationship with his brother Galileo became especially difficult in his last years. Many of the letters between the two have been preserved; Michelagnolo ceaselessly implored his elder brother for money, and for help with his difficult children (Vincenzo, born in 1608, was particularly troublesome).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Music [ edit ] Most of Galilei's music was for ten-course lute, and most was published in his first book, Il primo libro d'intavolatura di liuto (Munich, 1620), which used tablature notation. Some of his pieces appeared singly in other publications.

His music consists of dances such as galliards , voltas , and correntes , grouped loosely into suites , organized by musical mode. Each suite is preceded by a toccata , and the book closes with two paired passamezzos and saltarellos .

[ 4 ] Stylistically they are written in the most modern manner of the time, with dissonances , ornaments, and functional tonal progressions indicative of the developing early Baroque style. His musical style was particularly influential in southern Germany, as shown by the demand for his music, even when he was still in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth .

[ 4 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Eisenhardt, Lex (2015).

Italian Guitar Music of the Seventeenth Century: Battuto and Pizzicato . Boydell & Brewer. p. 93.

ISBN 9781580465335 .

^ Morawska, Grove ^ a b Beier, Program Notes ^ a b c d Chauvel, Grove References [ edit ] Claude Chauvel: "Michelagnolo Galilei", Grove Music Online, ed. L. Macy (Accessed March 7, 2007) (subscription access) Katarzyna Morawska, "Poland", I, 1, Grove Music Online, ed. L. Macy (Accessed March 10, 2007) (subscription access) Paul Beier, Program Notes for "Michelagnolo Galilei: Sonate from Il primo libro d'Intavolatura di liuto (1620)" (biography and musical description) v t e Galileo Galilei Scientific career Observational astronomy Galileo affair Galileo's escapement Galilean invariance Galilean moons Galilean transformation Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment Phases of Venus Celatone Thermoscope Works De motu antiquiora (1589–1592) Sidereus Nuncius (1610) Letters on Sunspots (1613) Letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) " Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina " (1615) " Discourse on the Tides " (1616) Discourse on Comets (1619) The Assayer (1623) Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632) Two New Sciences (1638) Family Vincenzo Galilei (father) Michelagnolo Galilei (brother) Vincenzo Gamba (son) Maria Celeste (daughter) Marina Gamba (mistress) Related " And yet it moves " Villa Il Gioiello Galileo's paradox Galileo's ship Sector Museo Galileo Galileo's telescopes Galileo's objective lens Tribune of Galileo Galileo thermometer Galileo project spacecraft Galileo Galilei Airport Galileo National Telescope Astronomers Monument In popular culture Life of Galileo (1943 play) Lamp At Midnight (1947 play) Galileo (1968 film) Galileo (1975 film) Starry Messenger (1996 book) Galileo's Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and Love (1999 book) Galileo Galilei (2002 opera) Galileo's Dream (2009 novel) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Croatia Poland Israel Finland Belgium Artists MusicBrainz People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michelagnolo_Galilei&oldid=1295258647 " Categories : 1575 births 1631 deaths Galilei family Italian male classical composers Italian Baroque composers Italian lutenists Italian Renaissance composers Musicians from Florence 17th-century Italian composers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michelagnolo Galilei 12 languages Add topic

