Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples of non-credible threats Toggle Examples of non-credible threats subsection 1.1 Market entry game 1.2 Eric van Damme's Extensive Form Game 2 Rationality Toggle Rationality subsection 2.1 Experiment using the Beard and Beil Game (1994) 3 Notes 4 See also 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Non-credible threat 3 languages 한국어 עברית Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in game theory Illustration that shows the difference between a SPNE and another NE. The blue equilibrium is not subgame perfect because player two makes a non-credible threat at 2(2) to be unkind (U).

A non-credible threat is a term used in game theory and economics to describe a threat in a sequential game that a rational player would not actually carry out, because it would not be in his best interest to do so.

A threat, and its counterpart – a commitment, are both defined by American economist and Nobel prize winner, T.C. Schelling , who stated that: "A announces that B's behaviour will lead to a response from A. If this response is a reward, then the announcement is a commitment; if this response is a penalty, then the announcement is a threat." [ 1 ] While a player might make a threat, it is only deemed credible if it serves the best interest of the player.

[ 2 ] In other words, the player would be willing to carry through with the action that is being threatened regardless of the choice of the other player.

[ 3 ] This is based on the assumption that the player is rational.

[ 1 ] A non-credible threat is made on the hope that it will be believed, and therefore the threatening undesirable action will not need to be carried out.

[ 4 ] For a threat to be credible within an equilibrium , whenever a node is reached where a threat should be fulfilled, it will be fulfilled.

[ 3 ] Those Nash equilibria that rely on non-credible threats can be eliminated through backward induction ; the remaining equilibria are called subgame perfect Nash equilibria .

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] Examples of non-credible threats [ edit ] Player 2 threatening action A if Player 1 chooses action B is a non-credible threat. This is because if Player 1 chooses action B, Player 2 will choose action B, as this results in a higher payoff than action A for Player 2.

Market entry game [ edit ] An example of a non-credible threat is demonstrated by Shaorong Sun & Na Sun in their book Management Game Theory. The example game, the market entry game, describes a situation in which an existing firm, firm 2, has a strong hold on the market and a new firm, firm 1, is considering entering. If firm 1 doesn’t enter, the payoff is (4,10). However, if firm 1 does enter, firm 2 has the choice to either attack or not attack. If firm 2 attacks, the payoff is (3,3) whereas if firm 2 doesn’t attack, the payoff is (6,6). Given that firm 2’s optimum payoff is firm 1 not entering, it can issue a threat that they will attack if firm 1 enters, to discourage firm 1 from entering the market. However, this is a non-credible threat. If firm 1 does decide to enter the market, the action that is in the best interest for firm 2 is to not attack as this leads to a payoff of 6 for the firm, as opposed to the payoff of 3 from attacking.

[ 1 ] Eric van Damme's Extensive Form Game [ edit ] Eric van Damme's Extensive Form Game demonstrates another example of a non-credible threat. In this game, player 1 has the choice of L or R, and if player 1 chooses R, then player 2 has the choice of l or r . Player 2 can threaten choosing l with a payoff of (0,0) to entice player 1 to choose L with a payoff of (2,2), as this is the highest payoff for player 2. However, this is a non-credible threat as, if player 1 does decide to choose R, player 2 will choose r as their payoff is 1 as opposed to l which has a payoff of 0 for player 2. Given that action l is not in player 2’s best interest, their threat to play that is non-credible.

[ 4 ] Rationality [ edit ] The notion of credibility is contingent on the principle of rationality. A rational player always make decisions that maximise their own utility, however, players are not always rational.

[ 6 ] Therefore, in real world applications, the assumption that all players will be rational and act to maximise their utility is not practical, thus non-credible threats cannot be ignored.

[ 7 ] Experiment using the Beard and Beil Game (1994) [ edit ] Nicolas Jacquemet and Adam Zylbersztejn conducted experiments based on the Beard and Beil Game to investigate whether people act to maximise their payoffs. From the study Jacquemet and Zylbersztejn found that failure to maximise utility stemmed from two observations: "subjects are not willing to rely on others’ self-interested maximization, and self-interested maximization is not ubiquitous." [ 8 ] A key component of the utility maximising strategy in the game was the elimination of non-credible threats, however, the study found that suboptimal payoffs were a direct result of players following through on these non-credible threats.

[ 8 ] In real world applications, non-credible threats must be considered as there is a high possibility players will not act rationally.

[ 7 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Sun, Shaorong; Sun, Na (2018).

Management Game Theory .

doi : 10.1007/978-981-13-1062-1 .

ISBN 978-981-13-1061-4 .

S2CID 169075970 .

^ a b Heifetz, A., & Yalon-Fortus, J. (2012). Game Theory: Interactive Strategies in Economics and Management. Cambridge University Press. ProQuest Ebook Central ^ a b Schelling, Thomas C. (1956).

"An Essay on Bargaining" .

The American Economic Review .

46 (3): 281– 306.

JSTOR 1805498 .

^ a b van Damme, Eric (1989). "Extensive Form Games". In Eatwell, J.; Milgate, M.; Newman, P. (eds.).

Game Theory . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

139– 144.

ISBN 978-1-349-20181-5 .

^ Harrington, J. E. (1989). "Noncooperative Games". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.).

Game Theory . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

178– 184.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-20181-5 .

ISBN 978-1-349-20181-5 .

^ Monahan, K. (2018).

How Behavioral Economics Influences Management Decision-Making: A New Paradigm . Academic Press.

doi : 10.1016/C2016-0-05106-9 .

ISBN 9780128135310 .

^ a b Khalil, Elias L. (2011).

"Rational, Normative and Procedural Theories of Beliefs: Can They Explain Internal Motivations?" .

Journal of Economic Issues .

45 (3): 641– 664.

doi : 10.2753/JEI0021-3624450307 .

S2CID 143987777 .

^ a b Jacquemet, Nicolas; Zylbersztejn, Adam (June 2014).

"What Drives Failure to Maximize Payoffs in the Lab? A Test of the Inequality Aversion Hypothesis" .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1895287 .

S2CID 219374150 .

SSRN 1895287 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) See also [ edit ] Dynamic inconsistency Subgame perfect equilibrium External links [ edit ] Schelling, Thomas C. (1956).

"An Essay on Bargaining" .

The American Economic Review .

46 (3): 281– 306.

JSTOR 1805498 .

Ellsberg, Daniel.

The theory and practice of blackmail.

No. RAND/P-3883. RAND CORP SANTA MONICA CA, 1968.

Uri Weiss, 2015. " The Robber Wants To Be Punished ," Discussion Paper Series dp685, The Federmann Center for the Study of Rationality, the Hebrew University, Jerusalem.

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category This game theory article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-credible_threat&oldid=1297149331 " Categories : Game theory Microeconomics stubs Economic theories stubs Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 12:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-credible threat 3 languages Add topic

