Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Instrument making 3 Transit circle 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Georg Friedrich von Reichenbach 11 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Italiano مصرى Português Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German scientific instrument maker (1771–1826) Georg Friedrich von Reichenbach By Friedrich Hohe after Joseph Karl Stieler (c. 1825) Born 24 August 1771 Durlach , Baden , Holy Roman Empire Died 21 May 1826 (1826-05-21) (aged 53) Munich , Germany Occupation Scientific instrument maker Georg Friedrich von Reichenbach (24 August 1771 – 21 May 1826) was a German scientific instrument maker.

Early life [ edit ] Reichenbach's father was a master mechanic, and a master cannon-borer, who moved to Mannheim when Reichenbach was two, and became manager of the cannon-boring works there. At 14 Georg was admitted to the Military School at Mannheim where he got to know the astronomer at the Mannheim Observatory. He received a knowledge of mathematical instruments and was inspired to try to construct similar instruments in his father's workshop. The Director of the Observatory sent a sextant made by Reichenbach to Count Rumford .

When he was 19, Reichenbach received a grant of 500 gulden for a journey to London, and introductions to the engineers James Watt and Matthew Boulton . Reichenbach's first visit to England lasted from 1 June 1791 to January 1792, when he returned home for a short time before returning to England. He made drawings of Watt's steam engine despite Watt's attempts to keep it secret from him and also worked as an engineer in English ironworks and studied English instrument making.

He returned home in May 1793 and attempted improvements in the military workshops in Mannheim and Munich, with the help of his father.

Instrument making [ edit ] In 1796 he moved to Munich where he began making his famous scientific instruments, including a dividing engine ,  in between carrying out military work, which included the invention of a breech-loading rifle which however did not prove popular.

In 1804, with Joseph Liebherr and Joseph Utzschneider , he founded an instrument making business in Munich and from 1807 onwards he was occupied more and more with the technical problems involved in making scientific instruments, in 1809 establishing with Joseph Fraunhofer and Utzschneider, optical works at Benediktbeuern , which were later moved to Munich in 1823.

[ 1 ] In 1811 resigned from the army to devote his time to his scientific work and in 1814 withdrew from both of the companies he had been involved with, founding with T. L. Ertel a new optical business, from which he retired in 1821, when he obtained an engineering appointment under the Bavarian government. He died at Munich on 21 May 1826.

[ 1 ] He is buried in the Alter Südfriedhof in Munich.

Transit circle [ edit ] Reichenbach's principal achievement was the introduction into observatories of the meridian or transit circle , which combined the transit and the mural circle into one instrument. This had already been done by Ole Rømer in around 1704, but the idea had not been adopted by anyone else, except in the transit circle constructed by Edward Troughton for Stephen Groombridge in 1806. The transit circle in the form given it by Reichenbach had one finely divided circle attached to one end of the horizontal axis and was read by four verniers on an " alidade circle," the unaltered position of which was tested by a spirit level. The instrument came almost at once into universal use on the continent of Europe (the first one was made for F. W. Bessel in 1819), but in England the mural circle and transit instrument were not superseded for many years.

[ 1 ] Notes [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ a b c Chisholm 1911 .

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Reichenbach, Georg von ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 49.

Matschoss, Conrad; H. Stafford Hatfield (1970).

Great Engineers . Ayer Publishing.

ISBN 0-8369-1837-1 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Georg_Friedrich_von_Reichenbach&oldid=1256679689 " Categories : German scientific instrument makers People associated with astronomy Burials at the Alter Südfriedhof 1771 births 1826 deaths Military personnel from Mannheim 18th-century German artisans Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 11 November 2024, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Georg Friedrich von Reichenbach 11 languages Add topic

