Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin of the term 2 Purposes Toggle Purposes subsection 2.1 Ideological influence 2.2 Political influence 3 Techniques Toggle Techniques subsection 3.1 Deception 3.2 Denial 3.3 Relativization and trivialization 4 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 4.1 Book burning 4.1.1 Chinese book burning 4.2 United States history 4.2.1 Executive order to negate American history 4.2.2 Confederate revisionism 4.2.3 California genocide 4.3 War crimes 4.3.1 Japanese war crimes 4.3.2 Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings 4.3.3 Croatian war crimes in World War II 4.3.4 Serbian war crimes in World War II 4.3.5 Serbian war crimes in the Yugoslav wars 4.3.6 Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia 4.3.7 Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 4.3.8 Turkey and the Armenian genocide 4.3.9 South Korean war crimes in Vietnam 4.4 Iran 4.5 Soviet and Russian history 4.6 Azerbaijan 4.6.1 In relation to Armenia 4.6.2 In relation to Iran 4.7 North Korea and the Korean War 4.8 Holocaust denial 4.9 North Macedonia 4.10 Historiography in Africa 4.11 In textbooks 4.11.1 Japan 4.11.2 Pakistan 4.11.3 South Korea 4.11.4 Turkey 4.11.5 Yugoslavia 4.12 French law recognizing colonialism's positive value 4.13 Marcos martial law negationism in the Philippines 4.14 Denial of the Muslim conquest of the Iberian peninsula 4.15 Australia 4.16 Nakba 5 Ramifications and judicature Toggle Ramifications and judicature subsection 5.1 International law 5.2 Domestic law 6 In fiction 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Cases of denialism 8 Notes 9 References 10 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Historical negationism 27 languages العربية Беларуская Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Sardu Shqip Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Illegitimate distortion of the historical record For the critical re-examination of historical facts, see Historical revisionism .

"Negationism" redirects here; not to be confused with Denialism .

Historical negationism , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] also called historical denialism , is the falsification, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] trivialization, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] or distortion of the historical record. This is distinct from historical revisionism , a broader term encompassing academic reinterpretations of history driven by new evidence or reasoning.

[ 7 ] In attempting to revise and influence the past, historical negationism acts as illegitimate historical revisionism by using techniques inadmissible in proper historical discourse, such as presenting known forged documents as genuine, inventing ingenious but implausible reasons for distrusting genuine documents, attributing conclusions to books and sources that report the opposite, manipulating statistical series to support the given point of view, and deliberately mistranslating traditional or modern texts.

[ 8 ] Some countries, such as Germany, have criminalized the negationist revision of certain historical events, while others take a more cautious position for various reasons, such as protection of free speech . Others have in the past mandated negationist views, such as the US state of California , where it is claimed that some schoolchildren have been explicitly prevented from learning about the California genocide .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Notable examples of negationism include denials of the Holocaust , Nakba , Holodomor , Armenian genocide , the Lost Cause of the Confederacy , and the clean Wehrmacht myth .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] In literature, it has been imaginatively depicted in some works of fiction , such as Nineteen Eighty-Four , by George Orwell . In modern times, negationism may spread via political , religious agendas through state media , mainstream media , and new media , such as the Internet .

[ 14 ] Origin of the term [ edit ] The term negationism ( négationnisme ) was first coined by the French historian Henry Rousso in his 1987 book The Vichy Syndrome which looked at the French popular memory of Vichy France and the French Resistance . Rousso posited that it was necessary to distinguish between legitimate historical revisionism in Holocaust studies and politically motivated denial of the Holocaust, which he termed negationism.

[ 15 ] Purposes [ edit ] Usually, the purpose of historical negation is to align with tribal or ideological beliefs, demonize an enemy, maintain group identity, or preserve social bonds, often through motivated reasoning and denial of established facts.

[ 16 ] Ideological influence [ edit ] See also: Social influence and War of ideas The principal functions of negationist history are the abilities to control ideological and political influence.

History is a social resource that contributes to shaping national identity , culture, and the public memory. Through the study of history, people are imbued with a particular cultural identity; therefore, by negatively revising history, the negationist can craft a specific, ideological identity. Because historians are credited as people who single-mindedly pursue truth, by way of fact, negationist historians capitalize on the historian's professional credibility , and present their pseudohistory as true scholarship. By adding a measure of credibility to the work of revised history, the ideas of the negationist historian are more readily accepted in the public mind. As such, professional historians recognize the revisionist practice of historical negationism as the work of "truth-seekers" finding different truths in the historical record to fit their political, social, and ideological contexts.

[ citation needed ] Political influence [ edit ] History provides insight into past political policies and consequences, and thus assists people in extrapolating political implications for contemporary society. Historical negationism is applied to cultivate a specific political myth , sometimes with official consent from the government, whereby self-taught, amateur, and dissident academic historians either manipulate or misrepresent historical accounts to achieve political ends. For example, after the late 1930s in the Soviet Union , the ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and historiography in the Soviet Union treated reality and the party line as the same intellectual entity, especially in regards to the Russian Civil War and peasant rebellions; [ 17 ] Soviet historical negationism advanced a specific, political, and ideological agenda about Russia and its place in world history.

[ 18 ] Techniques [ edit ] Main article: Pseudohistory Historical negationism applies the techniques of research, quotation, and presentation for deception of the reader and denial of the historical record. In support of the "revised history" perspective, the negationist historian uses false documents as genuine sources, presents specious reasons to distrust genuine documents, exploits published opinions by quoting out of historical context, manipulates statistics , and mistranslates texts in other languages.

[ 19 ] The revision techniques of historical negationism operate in the intellectual space of public debate for the advancement of a given interpretation of history and the cultural perspective of the "revised history".

[ 20 ] As a document, the revised history is used to negate the validity of the factual, documentary record, and so reframe explanations and perceptions of the discussed historical event, to deceive the reader, the listener, and the viewer; therefore, historical negationism functions as a technique of propaganda .

[ 21 ] Rather than submit their works for peer review , negationist historians rewrite history and use logical fallacies to construct arguments that will obtain the desired results, a "revised history" that supports an agenda – political, ideological, religious, etc.

[ 8 ] In the practice of historiography , the British historian Richard J. Evans describes the technical differences, between professional historians and negationist historians, commenting: "Reputable and professional historians do not suppress parts of quotations from documents that go against their own case, but take them into account, and, if necessary, amend their own case, accordingly. They do not present, as genuine, documents which they know to be forged, just because these forgeries happen to back up what they are saying. They do not invent ingenious, but implausible, and utterly unsupported reasons for distrusting genuine documents, because these documents run counter to their arguments; again, they amend their arguments, if this is the case, or, indeed, abandon them altogether. They do not consciously attribute their own conclusions to books and other sources, which, in fact, on closer inspection, actually say the opposite. They do not eagerly seek out the highest possible figures in a series of statistics, independently of their reliability, or otherwise, simply because they want, for whatever reason, to maximize the figure in question, but rather, they assess all the available figures, as impartially as possible, to arrive at a number that will withstand the critical scrutiny of others. They do not knowingly mistranslate sources in foreign languages to make them more serviceable to themselves. They do not willfully invent words, phrases, quotations, incidents and events, for which there is no historical evidence, to make their arguments more plausible." [ 22 ] Deception [ edit ] See also: Disinformation Deception includes falsifying information, obscuring the truth , and lying to manipulate public opinion about the historical event discussed in the revised history. The negationist historian applies the techniques of deception to achieve either a political or an ideological goal, or both. The field of history distinguishes among history books based upon credible, verifiable sources, which were peer-reviewed before publication; and deceptive history books, based upon unreliable sources, which were not submitted for peer review.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The distinction among types of history books rests upon the research techniques used in writing a history. Verifiability, accuracy, and openness to criticism are central tenets of historical scholarship . When these techniques are sidestepped, the presented historical information might be deliberately deceptive, a "revised history".

Denial [ edit ] See also: Conspiracy theory , Denialism , and Genocide denial Denial is defensively protecting information from being shared with other historians, and claiming that facts are untrue, especially denial of the war crimes and crimes against humanity perpetrated in the course of World War II (1939–1945) and the Holocaust (1933–1945). The negationist historian protects the historical-revisionism project by blame shifting , censorship, distraction, and media manipulation ; occasionally, denial by protection includes risk management for the physical security of revisionist sources.

Relativization and trivialization [ edit ] See also: Holocaust trivialization Comparing certain historical atrocities to other crimes is the practice of relativization, interpretation by moral judgements, to alter public perception of the first historical atrocity. Although such comparisons often occur in negationist history, their pronouncement is not usually part of revisionist intentions upon the historical facts, but an opinion of moral judgement .

The Holocaust and Nazism : The historian Deborah Lipstadt says that the concept of "comparable Allied wrongs", such as the expulsion of Germans after World War II from Nazi-colonized lands and the formal Allied war crimes , is at the centre of, and is a continually repeated theme of, contemporary Holocaust denial , and that such relativization presents "immoral equivalencies".

[ 25 ] Some proponents of the Lost Cause of the Confederacy use certain historical examples of non- chattel slavery in discussions on the role of the slave system of the South, however insofar as it is to further this ideological point it obscures and downplays the specificities of the American slave system- both its place in history, and comparison to other such systems overall. For example, court decisions and statutes mandated multi-generational slavery unlike many other slave systems, and further beyond that stated that a freedman could never become a citizen of the United States. These measures, related to perpetuation and racist characterization besides further restrictions on life even outside slavery in support of it distinguished the system compared to all, or an overwhelming amount of historical systems Connected to the Lost Cause of the Confederacy is the Irish slaves myth , a pseudo-historical narrative which conflates the experiences of Irish indentured servants and enslaved Africans in the Americas . This distortion, which was historically promoted by Irish nationalists such as John Mitchel , has in the modern-day been promoted by white supremacists in the United States to negate the mistreatment experienced by African Americans (such as racism and segregation ), also opposing slavery reparations .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Examples [ edit ] Part of a series on Denial of mass killings Instances of denial Denial of genocides of Indigenous peoples Armenian genocide Kantō Massacre Holodomor Romani genocide The Holocaust trivialization Congo Free State Nanjing Massacre Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia Indonesian mass killings Bangladesh genocide Cambodian genocide Tiananmen Square massacre Katyn massacre Khojaly massacre Rwandan genocide Bosnian genocide Rohingya genocide Scholarly controversy over mass killings Mongol conquest Native American population decline Colonization of Australia Holodomor Joseph Stalin Japanese history textbooks Mao Zedong 1944–1950 expulsion of Germans Related topics Genocide justification Historical negationism Historical revisionism v t e Book burning [ edit ] Main article: Book burning Repositories of literature have been targeted throughout history (e.g., the Grand Library of Baghdad , the burning of liturgical and historical books of the St. Thomas Christians by the archbishop of Goa Aleixo de Menezes [ 28 ] ) including recently, such as the 1981 Burning of Jaffna library and the destruction of Iraqi libraries by ISIS during the fall of Mosul in 2014.

[ 29 ] Similarly, British officials destroyed documents in Operation Legacy to avoid records on colonial rule falling into the hands of countries declaring independence from Britain and any scrutiny of the British state.

Chinese book burning [ edit ] Main article: Burning of books and burying of scholars The Burning of books and burying of scholars ( traditional Chinese : 焚書坑儒 ; simplified Chinese : 焚书坑儒 ; pinyin : fénshū kēngrú ; lit.

'burning of books and burying (alive) of (Confucian) scholars'), or "Fires of Qin", refers to the burning of writings and slaughter of scholars during the Qin dynasty of ancient China , between the period of 213 and 210 BC. "Books" at this point refers to writings on bamboo strips , which were then bound together. The exact extent of the damage is hard to assess; technological books were to be spared [ 30 ] and even the "objectionable" books, poetry and philosophy in particular, were preserved in imperial archives and allowed to be kept by the official scholar.

United States history [ edit ] Executive order to negate American history [ edit ] During the second presidency of Donald Trump (2025–present), the National Park Service was ordered to police "negative" American history. In over 400 Federally managed properties, they displayed signs to encourage visitors to report information critical of American history. It was meant to counter what Trump considered "revisionist" history, such as at Indian massacre sites, Japanese interment sites, and particularly Civil Rights historical sites in the American south, were all impacted by the order to police negative information.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Confederate revisionism [ edit ] Main articles: Lost Cause of the Confederacy , Neo-Confederate , and White supremacy in U.S. school curriculum The historical negationism of American Civil War revisionists and Neo-Confederates claims that the Confederate States (1861–1865) were the defenders rather than the instigators of the American Civil War , and that the Confederacy's motivation for secession from the United States was the maintenance of the Southern states' rights and limited government, rather than the preservation and expansion of chattel slavery .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Regarding Neo-Confederate revisionism of the U.S. Civil War, the historian Brooks D. Simpson says: "This is an active attempt to reshape historical memory, an effort by white Southerners to find historical justifications for present-day actions. The neo–Confederate movement's ideologues have grasped that if they control how people remember the past, they'll control how people approach the present and the future. Ultimately, this is a very conscious war for memory and heritage. It's a quest for legitimacy , the eternal quest for justification." [ 36 ] In the early 20th century, Mildred Rutherford , the historian general of the United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC), led the attack against American history textbooks that did not present the " Lost Cause of the Confederacy " version of the history of the U.S. Civil War. To that pedagogical end, Rutherford assembled a "massive collection" of documents that included "essay contests on the glory of the Ku Klux Klan and personal tributes to faithful slaves".

[ 37 ] About the historical negationism of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, the historian David Blight says: "All UDC members and leaders were not as virulently racist as Rutherford, but all, in the name of a reconciled nation, participated in an enterprise that deeply influenced the white supremacist vision of Civil War memory." [ 38 ] California genocide [ edit ] Between 1846 and 1873, following the conquest of California by the United States, the region's Indigenous Californian population plummeted from around 150,000 to around 30,000 due to disease, famine, forced removals , slavery, and massacres. Many historians refer to the massacres as the California genocide . Between 9,500 and 16,000 California Natives were killed by both government forces and white settlers in massacres during this period.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Despite the well documented evidence of the widespread massacres and atrocities, the public school curriculum and history textbooks approved by the California Department of Education ignore the history of this genocide.

[ 10 ] According to author Clifford Trafzer, although many historians have pushed for recognition of the genocide in public school curricula, government-approved textbooks omit mention of the genocide because of the dominance of conservative publishing companies with an ideological impetus to deny the genocide, the fear of publishing companies being branded as un-American for discussing it, and the unwillingness of state and federal government officials to acknowledge the genocide due to the possibility of having to pay reparations to indigenous communities affected by it.

[ 9 ] War crimes [ edit ] Japanese war crimes [ edit ] See also: Japanese imperialism and Japanese war crimes A Chinese POW about to be beheaded by a Japanese officer with a shin gunto during the Nanking Massacre The post-war minimization of the war crimes of Japanese imperialism is an example of "illegitimate" historical revisionism; [ 46 ] some contemporary Japanese revisionists, such as Yūko Iwanami (granddaughter of General Hideki Tojo ), propose that Japan's invasion of China, and World War II , itself, were justified reactions to the Western imperialism of the time.

[ 47 ] On 2 March 2007, Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe denied that the military had forced women into sexual slavery during the war, saying, "The fact is, there is no evidence to prove there was coercion". Before he spoke, some Liberal Democratic Party legislators also sought to revise Yōhei Kōno 's apology to former comfort women in 1993; [ 48 ] likewise, there was the controversial negation of the six-week Nanking Massacre in 1937–1938.

[ 49 ] Shinzō Abe was general secretary of a group of parliament members concerned with history education ( Japanese : 日本の前途と歴史教育を考える若手議員の会 ) that is associated with the Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform , and was a special advisor to Nippon Kaigi , which are two openly revisionist groups denying, downplaying, or justifying various Japanese war crimes . Editor-in-chief of the conservative Yomiuri Shimbun Tsuneo Watanabe criticized the Yasukuni Shrine as a bastion of revisionism: "The Yasukuni Shrine runs a museum where they show items in order to encourage and worship militarism. It's wrong for the prime minister to visit such a place".

[ 50 ] Other critics [ who?

] note that men, who would contemporarily be perceived as "Korean" and "Chinese", are enshrined for the military actions they effected as Japanese Imperial subjects.

[ citation needed ] Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings [ edit ] Further information: Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki See also: Debate over the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki The Hibakusha ("explosion-affected people") of Hiroshima and Nagasaki seek compensation from their government and criticize it for failing to "accept responsibility for having instigated and then prolonged an aggressive war long after Japan's defeat was apparent, resulting in a heavy toll in Japanese, Asian and American lives".

[ 51 ] EB Sledge expressed concern that such revisionism, in his words "mellowing", would allow the harsh facts of the history that led to the bombings to be forgotten.

[ 52 ] Historians Hill and Koshiro have stated that attempts to minimize the importance of the bombings as "righteous revenge and salvation" would be revisionism, and that while the Japanese should recognize their atrocities led the bombing, Americans also have to accept the fact that their own actions "caused massive destruction and suffering that has lasted for fifty years".

[ 53 ] Croatian war crimes in World War II [ edit ] Further information: Far-right politics in Croatia and Denial of the genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia Some Croats, including some high-ranked officials and political leaders during the 1990s and far-right organization members, have attempted to minimize the magnitude of the genocide perpetrated against Serbs and other ethnic minorities in the World War II puppet state of Nazi Germany , the Independent State of Croatia .

[ 54 ] By 1989, the future President of Croatia Franjo Tuđman (who had been a Partisan during World War II), had embraced Croatian nationalism [ 55 ] and published Horrors of War: Historical Reality and Philosophy , in which he questioned the official number of victims killed by the Ustaše during World War II , particularly at the Jasenovac concentration camp .

[ 56 ] Yugoslav and Serbian historiography had long exaggerated the number of victims at the camp.

[ 57 ] Tuđman criticized the long-standing figures, but also described the camp as a "work camp", giving an estimate of between 30,000 and 40,000 deaths.

[ 56 ] Tuđman's government's toleration of Ustaša symbols and their crimes often dismissed in public, frequently strained relations with Israel.

[ 58 ] Croatia's far-right often advocates the false theory that Jasenovac was a "labour camp" where mass murder did not take place.

[ 59 ] In 2017, two videos of former Croatian president Stjepan Mesić from 1992 were made public in which he stated that Jasenovac was not a death camp.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] The far-right NGO "The Society for Research of the Threefold Jasenovac Camp" also advocates this disproven theory, in addition to claiming that the camp was used by the Yugoslav authorities following the war to imprison Ustasha members and regular Home Guard army troops until 1948, then alleged Stalinists until 1951.

[ 59 ] Its members include journalist Igor Vukić , who wrote his own book advocating the theory, Catholic priest Stjepan Razum and academic Josip Pečarić .

[ 61 ] The ideas promoted by its members have been amplified by mainstream media interviews and book tours.

[ 61 ] The last book, "The Jasenovac Lie Revealed" written by Vukić, prompted the Simon Wiesenthal Center to urge Croatian authorities to ban such works, noting that they "would immediately be banned in Germany and Austria and rightfully so".

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] In 2016, Croatian filmmaker Jakov Sedlar released a documentary Jasenovac – The Truth which advocated the same theories, labelling the camp as a "collection and labour camp".

[ 64 ] The film contained alleged falsifications and forgeries, in addition to denial of crimes and hate speech towards politicians and journalists.

[ 65 ] Serbian war crimes in World War II [ edit ] Among far-right and nationalist groups, denial and revisionism of Serbian war crimes are carried out through the downplaying of Milan Nedić and Dimitrije Ljotić 's roles in the extermination of Serbia's Jews in concentration camps, in the German-occupied Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia by a number of Serbian historians.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Serbian collaborationist armed forces were involved, either directly or indirectly, in the mass killings of Jews as well as Roma and those Serbs who sided with any anti-German resistance and the killing of many Croats and Muslims.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Since the end of the war, Serbian collaboration in the Holocaust has been the subject of historical revisionism by Serbian leaders.

[ 70 ] In 1993, the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts listed Nedić among The 100 most prominent Serbs .

[ 71 ] There is also the denial of Chetnik collaboration with Axis forces and crimes committed during World War II. Serbian historian Jelena Djureinovic states in her book The Politics of Memory of the Second World War in Contemporary Serbia: Collaboration, Resistance and Retribution that "during those years, the WWII nationalist Chetniks have been recast as an anti-fascist movement equivalent to Tito 's Partisans , and as victims of communism". The glorification of the Chetnik movement has now become the central theme of Serbia's WWII memory politics. Chetnik leaders convicted under communist rule of collaboration with the Nazis have been rehabilitated by Serbian courts , and television programmes have contributed to spreading a positive image of the movement, "distorting the real picture of what happened during WWII".

[ 72 ] Serbian war crimes in the Yugoslav wars [ edit ] Further information: Bosnian genocide denial There have been a number of far-right and nationalist authors and political activists who have publicly disagreed with mainstream views of Serbian war crimes in the Yugoslav wars of 1991–1999. Some high-ranked Serbian officials and political leaders who categorically claimed that no genocide against Bosnian Muslims took place at all, include former president of Serbia Tomislav Nikolić , Bosnian Serb leader Milorad Dodik , Serbian Minister of Defence Aleksandar Vulin and Serbian far-right leader Vojislav Šešelj . Among the points of contention are whether the victims of massacres such as the Račak massacre and Srebrenica massacre were unarmed civilians or armed resistance fighters, whether death and rape tolls were inflated, and whether prison camps such as Sremska Mitrovica camp were sites of mass war crimes. These authors are called "revisionists" by scholars and organizations, such as ICTY .

The Report about Case Srebrenica by Darko Trifunovic , [ 73 ] commissioned by the government of the Republika Srpska , [ 74 ] was described by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia as "one of the worst examples of revisionism in relation to the mass executions of Bosnian Muslims committed in Srebrenica in July 1995".

[ 75 ] Outrage and condemnation by a wide variety of Balkan and international figures eventually forced the Republika Srpska to disown the report.

[ 74 ] [ 76 ] In 2017 legislation that banned the teaching of the Srebrenica genocide and Sarajevo siege in schools was introduced in Republika Srpska, initiated by President Milorad Dodik and his SNSD party, who stated that it was "impossible to use here the textbooks ... which say the Serbs have committed genocide and kept Sarajevo under siege. This is not correct and this will not be taught here".

[ 77 ] In 2019 Republika Srpska authorities appointed Israeli historian Gideon Greif – who has worked at Yad Vashem for more than three decades – to head its own revisionist commission to "determine the truth" about Srebrenica.

[ 78 ] Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia [ edit ] Main article: Historiography of the Volyn tragedy The issue of the Volyn massacres was largely non-existent in Ukrainian scholarly literature for many years, and until very recently, Ukrainian historiography did not undertake any objective research of the events in Volyn.

[ 79 ] Until 1991 any independent Ukrainian historic research was only possible abroad, mainly in the US and the Canadian diaspora . Despite publishing a number of works devoted to the history of UPA, the Ukrainian emigration researchers (with only few exceptions) remained completely mute about the Volyn events for many years. Until very recently much of the remaining documentation was closed in Ukrainian state archives, unavailable to researchers.

[ 79 ] As a result, Ukrainian historiography lacks broader reliable research of the events and the presence of the issue in Ukrainian publications is still very limited. The young generation of Ukrainian historians is often infected with Ukrainocentrism, and often borrows the stereotypes and myths about Poland and Poles from the biased publications of the Ukrainian diaspora.

[ 80 ] In September 2016, after Poland 's Sejm had passed a resolution declaring 11 July a National Day of Remembrance of the victims of the Genocide of the Citizens of the Polish Republic committed by Ukrainian Nationalists and formally called the Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia a genocide, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine passed a resolution condemning "the one-sided political assessment of the historical events in Poland", [ 81 ] rejecting the term "genocide".

[ 82 ] Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 [ edit ] Discussion of the killings was taboo in Indonesia and, if mentioned at all, usually called peristiwa enam lima , the "incident of '65." [ 83 ] Inside and outside Indonesia, public discussion of the killings increased during the 1990s and especially after 1998 when the New Order government collapsed. Jailed and exiled members of the Sukarno regime, as well as ordinary people, told their stories in increasing numbers. Foreign researchers began to publish increasingly more on the topic, with the end of the military regime and its doctrine of coercing such research attempts into futility.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] The killings are skipped over in most Indonesian histories and have been scarcely examined by Indonesians, and has received comparatively little international attention.

[ 85 ] Indonesian textbooks typically depict the killings as a "patriotic campaign" that resulted in less than 80,000 deaths. In 2004, the textbooks were briefly changed to include the events, but this new curriculum discontinued in 2006 following protests from the military and Islamic groups.

[ 86 ] The textbooks which mentioned the mass killings were subsequently burnt [ 86 ] by order of Indonesia's Attorney General.

[ 87 ] John Roosa's Pretext for Mass Murder (2006) was initially banned by the Attorney General's Office.

[ 88 ] The Indonesian parliament set up a truth and reconciliation commission to analyse the killings, but it was suspended by the Indonesian High Court . An academic conference regarding the killings was held in Singapore in 2009.

[ 86 ] A hesitant search for mass graves by survivors and family members began after 1998, although little has been found. Over three decades later, great enmity remains in Indonesian society over the events.

[ 84 ] Turkey and the Armenian genocide [ edit ] The Iğdır Genocide Memorial and Museum 's promotion of the view that Armenians committed genocide against Turks , rather than vice versa, has received international condemnation for falsifying the history surrounding those Armenians killed .

[ 89 ] Main article: Armenian genocide denial Turkish laws such as Article 301 , that state "a person who publicly insults Turkishness , or the Republic or [the] Turkish Grand National Assembly of Turkey , shall be punishable by imprisonment", were used to criminally charge the writer Orhan Pamuk with disrespecting Turkey, for saying that "Thirty thousand Kurds, and a million Armenians , were killed in these lands, and nobody, but me, dares to talk about it".

[ 90 ] The controversy occurred as Turkey was first vying for membership in the European Union (EU) where the suppression of dissenters is looked down upon.

[ 91 ] Article 301 originally was part of penal-law reforms meant to modernize Turkey to European Union standards, as part of negotiating Turkey's accession to the EU .

[ 92 ] In 2006, the charges were dropped due to pressure from the European Union and United States on the Turkish government.

[ 91 ] On 7 February 2006, five journalists were tried for insulting the judicial institutions of the State, and for aiming to prejudice a court case (per Article 288 of the Turkish penal code).

[ 93 ] The reporters were on trial for criticizing the court-ordered closing of a conference in Istanbul regarding the Armenian genocide during the time of the Ottoman Empire . The conference continued elsewhere, transferring locations from a state to a private university. The trial continued until 11 April 2006, when four of the reporters were acquitted. The case against the fifth journalist, Murat Belge , proceeded until 8 June 2006, when he was also acquitted. The purpose of the conference was to critically analyse the official Turkish view of the Armenian genocide in 1915; a taboo subject in Turkey.

[ 94 ] The trial proved to be a test case between Turkey and the European Union ; the EU insisted that Turkey should allow increased freedom of expression rights, as a condition to membership.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] South Korean war crimes in Vietnam [ edit ] Further information: South Korea in the Vietnam War § War crimes and atrocities At the request of the United States, South Korea under Park Chung Hee sent approximately 320,000 South Korean troops to fight alongside the United States and South Vietnam during the Vietnam War . Various civilian groups have accused the South Korean military of many " My Lai -style massacres", [ 97 ] while the Korean Ministry of Defense has denied all such accusations.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Korean forces are alleged to have perpetrated the Binh Tai , Bình An/Tây Vinh , Bình Hòa , and Hà My massacres and several other massacres across Vietnam, [ 100 ] killing as many as 9000 Vietnamese civilians.

[ 101 ] In 2023, a South Korean court ruled in favour of a Vietnamese victim of South Korean atrocities during the war and ordered that the South Korean government compensate the surviving victim. In response, the South Korean government repeated its earlier denials of the atrocities, and later announced its appeal of the decision. This strained relations with Vietnam, as a spokesperson for Vietnam's fording ministry called the decision "extremely regrettable".

[ 102 ] Iran [ edit ] The Islamic Republic of Iran uses historical negationism against religious minorities in order to maintain legitimacy and relevancy of the regime. One example is the regime's approach to the Baháʼí community . In 2008, an erroneous and misleading biography of Báb was presented to all primary school children.

[ 103 ] In his official 2013 Nowruz address, Supreme Leader of Iran Grand Ayatollah Ali Khamenei questioned the veracity of the Holocaust, remarking that "The Holocaust is an event whose reality is uncertain and if it has happened, it's uncertain how it has happened." [ 104 ] [ 105 ] This was consistent with Khamenei's previous comments regarding the Holocaust.

[ 106 ] Soviet and Russian history [ edit ] See also: Historiography in the Soviet Union , Soviet war crimes , and Holodomor denial In his book, The Stalin School of Falsification , Leon Trotsky cited a range of historical documents such as private letters, telegrams, party speeches, meeting minutes, and suppressed texts such as Lenin's Testament , [ 108 ] to argue that the Stalinist faction routinely distorted political events, forged a theoretical basis for irreconcilable concepts such as the notion of "Socialism in One Country" and misrepresented the views of opponents. He also argued that the Stalinist regime employed an array of professional historians as well as economists to justify policy manoeuvering and safeguarding its own set of material interests.

[ 109 ] During the existence of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (1917–1991) and the Soviet Union (1922–1991), the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) attempted to ideologically and politically control the writing of both academic and popular history. These attempts were most successful in the 1934–1952 period. According to Klaus Mehnert , writing in 1952, the Soviet government attempted to control academic historiography (the writing of history by academic historians) to promote ideological and ethno-racial imperialism by Russians.

[ 11 ] [ better source needed ] During the 1928–1956 period, modern and contemporary history was generally composed according to the wishes of the CPSU, not the requirements of accepted historiographic method.

[ 11 ] During and after the rule of Nikita Khrushchev (1956–1964), Soviet historiographic practice was more complicated. In this period, Soviet historiography was characterized by complex competition between Stalinist and anti-Stalinist Marxist historians.

[ 12 ] To avoid the professional hazard of politicized history, some historians chose pre-modern, medieval history or classical history , where ideological demands were relatively relaxed and conversation with other historians in the field could be fostered.

[ 110 ] Prescribed ideology could still introduce biases in historians' work, but not all of Soviet historiography was affected.

[ 12 ] Control over party history and the legal status of individual ex-party members played a large role in dictating the ideological diversity and thus the faction in power within the CPSU. The official History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) was revised to delete references to leaders purged from the party, especially during the rule of Joseph Stalin (1922–1953).

[ note 1 ] In the historiography of the Cold War , a controversy over negationist historical revisionism exists, where numerous revisionist scholars in the West have been accused of whitewashing the crimes of Stalinism, overlooking the Katyn massacre in Poland, disregarding the validity of the Venona Project messages with regards to Soviet espionage in the United States , [ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] as well as the denial of the Holodomor of 1932–1933.

In 2009, Russia established the Presidential Commission of the Russian Federation to Counter Attempts to Falsify History to the Detriment of Russia's Interests to "defend Russia against falsifiers of history". Some critics, like Heorhiy Kasyanov from the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine , said the Kremlin was trying to whitewash Soviet history in order to justify its denial of human rights: "It's part of the Russian Federation's policy to create an ideological foundation for what is happening in Russia right now." [ 114 ] Historian and author Orlando Figes , a professor at the University of London , who views the new commission is part of a clampdown on historical scholarship, stated: "They're idiots if they think they can change the discussion of Soviet history internationally, but they can make it hard for Russian historians to teach and publish. It's like we're back to the old days." [ 115 ] The commission was disestablished in 2012.

[ citation needed ] Azerbaijan [ edit ] Main article: Falsification of history in Azerbaijan In relation to Armenia [ edit ] See also: Anti-Armenian sentiment in Azerbaijan , Armenian cemetery in Julfa , and Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences § Statements on Armenia and Armenians Many scholars, among them Victor Schnirelmann , [ 116 ] [ 117 ] Willem Floor , [ 118 ] Robert Hewsen , [ 119 ] George Bournoutian [ 120 ] [ 121 ] and others state that in Soviet and post-Soviet Azerbaijan since the 1960s there is a practice of revising primary sources on the South Caucasus in which any mention about Armenians is removed. In the revised texts, Armenian is either simply removed or is replaced by Albanian ; there are many other examples of such falsifications, all of which have the purpose of creating an impression that historically Armenians were not present in this territory. Willem M. Floor and Hasan Javadi in the English edition of "The Heavenly Rose-Garden: A History of Shirvan & Daghestan" by Abbasgulu Bakikhanov specifically point out to the instances of distortions and falsifications made by Ziya Bunyadov in his Russian translation of this book.

[ 118 ] According to Bournoutian and Hewsen these distortions are widespread in these works; they thus advise the readers in general to avoid the books produced in Azerbaijan in Soviet and post-Soviet times if these books do not contain the facsimile copy of original sources.

[ 119 ] [ 121 ] Shnirelman thinks that this practice is being realized in Azerbaijan according to state order.

[ 116 ] Philip L. Kohl brings an example of a theory advanced by Azerbaijani archaeologist Akhundov about Albanian origin of Khachkars as an example of patently false cultural origin myths.

[ 122 ] The Armenian cemetery in Julfa, a cemetery near the town of Julfa , in the Nakhchivan exclave of Azerbaijan originally housed around 10,000 funerary monuments. The tombstones consisted mainly of thousands of khachkars , uniquely decorated cross-stones characteristic of medieval Christian Armenian art . The cemetery was still standing in the late 1990s, when the government of Azerbaijan began a systematic campaign to destroy the monuments.

[ 123 ] After studying and comparing satellite photos of Julfa taken in 2003 and 2009, the American Association for the Advancement of Science came to the conclusion in December 2010 that the cemetery was demolished and levelled.

[ 124 ] After the director of the Hermitage Museum Mikhail Piotrovsky expressed his protest about the destruction of Armenian khachkars in Julfa , he was accused by Azerbaijanis of supporting the "total falsification of the history and culture of Azerbaijan".

[ 125 ] Several appeals were filed by both Armenian and international organizations, condemning the Azerbaijani government and calling on it to desist from such activity. In 2006, Azerbaijan barred European Parliament members from investigating the claims, charging them with a "biased and hysterical approach" to the issue and stating that it would only accept a delegation if it visited Armenian-occupied territory as well.

[ 126 ] In the spring of 2006, a journalist from the Institute for War and Peace Reporting who visited the area reported that no visible traces of the cemetery remained.

[ 127 ] In the same year, photographs taken from Iran showed that the cemetery site had been turned into a military shooting range .

[ 128 ] The destruction of the cemetery has been widely described by Armenian sources, and some non-Armenian sources, as an act of " cultural genocide ." [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] In Azerbaijan, the Armenian genocide is officially denied and is considered a hoax. According to the state ideology of Azerbaijan, a genocide of Azerbaijanis, carried out by Armenians and Russians, took place starting from 1813. Mahmudov has claimed that Armenians first appeared in Karabakh in 1828.

[ 132 ] Azerbaijani academics and politicians have claimed that foreign historians falsify the history of Azerbaijan and criticism was directed towards a Russian documentary about the regions of Karabakh and Nakhchivan and the historical Armenian presence in these areas.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] According to the institute director of the Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences Yagub Mahmudov, prior to 1918 "there was never an Armenian state in the South Caucasus".

[ 136 ] According to Mahmudov, Ilham Aliyev 's statement in which he said that "Irevan is our [Azerbaijan's] historic land, and we, Azerbaijanis must return to these historic lands", was based "historical facts" and "historical reality".

[ 136 ] Mahmudov also stated that the claim that Armenians are the most ancient people in the region is based on propaganda, and said that Armenians are non-natives of the region, having only arrived in the area after Russian victories over Iran and the Ottoman Empire in the first half of the 19th century.

[ 136 ] The institute director also said: "The Azerbaijani soldier should know that the land under the feet of provocative Armenians is Azerbaijani land. The enemy can never defeat Azerbaijanis on Azerbaijani soil. Those who rule the Armenian state today must fundamentally change their political course. The Armenians cannot defeat us by sitting in our historic city of Irevan." [ 136 ] In relation to Iran [ edit ] See also: Azerbaijan naming controversy , Campaign on granting Nizami the status of the national poet of Azerbaijan , and Anti-Iranian sentiment in Azerbaijan Historic falsifications in Azerbaijan, in relation to Iran and its history , are "backed by state and state backed non-governmental organizational bodies", ranging "from elementary school all the way to the highest level of universities".

[ 137 ] As a result of the two Russo-Iranian Wars of the 19th century, the border between what is present-day Iran and the Republic of Azerbaijan was formed.

[ 138 ] Although there had not been a historical Azerbaijani state to speak of in history, the demarcation, set at the Aras river , left significant numbers of what were later coined "Azerbaijanis" to the north of the Aras river.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] During the existence of the Azerbaijan SSR , as a result of Soviet-era historical revionism and myth-building, the notion of a "northern" and " southern " Azerbaijan was formulated and spread throughout the Soviet Union.

[ 138 ] [ 140 ] During the Soviet nation building campaign, any event, both past and present, that had ever occurred in what is the present-day Azerbaijan Republic and Iranian Azerbaijan were rebranded as phenomenons of "Azerbaijani culture".

[ 141 ] Any Iranian ruler or poet that had lived in the area was assigned to the newly rebranded identity of the Transcaucasian Turkophones , in other words "Azerbaijanis".

[ 142 ] According to Michael P. Croissant: "It was charged that the "two Azerbaijans", once united, were separated artificially by a conspiracy between imperial Russia and Iran".

[ 138 ] This notion based on illegitimate historic revisionism suited Soviet political purposes well (based on "anti-imperialism"), and became the basis for irredentism among Azerbaijani nationalists in the last years of the Soviet Union, shortly prior to the establishment of the Azerbaijan Republic in 1991.

[ 138 ] In Azerbaijan, periods and aspects of Iranian history are usually claimed as being an "Azerbaijani" product in a distortion of history, and historic Iranian figures, such as the Persian poet Nizami Ganjavi are called "Azerbaijanis", contrary to universally acknowledged fact.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] In the Azerbaijan SSR, forgeries such as an alleged "Turkish divan " and falsified verses were published in order to "Turkify" Nizami Ganjavi.

[ 144 ] Although this type of irredentism was initially the result of the nation building policy of the Soviets, it became an instrument for "biased, pseudo-academic approaches and political speculations" in the nationalistic aspirations of the young Azerbaijan Republic.

[ 143 ] In the modern Azerbaijan Republic, historiography is written with the aim of retroactively Turkifying many of the peoples and kingdoms that existed prior to the arrival of Turks in the region, including the Iranian Medes .

[ 145 ] According to professor of history George Bournoutian : [ 146 ] As noted, in order to construct an Azerbaijani national history and identity based on the territorial definition of a nation, as well as to reduce the influence of Islam and Iran, the Azeri nationalists , prompted by Moscow devised an "Azeri" alphabet , which replaced the Arabo-Persian script. In the 1930s a number of Soviet historians, including the prominent Russian Orientalist, Ilya Petrushevskii , were instructed by the Kremlin to accept the totally unsubstantiated notion that the territory of the former Iranian khanates (except Yerevan , which had become Soviet Armenia ) was part of an Azerbaijani nation. Petrushevskii's two important studies dealing with the South Caucasus , therefore, use the term Azerbaijan and Azerbaijani in his works on the history of the region from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries. Other Russian academics went even further and claimed that an Azeri nation had existed from ancient times and had continued to the present. Since all the Russian surveys and almost all nineteenth-century Russian primary sources referred to the Muslims who resided in the South Caucasus as "Tatars" and not " Azerbaijanis ", Soviet historians simply substituted Azerbaijani for Tatars. Azeri historians and writers, starting in 1937, followed suit and began to view the three-thousand-year history of the region as that of Azerbaijan. The pre-Iranian, Iranian, and Arab eras were expunged. Anyone who lived in the territory of Soviet Azerbaijan was classified as Azeri; hence the great Iranian poet Nezami , who had written only in Persian, became the national poet of Azerbaijan .

Bournoutian adds: [ 147 ] Although after Stalin 's death arguments rose between Azerbaijani historians and Soviet Iranologists dealing with the history of the region in ancient times (specifically the era of the Medes ), no Soviet historian dared to question the use of the term Azerbaijan or Azerbaijani in modern times. As late as 1991, the Institute of History of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, published a book by an Azeri historian, in which it not only equated the "Tatars" with the present-day Azeris, but the author, discussing the population numbers in 1842, also included Nakhichevan and Ordubad in "Azerbaijan". The author, just like Petrushevskii, totally ignored the fact that between 1828 and 1921, Nakhichivan and Ordubad were first part of the Armenian Province and then part of the Yerevan guberniia and had only become part of Soviet Azerbaijan, some eight decades later ... Although the overwhelming number of nineteenth-century Russian and Iranian, as well as present-day European historians view the Iranian province of Azarbayjan and the present-day Republic of Azerbaijan as two separate geographical and political entities, modern Azeri historians and geographers view it as a single state that has been separated into "northern" and "southern" sectors and which will be united in the future. ... Since the collapse of the Soviet Union the current Azeri historians have not only continued to use the terms "northern" and "southern" Azerbaijan, but also assert that the present-day Armenian Republic was a part of northern Azerbaijan. In their fury over what they view as the "Armenian occupation" of Nagorno-Karabakh [which incidentally was an autonomous Armenian region within Soviet Azerbaijan ], Azeri politicians and historians deny any historic Armenian presence in the South Caucasus and add that all Armenian architectural monuments located in the present-day Republic of Azerbaijan are not Armenian but [Caucasian] Albanian .

North Korea and the Korean War [ edit ] Since the start of the Korean War (1950–1953), the government of North Korea has consistently denied that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) launched the attack with which it began the war for the Communist unification of Korea. The historiography of the DPRK maintains that the war was provoked by South Korea , at the instigation of the United States: "On June 17, Juche 39 [1950] the then U.S. President [Harry S.] Truman sent [John Foster] Dulles as his special envoy to South Korea to examine the anti-North war scenario and give an order to start the attack. On June 18, Dulles inspected the 38th parallel and the war preparations of the ' ROK Army ' units. That day he told Syngman Rhee to start the attack on North Korea with the counter-propaganda that North Korea first 'invaded' the south." [ 148 ] Further North Korean pronouncements included the claim that the U.S. needed the peninsula of Korea as "a bridgehead, for invading the Asian continent, and as a strategic base, from which to fight against national-liberation movements and socialism , and, ultimately, to attain world supremacy." [ 149 ] Likewise, the DPRK denied the war crimes committed by the Korean People's Army in the course of the war; nonetheless, in the 1951–1952 period, the Workers' Party of Korea (WPK) privately admitted to the "excesses" of their earlier campaign against North Korean citizens who had collaborated with the enemy – either actually or allegedly – during the US–South Korean occupation of North Korea. Later, the WPK blamed every wartime atrocity upon the U.S. Armed Forces , e.g. the Sinchon Massacre (17 October – 7 December 1950) occurred during the retreat of the DPRK government from Hwanghae Province , in the south-west of North Korea.

The campaign against " collaborators " was attributed to political and ideological manipulations by the U.S.; the high-ranking leader Pak Chang-ok said that the American enemy had "started to use a new method, namely, it donned a leftist garb, which considerably influenced the inexperienced cadres of the Party and government organs." [ 150 ] Kathryn Weathersby's Soviet Aims in Korea and the Origins of the Korean War, 1945–1950: New Evidence from Russian Archives (1993) confirmed that the Korean War was launched by order of Kim Il Sung (1912–1994); and also refuted the DPRK's allegations of biological warfare in the Korean War . The Korean Central News Agency dismissed the historical record of Soviet documents as "sheer forgery".

[ 151 ] Holocaust denial [ edit ] Main articles: Criticism of Holocaust denial and Holocaust denial Holocaust deniers usually reject the term Holocaust denier as an inaccurate description of their historical point of view, instead preferring the term Holocaust revisionist ; [ 152 ] nonetheless, scholars prefer "Holocaust denier" to differentiate deniers from legitimate historical revisionists , whose goal is to accurately analyse historical evidence with established methods.

[ note 2 ] Historian Alan Berger reports that Holocaust deniers argue in support of a preconceived theory – that the Holocaust either did not occur or was mostly a hoax – by ignoring extensive historical evidence to the contrary.

[ 153 ] When the author David Irving [ note 3 ] lost his English libel case against Deborah Lipstadt, and her publisher, Penguin Books , and thus was publicly discredited and identified as a Holocaust denier, [ 154 ] the trial judge, Justice Charles Gray , concluded that "Irving has, for his own ideological reasons, persistently and deliberately misrepresented and manipulated historical evidence; that, for the same reasons, he has portrayed Hitler in an unwarrantedly favorable light, principally in relation to his attitude towards, and responsibility for, the treatment of the Jews; that he is an active Holocaust denier; that he is anti-semitic and racist, and that he associates with right-wing extremists who promote neo-Nazism." [ 155 ] On 20 February 2006, Irving was found guilty, and sentenced to three years imprisonment for Holocaust denial, under Austria's 1947 law banning Nazi revivalism and criminalizing the "public denial, belittling or justification of National Socialist crimes".

[ 156 ] Besides Austria, eleven other countries [ 157 ] – including Belgium, France, Germany, Lithuania, Poland, and Switzerland – have criminalized Holocaust denial as punishable with imprisonment.

[ note 4 ] North Macedonia [ edit ] See also: Historiography in North Macedonia Further information: Antiquization According to Eugene N. Borza , the Macedonians are in search of their past to legitimize their unsure present, in the disorder of the Balkan politics .

[ 158 ] Ivaylo Dichev claims that the Macedonian historiography has the impossible task of filling the huge gaps between the ancient kingdom of Macedon , that collapsed in 2nd century BC, the 10th–11th century state of the Cometopuls , and the Yugoslav Macedonia established in the middle of the 20th century.

[ 159 ] According to Ulf Brunnbauer , modern Macedonian historiography is highly politicized, because the Macedonian nation-building process is still in development.

[ 160 ] The recent nation-building project imposes the idea of a "Macedonian nation" with unbroken continuity from the antiquity ( Ancient Macedonians ) to the modern times, [ 161 ] which has been criticized by some domestic and foreign scholars [ 162 ] for ahistorically projecting modern ethnic distinctions into the past.

[ 163 ] In this way generations of students were educated in pseudohistory .

[ 164 ] Historiography in Africa [ edit ] During the Rwandan genocide , over five-thousand people seeking refuge in the then Ntarama church were killed by grenade, machete, rifle, or burnt alive.

Rwandan genocide denial has proliferated in multiple contexts despite the fact that the mass killings took place amidst widespread news coverage and additionally later received detailed study during the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Perpetrators of violent attacks against civilians in Rwanda , known as the "génocidaires", have been an element of this controversy. Concentrated details involving the planning, financing, and progress of war crimes have gotten unearthed, yet campaigns of denial endure given the influences of extremist ideologies surrounding ethnicity and race.

[ 165 ] In May 2020, the Los Angeles Review of Books interviewed legal advocate and writer Linda Melvern on the topic, with her having assisted with ICTR related prosecutions. She concluded that the "pernicious influence" of the Hutu Power faction that enacted the widespread murders "lives on in rumor, stereotype, lies, and propaganda." She also remarked that said "movement's campaign of genocide denial has confused many, recruited some, and shielded others" such that with "the use of seemingly sound research methods, the génocidaires pose a threat, especially to those who might not be aware of the historical facts." [ 165 ] In terms of the 21st Century, increased international debate and discussion have partially failed to prevent efforts obfuscating the facts surrounding the Sudanese genocide . In March 2010, Omer Ismail and John Prendergast wrote for the Christian Science Monitor warning of multiple distortions of reality with lasting implications given the actions of the then Khartoum-based government. Specifically, they alleged that the state had "systematically denied access to the United Nations / African Union observer mission [personnel] to investigate attacks on civilians, so many of these attacks go unreported and the culpability remains mysterious." [ 166 ] Historical negationism within the territories of multiple African nations constitutes a crime from a de jure legal perspective. For example, denying the Rwandan genocide has led to prosecutions in that country. However, the negative social affects from disinformation and misinformation have expanded in some cases using modern media.

In textbooks [ edit ] Japan [ edit ] Main article: Japanese history textbook controversies A member of the revisionist group “ Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform ” erects a banner reading "[Give] the Children Correct History Textbooks".

The history textbook controversy centres upon the secondary school history textbook Atarashii Rekishi Kyōkasho ("New History Textbook") said to minimize the nature of Japanese militarism in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), in annexing Korea in 1910, in the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), and in the Pacific Theater of World War II (1941–1945). The conservative Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform commissioned the Atarashii Rekishi Kyōkasho textbook with the purpose of traditional national and international view of that Japanese historical period. The Ministry of Education vets all history textbooks, especially those containing references to imperialist atrocities due to a special provision in the textbook examination rules to avoid inflaming controversy with neighbouring countries; however, the Atarashii Rekishi Kyōkasho de-emphasizes aggressive Japanese Imperial wartime behaviour and the matter of Chinese and Korean comfort women . When it comes to the Nanking massacre , the textbook only refers to it as the Nanking Incident, mentioning there were civilian casualties without delving into specifics, and mentioning it again in relation to the Tokyo tribunal, stating that there are multiple opinions about the topic with controversies continuing to this day (see Nanking massacre denial ).

[ 167 ] In 2007, the Ministry of Education attempted to revise textbooks regarding the Battle of Okinawa , lessening the involvement of the Imperial Japanese Army in Okinawan civilian mass suicides.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Further information: Pakistani textbooks controversy Allegations of historical revisionism have been made regarding Pakistani textbooks in that they are laced with Indophobic , Hindu-hating and Islamist bias. Pakistan's use of officially published textbooks has been criticized for using schools to more subtly foster religious extremism, whitewashing Muslim conquests on the Indian subcontinent and promoting "expansive pan-Islamic imaginings" that "detect the beginnings of Pakistan in the birth of Islam on the Arabian peninsula ".

[ 170 ] Since 2001, the Pakistani government has stated that curriculum reforms have been underway by the Ministry of Education .

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] [ 173 ] South Korea [ edit ] 12 October 2015, South Korea's government has announced controversial plans to control the history textbooks used in secondary schools despite oppositional concerns of people and academics that the decision is made to glorify the history of those who served the Imperial Japanese government ( Chinilpa ). Section and the authoritarian dictatorships in South Korea during 1960s–1980s.The Ministry of Education announced that it would put the secondary-school history textbook under state control; "This was an inevitable choice in order to straighten out historical errors and end the social dispute caused by ideological bias in the textbooks," Hwang Woo-yea , education minister said on 12 October 2015.

[ 174 ] According to the government's plan, the current history textbooks of South Korea will be replaced by a single textbook written by a panel of government-appointed historians and the new series of publications would be issued under the title The Correct Textbook of History and are to be issued to the public and private primary and secondary schools in 2017 onwards.

The move has sparked fierce criticism from academics who argue that the system can be used to distort the history and glorify the history of those who served the Imperial Japanese government ( Chinilpa ) and of the authoritarian dictatorships. Moreover, 466 organizations including Korean Teachers and Education Workers Union formed History Act Network in solidarity and have staged protests: "The government's decision allows the state too much control and power and, therefore, it is against political neutrality that is certainly the fundamental principle of education." Many South Korean historians condemned Kyohaksa for their text glorifying those who served the Imperial Japanese government (Chinilpa) and the authoritarian dictatorship with a far-right political perspective. On the other hand, New Right supporters welcomed the textbook, saying that "the new textbook finally describes historical truths contrary to the history textbooks published by left-wing publishers", and the textbook issue became intensified as a case of ideological conflict. In Korean history , the history textbook was once put under state control during the authoritarian regime under Park Chung Hee (1963–1979), who is a father of Park Geun-hye , former President of South Korea , and was used as a means to keep the Yushin Regime , also known as the Yushin Dictatorship; however, there had been continuous criticisms about the system especially from the 1980s when Korea experienced a dramatic democratic development . In 2003, reformation of textbook began when the textbooks on Korean modern and contemporary history were published though the Textbook Screening System, which allows textbooks to be published not by a single government body but by many different companies, for the first time.

Turkey [ edit ] Main article: Turkish textbook controversies Education in Turkey is centralized, and its policy, administration, and content are each determined by the Turkish government. Textbooks taught in schools are either prepared directly by the Ministry of National Education (MEB) or must be approved by its Instruction and Education Board. In practice, this means that the Turkish government is directly responsible for what textbooks are taught in schools across Turkey.

[ 175 ] In 2014, Taner Akçam , writing for the Armenian Weekly , discussed 2014–2015 Turkish elementary and middle school textbooks that the MEB had made available on the internet. He found that Turkish history textbooks describe Armenians as people "who are incited by foreigners, who aim to break apart the state and the country, and who murdered Turks and Muslims." The Armenian genocide is referred to as the "Armenian matter", and is described as a lie perpetrated to further the perceived hidden agenda of Armenians. Recognition of the Armenian genocide is defined as the "biggest threat to Turkish national security".

[ 175 ] Akçam summarized one textbook that claims the Armenians had sided with the Russians during the war. The 1909 Adana massacre , in which as many as 20,000–30,000 Armenians were massacred, is identified as "The Rebellion of Armenians of Adana". According to the book, the Armenian Hnchak and Dashnak organizations instituted rebellions in many parts of Anatolia , and "didn't hesitate to kill Armenians who would not join them," issuing instructions that "if you want to survive you have to kill your neighbor first." Claims highlighted by Akçam: "[The Armenians murdered] many people living in villages, even children, by attacking Turkish villages, which had become defenseless because all the Turkish men were fighting on the war fronts. ... They stabbed the Ottoman forces in the back. They created obstacles for the operations of the Ottoman units by cutting off their supply routes and destroying bridges and roads. ... They spied for Russia and by rebelling in the cities where they were located, they eased the way for the Russian invasion. ... Since the Armenians who engaged in massacres in collaboration with the Russians created a dangerous situation, this law required the migration of [Armenian people] from the towns they were living in to Syria, a safe Ottoman territory. ... Despite being in the midst of war, the Ottoman state took precautions and measures when it came to the Armenians who were migrating. Their tax payments were postponed, they were permitted to take any personal property they wished, government officials were assigned to ensure that they were protected from attacks during the journey and that their needs were met, police stations were established to ensure that their lives and properties were secure." [ 175 ] Similar revisionist claims found in other textbooks by Akçam included that Armenian "back-stabbing" was the reason the Ottomans lost the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78 (similar to the post-War German stab-in-the-back myth ), that the Hamidian massacres never happened, that the Armenians were armed by the Russians during late World War I to fight the Ottomans (in reality they had already been nearly annihilated from the area by this point), that Armenians killed 600,000 Turks during said war, that the deportation were to save Armenians from other violent Armenian gangs, and that deported Armenians were later allowed to retrieve their possessions and return to Turkey unharmed.

[ 175 ] As of 2015, Turkish textbooks continue to refer to Armenians as "traitors," deny the genocide, and assert that the Ottoman Turks "took necessary measures to counter Armenian separatism".

[ 176 ] Students are taught that Armenians were forcibly relocated to defend Turkish nationals from attacks, and Armenians are described as "dishonorable and treacherous".

[ 177 ] Yugoslavia [ edit ] Throughout the post war era, though Tito denounced nationalist sentiments in historiography, those trends continued with Croat and Serbian academics at times accusing each other of misrepresenting each other's histories, especially in relation to the Croat-Nazi alliance.

[ 178 ] Communist historiography was challenged in the 1980s and a rehabilitation of Serbian nationalism by Serbian historians began.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] Historians and other members of the intelligentsia belonging to the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts (SANU) and the Writers Association played a significant role in the explanation of the new historical narrative.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ] The process of writing a "new Serbian history" paralleled alongside the emerging ethno-nationalist mobilization of Serbs with the objective of reorganizing the Yugoslav federation.

[ 180 ] Using ideas and concepts from Holocaust historiography, Serbian historians alongside church leaders applied it to World War Two Yugoslavia and equated the Serbs with Jews and Croats with Nazi Germans.

[ 184 ] Chetniks along with the Ustashe were vilified by Tito era historiography within Yugoslavia.

[ 185 ] In the 1980s, Serbian historians initiated the process of re-examining the narrative of how World War Two was told in Yugoslavia which was accompanied by the rehabilitation of Četnik leader Draža Mihailović .

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Monographs relating to Mihailović and the Četnik movement were produced by some younger historians who were ideologically close to it towards the end of the 1990s.

[ 188 ] Being preoccupied with the era, Serbian historians have looked to vindicate the history of the Chetniks by portraying them as righteous freedom fighters battling the Nazis while removing from history books the ambiguous alliances with the Italians and Germans.

[ 189 ] [ 185 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] Whereas the crimes committed by Chetniks against Croats and Muslims in Serbian historiography are overall "cloaked in silence".

[ 192 ] During the Milošević era, Serbian history was falsified to obscure the role Serbian collaborators Milan Nedić and Dimitrije Ljotić played in cleansing Serbia's Jewish community , killing them in the country or deporting them to Eastern European concentration camps.

[ 66 ] In the 1990s following a massive Western media coverage of the Yugoslav Wars , there was a rise of the publications considering the matter on historical revisionism of former Yugoslavia . One of the most prominent authors on the field of historical revisionism in the 1990s considering the newly emerged republics is Noel Malcolm and his works Bosnia: A Short History (1994) and Kosovo: A Short History (1998) , that have seen a robust debate among historians following their release; following the release of the latter, the merits of the book were the subject of an extended debate in Foreign Affairs . Critics said that the book was "marred by his sympathies for its ethnic Albanian separatists, anti-Serbian bias, and illusions about the Balkans".

[ 193 ] In late 1999, Thomas Emmert of the history faculty of Gustavus Adolphus College in Minnesota reviewed the book in Journal of Southern Europe and the Balkans Online and while praising aspects of the book also asserted that it was "shaped by the author's overriding determination to challenge Serbian myths", that Malcolm was "partisan", and also complained that the book made a "transparent attempt to prove that the main Serbian myths are false".

[ 194 ] In 2006, a study by Frederick Anscombe looked at issues surrounding scholarship on Kosovo such as Noel Malcolm's work Kosovo: A Short History .

[ 195 ] Anscombe noted that Malcolm offered a "detailed critique of the competing versions of Kosovo's history" and that his work marked a "remarkable reversal" of previous acceptance by Western historians of the "Serbian account" regarding the migration of the Serbs (1690) from Kosovo.

[ 195 ] Malcolm has been criticized for being "anti-Serbian" and selective like the Serbs with the sources, while other more restrained critics note that "his arguments are unconvincing".

[ 196 ] Anscombe noted that Malcolm, like Serbian and Yugoslav historians who have ignored his conclusions, sidelines and is unwilling to consider indigenous evidence such as that from the Ottoman archive when composing national history.

[ 196 ] French law recognizing colonialism's positive value [ edit ] Main article: French law on colonialism On 23 February 2005, the Union for a Popular Movement conservative majority at the French National Assembly voted a law compelling history textbooks and teachers to "acknowledge and recognize in particular the positive role of the French presence abroad, especially in North Africa ".

[ 197 ] It was criticized by historians and teachers, among them Pierre Vidal-Naquet , who refused to recognize the French Parliament 's right to influence the way history is written (despite the French Holocaust denial laws, see Loi Gayssot ). That law was also challenged by left-wing parties and the former French colonies ; critics argued that the law was tantamount to refusing to acknowledge the racism inherent to French colonialism , and that the law proper is a form of historical revisionism.

[ note 5 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] Marcos martial law negationism in the Philippines [ edit ] Main article: Historical distortion regarding Ferdinand Marcos See also: Ferdinand Marcos' cult of personality In the Philippines, the biggest examples of historical negationism are linked to the Marcos family dynasty, usually Imelda Marcos , Bongbong Marcos , and Imee Marcos specifically.

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] [ 202 ] They have been accused of denying or trivializing the human rights violations during martial law and the plunder of the Philippines' coffers while Ferdinand Marcos was president.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] Denial of the Muslim conquest of the Iberian peninsula [ edit ] See also: Umayyad conquest of Hispania A spin-off of the vision of history espoused by the "inclusive Spanish nationalism " built in opposition to the National-Catholic brand of Spanish nationalism, it was first coined by Ignacio Olagüe (a dilettante historian connected to the early Spanish fascism ) particularly in the former's 1974 work La revolución islámica en Occidente ("The Islamic revolution in the West").

[ 206 ] Olagüe argued that it was impossible for Arabs to have invaded Hispania in 711 since they had not yet established their dominance over the neighbouring part of North Africa . Instead, Olagüe held that the events of 711 could be explained as skirmishes involving allied North African troops within the context of a civil war pitting Catholic Goths led by Roderic against Goths adhering to some form of Arianism and a largely- nontrinitarian Spanish population, including Nestorians , Gnostics and Manichaeans . The negationist postulates of Olagüe were later adopted by certain sectors within Andalusian nationalism .

[ 206 ] These ideas were resurrected in the early 21st century by the Arabist Emilio González Ferrín.

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] Australia [ edit ] Main article: Australian history wars See also: Australian frontier wars and Stolen Generations The Indigenous Australian population plummeted in the Australian frontier wars . The aboriginal people were regarded as lacking any concept of property or land rights: consequently, Australia was considered terra nullius .

[ 208 ] Massacres and mass poisonings were carried out against indigenous people.

[ 209 ] Indigenous children were removed from their families in what is known as the Stolen Generations .

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Several critics like Andrew Bolt and Keith Windschuttle have rejected the scholarly evidence pointing to the genocide against Indigenous Australians and have accused historians like Henry Reynolds and Lyndall Ryan of deliberately fabricating Australian history to suit a political agenda.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] [ 214 ] Nakba [ edit ] Main article: Nakba denial Nakba denial is a form of historical denialism [ 215 ] pertaining to the 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight and its accompanying effects , which Palestinians refer to collectively as the " Nakba " ( lit.

' catastrophe ' ).

[ 216 ] Underlying assumptions of Nakba denial cited by scholars can include the denial of historically documented violence against Palestinians, the denial of a distinct Palestinian identity , the idea that Palestine was barren land , and the notion that Palestinian dispossession were part of mutual transfers between Arabs and Jews justified by war.

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] [ 219 ] Ramifications and judicature [ edit ] 16 European countries as well as Canada and Israel have criminalized historical negationism of the Holocaust .

[ citation needed ] The Council of Europe defines it as the "denial, gross minimisation, approval or justification of genocide or crimes against humanity " (article 6, Additional Protocol to the Convention on cybercrime ).

International law [ edit ] Main article: Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime Some council-member states proposed an additional protocol to the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention , addressing materials and "acts of racist or xenophobic nature committed through computer networks"; it was negotiated from late 2001 to early 2002, and, on 7 November 2002, the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers adopted the protocol's final text [ 220 ] titled Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cyber-crime, Concerning the Criminalization of Acts of a Racist and Xenophobic Nature Committed through Computer Systems , ("Protocol").

[ 221 ] It opened on 28 January 2003, and became current on 1 March 2006; as of 30 November 2011, 20 States have signed and ratified the Protocol, and 15 others have signed, but not yet ratified it (including Canada and South Africa).

[ 222 ] The Protocol requires participant States to criminalize the dissemination of racist and xenophobic material, and of racist and xenophobic threats and insults through computer networks, such as the Internet.

[ 220 ] Article 6, Section 1 of the Protocol specifically covers Holocaust denial , and other genocides recognized as such by international courts, established since 1945, by relevant international legal instruments. Section 2 of Article 6 allows a Party to the Protocol, at their discretion, only to prosecute the violator if the crime is committed with the intent to incite hatred or discrimination or violence; or to use a reservation, by allowing a Party not to apply Article 6 – either partly or entirely.

[ 223 ] The Council of Europe's Explanatory Report of the Protocol says that the " European Court of Human Rights has made it clear that the denial or revision of 'clearly established historical facts – such as the Holocaust  –  ... would be removed from the protection of Article 10 by Article 17' of the European Convention on Human Rights " (see the Lehideux and Isorni judgement of 23 September 1998); [ 223 ] Two of the English-speaking states in Europe, Ireland and the United Kingdom, have not signed the additional protocol, (the third, Malta, signed on 28 January 2003, but has not yet ratified it).

[ 222 ] On 8 July 2005 Canada became the only non-European state to sign the convention. They were joined by South Africa in April 2008. The United States government does not believe that the final version of the Protocol is consistent with the United States' First Amendment Constitutional rights and has informed the Council of Europe that the United States will not become a Party to the protocol.

[ 220 ] [ 224 ] Domestic law [ edit ] There are domestic laws against negationism and hate speech (which may encompass negationism) in several countries, including: Austria (Article I §3 Verbotsgesetz 1947 with its 1992 updates and added paragraph §3h).

[ 225 ] Belgium ( Belgian Holocaust denial law ).

[ 226 ] Czech Republic.

[ 227 ] France ( Gayssot Act ).

Germany (§130(3) of the penal code).

[ 228 ] Hungary.

[ 229 ] Israel.

[ 230 ] Lithuania .

[ 231 ] Luxembourg .

[ 232 ] Poland (Article 55 of the law establishing the Institute of National Remembrance 1998).

[ 233 ] Portugal.

[ 234 ] Romania.

[ 235 ] Slovakia .

[ 236 ] Switzerland (Article 261bis of the Penal Code).

[ 237 ] Additionally, the Netherlands considers denying the Holocaust as a hate crime – which is a punishable offence.

[ 238 ] Wider use of domestic laws include the 1990 French Gayssot Act that prohibits any "racist, anti-Semitic or xenophobic " speech, [ 238 ] and the Czech Republic [ 239 ] and Ukraine [ 240 ] have criminalized the denial and the minimization of Communist-era crimes .

In fiction [ edit ] See also: Fahrenheit 451 and Alternate history In the novel Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949) by George Orwell , the government of Oceania continually revises historical records to concord with the contemporary political explanations of The Party. When Oceania is at war with Eurasia , the public records (newspapers, cinema, television) indicate that Oceania has been always at war with Eurasia; yet, when Eurasia and Oceania are no longer fighting each other, the historical records are subjected to negationism; thus, the populace are brainwashed to believe that Oceania and Eurasia always have been allies against Eastasia. The protagonist of the story, Winston Smith , is an editor in the Ministry of Truth , responsible for effecting the continual historical revisionism that will negate the contradictions of the past upon the contemporary world of Oceania.

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] To cope with the psychological stresses of life during wartime, Smith begins a diary, in which he observes that "He who controls the present, controls the past. He who controls the past, controls the future", and so illustrates the principal, ideological purpose of historical negationism.

[ 243 ] Franz Kurowski was an extremely prolific right-wing German writer who dedicated his entire career to the production of Nazi military propaganda , followed by post-war military pulp fiction and revisionist histories of World War II , claiming the humane behaviour and innocence of war crimes of the Wehrmacht , glorifying war as a desirable state, while fabricating eyewitness reports of atrocities allegedly committed by the Allies, especially Bomber Command and the air raids on Cologne and Dresden as a planned genocide of the civilian population.

[ 244 ] See also [ edit ] History portal Academic integrity Alternative facts Ash heap of history Big lie Black legend Cognitive dissonance Damnatio memoriae Doublethink Dunning School ( United States ) History wars (Australia) History wars (Canada) Hindutva pseudohistory Information warfare Memory hole National memory Selective omission – biases to taboo some elements of a collective memory Cases of denialism [ edit ] 1776 Commission Anti-Katyn Austria victim theory Denial of atrocities against indigenous peoples Denial of the Holodomor Genocide denial – lists a number of particular cases Holocaust denial Italiani brava gente Myth of the clean Wehrmacht Temple denial Waffen-SS in popular culture White Legend Notes [ edit ] ^ An example of changing visual history is the party's motivated practice of altering photographs .

^ To clarify the terminology of denial vs.

revisionism , see: "This is the phenomenon of what has come to be known as 'revisionism', 'negationism', or 'Holocaust denial,' whose main characteristic is either an outright rejection of the very veracity of the Nazi genocide of the Jews, or at least a concerted attempt to minimize both its scale and importance ... It is just as crucial, however, to distinguish between the wholly objectionable politics of denial and the fully legitimate scholarly revision of previously accepted conventional interpretations of any historical event, including the Holocaust." Bartov, Omer.

The Holocaust: Origins, Implementation and Aftermath, Routledge, pp. 11–12. Bartov is John P. Birkelund Distinguished Professor of European History at the Watson Institute, and is regarded as one of the world's leading authorities on genocide ( "Omer Bartov" Archived 16 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine , The Watson Institute for International Studies).

"The two leading critical exposés of Holocaust denial in the United States were written by historians Deborah Lipstadt (1993) and Michael Shermer and Alex Grobman (2000). These scholars make a distinction between historical revisionism and denial. Revisionism, in their view, entails a refinement of existing knowledge about a historical event, not a denial of the event itself, that comes through the examination of new empirical evidence or a reexamination or reinterpretation of existing evidence. Legitimate historical revisionism acknowledges a "certain body of irrefutable evidence" or a "convergence of evidence" that suggest that an event – like the black plague, American slavery, or the Holocaust – did in fact occur (Lipstadt 1993:21; Shermer & Grobman 200:34). Denial, on the other hand, rejects the entire foundation of historical evidence ..." Ronald J. Berger.

Fathoming the Holocaust: A Social Problems Approach , Aldine Transaction, 2002, ISBN 0-202-30670-4 , p. 154.

"At this time, in the mid-1970s, the specter of Holocaust Denial (masked as "revisionism") had begun to raise its head in Australia ..." Bartrop, Paul R.

"A Little More Understanding: The Experience of a Holocaust Educator in Australia" in Samuel Totten, Steven Leonard Jacobs, Paul R Bartrop.

Teaching about the Holocaust , Praeger/Greenwood, 2004, p. xix.

ISBN 0-275-98232-7 " Pierre Vidal-Naquet urges that denial of the Holocaust should not be called 'revisionism' because 'to deny history is not to revise it'.

Les Assassins de la Memoire. Un Eichmann de papier et autres essays sur le revisionisme (The Assassins of Memory – A Paper-Eichmann and Other Essays on Revisionism) 15 (1987)." Cited in Roth, Stephen J. "Denial of the Holocaust as an Issue of Law" in the Israel Yearbook on Human Rights , Vol. 23, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1993, ISBN 0-7923-2581-8 , p. 215.

"This essay describes, from a methodological perspective, some of the inherent flaws in the "revisionist" approach to the history of the Holocaust. It is not intended as a polemic, nor does it attempt to ascribe motives. Rather, it seeks to explain the fundamental error in the "revisionist" approach, as well as why that approach of necessity leaves no other choice. It concludes that "revisionism" is a misnomer because the facts do not accord with the position it puts forward and, more importantly, its methodology reverses the appropriate approach to historical investigation ..."Revisionism" is obliged to deviate from the standard methodology of historical pursuit because it seeks to mold facts to fit a preconceived result, it denies events that have been objectively and empirically proved to have occurred, and because it works backward from the conclusion to the facts, thus necessitating the distortion and manipulation of those facts where they differ from the preordained conclusion (which they almost always do). In short, "revisionism" denies something that demonstrably happened, through methodological dishonesty." McFee, Gordon.

"Why 'Revisionism' Isn't" , The Holocaust History Project , 15 May 1999. Retrieved 15 August 2016.

"Crucial to understanding and combating Holocaust denial is a clear distinction between denial and revisionism. One of the more insidious and dangerous aspects of contemporary Holocaust denial, a la Arthur Butz, Bradley Smith and Greg Raven, is the fact that they attempt to present their work as reputable scholarship under the guise of 'historical revisionism.' The term 'revisionist' permeates their publications as descriptive of their motives, orientation and methodology. In fact, Holocaust denial is in no sense 'revisionism,' it is denial ... Contemporary Holocaust deniers are not revisionists – not even neo-revisionists. They are Deniers . Their motivations stem from their neo-nazi political goals and their rampant antisemitism." Austin, Ben S.

"Deniers in Revisionists Clothing" Archived 21 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine , The Holocaust\Shoah Page, Middle Tennessee State University . Retrieved 29 March 2007.

"Holocaust denial can be a particularly insidious form of antisemitism precisely because it often tries to disguise itself as something quite different: as genuine scholarly debate (in the pages, for example, of the innocuous-sounding Journal for Historical Review). Holocaust deniers often refer to themselves as 'revisionists', in an attempt to claim legitimacy for their activities. There are, of course, a great many scholars engaged in historical debates about the Holocaust whose work should not be confused with the output of the Holocaust deniers. Debate continues about such subjects as, for example, the extent and nature of ordinary Germans' involvement in and knowledge of the policy of genocide, and the timing of orders given for the extermination of the Jews. However, the valid endeavour of historical revisionism, which involves the re-interpretation of historical knowledge in the light of newly emerging evidence, is a very different task from that of claiming that the essential facts of the Holocaust, and the evidence for those facts, are fabrications." The nature of Holocaust denial: What is Holocaust denial?

Archived 12 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , JPR report No. 3, 2000. Retrieved 16 May 2007.

^ Further information of how Irving was discredited as a historian: "In 1969, after David Irving's support for Rolf Hochhuth, the German playwright who accused Winston Churchill of murdering the Polish wartime leader General Sikorski, The Daily Telegraph issued a memo to all its correspondents. 'It is incorrect,' it said, 'to describe David Irving as a historian. In future we should describe him as an author.'" Ingram, Richard.

Irving was the author of his own downfall , The Independent , 25 February 2006.

"It may seem an absurd semantic dispute to deny the appellation of 'historian' to someone who has written two dozen books or more about historical subjects. But if we mean by historian someone who is concerned to discover the truth about the past, and to give as accurate a representation of it as possible, then Irving is not a historian. Those in the know, indeed, are accustomed to avoid the term altogether when referring to him and use some circumlocution such as 'historical writer' instead. Irving is essentially an ideologue who uses history for his own political purposes; he is not primarily concerned with discovering and interpreting what happened in the past, he is concerned merely to give a selective and tendentious account of it in order to further his own ideological ends in the present. The true historian's primary concern, however, is with the past. That is why, in the end, Irving is not a historian." Irving vs. (1) Lipstadt and (2) Penguin Books, Expert Witness Report Archived 6 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine by Richard J. Evans FBA, Professor of Modern History, University of Cambridge , 2000, Chapter 6.

"State prosecutor Michael Klackl said: 'He's not a historian, he's a falsifier of history.'" Traynor, Ian.

Irving jailed for denying Holocaust , The Guardian , 21 February 2006.

"One of Britain's most prominent speakers on Muslim issues is today exposed as a supporter of David Irving. ... Bukhari contacted the discredited historian, sentenced this year to three years in an Austrian prison for Holocaust denial, after reading his website." Doward, Jamie.

"Muslim leader sent funds to Irving" , The Guardian , 19 November 2006.

"David Irving, the discredited historian and Nazi apologist, was last night starting a three-year prison sentence in Vienna for denying the Holocaust and the gas chambers of Auschwitz." Traynor, Ian.

"Irving jailed for denying Holocaust" , The Guardian , 21 February 2006.

"Conclusion on meaning 2.15 (vi): that Irving is discredited as a historian." David Irving v. Penguin Books and Deborah Lipstadt/II .

"DAVID Irving, the discredited revisionist historian and most outspoken British Holocaust denier, has added further fuel to the controversy over his early release from an Austrian jail by recanting his court statement of regret over his views." Crichton, Torcuil. "Holocaust denier reneges on regret", The Sunday Herald , 24 December 2006.

"Discredited British author David Irving spoke in front of some 250 people at a small theatre on Szabadság tér last Monday." Hodgson, Robert.

"Holocaust denier David Irving draws a friendly crowd in Budapest" , The Budapest Times , 19 March 2007.

"An account of the 2000–2001 libel trial in the high court of the now discredited historian David Irving, which formed the backdrop for his recent conviction in Vienna for denying the Holocaust." Program Details – David Irving: The London Trial 2006-02-26 17:00:00 , BBC Radio 4 .

"Yet Irving, a discredited right-wing historian, was described by a High Court judge after a long libel trial as a racist anti-semite who denied the Holocaust." Edwards, Rob. "Anti-green activist in links with Nazi writer; Revealed: campaigner", The Sunday Herald , 5 May 2002.

"'The sentence against Irving confirms that he and his views are discredited, but as a general rule I don't think that this is the way this should be dealt with,' said Antony Lerman , director of the London-based Institute for Jewish Policy Research. 'It is better to combat denial by education and using good speech to drive out bad speech.'" Gruber, Ruth Ellen.

"Jail sentence for Holocaust denier spurs debate on free speech" , J. The Jewish News of Northern California , 24 February 2006.

"Deborah Lipstadt is Dorot Professor of Modern Jewish and Holocaust Studies and director of The Rabbi Donald A. Tam Institute for Jewish Studies at Emory University. She is the author of two books about the Holocaust. Her book Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory led to the 2000 court case in which she defeated and discredited Holocaust denier David Irving." Understanding Auschwitz Today , Task of Justice & Danger of Holocaust Deniers, Public Broadcasting Service .

"After the discredited British historian David Irving was sentenced to a three-year jail term in Austria as a penalty for denying the Holocaust, the liberal conscience of western Europe has squirmed and agonised." Glover, Gillian.

"Irving gets just what he wanted – his name in the headlines" , The Scotsman , 23 February 2006.

"... is a disciple of discredited historian and Holocaust denier David Irving." Horowitz, David .

The Professors: The 101 Most Dangerous Academics in America , Regnery Publishing, 2006, ISBN 0-89526-003-4 , p. 175.

"If the case for competence applies to those who lack specialist knowledge, it applies even further to those who have been discredited as incompetent. For example, why ought we include David Irving in a debate aiming to establish the truth about the Holocaust, after a court has found that he manipulates and misinterprets history?" Long, Graham.

Relativism and the Foundations of Liberalism , Imprint Academic, 2004, ISBN 1-84540-004-6 , p. 80.

"Ironically, Julius is also a celebrated solicitor famous for his defence of Schuchard's colleague, Deborah Lipstadt, against the suit for of libel brought by the discredited historian David Irving brought when Lipstadt accused him of denying the Holocaust." "T S Eliot's anti-Semitism hotly debated as scholars argue over new evidence" Archived 24 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine , University of York , Communications Office, 5 February 2003.

"Irving, a discredited historian, has insisted that Jews at Auschwitz were not gassed." "Irving vows to continue denial", Breaking News, Jewish Telegraphic Agency , 7 February 2007.

"David Irving, the discredited historian and Nazi apologist, was on Monday night starting a three-year prison sentence in Vienna for denying the Holocaust and the gas chambers of Auschwitz." "Historian jailed for denying Holocaust" Archived 1 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Mail & Guardian , 21 February 2006.

"Irving, a discredited historian, has insisted that Jews at Auschwitz were not gassed." "Irving Vows To Continue Denial" Archived 2 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine , The Jewish Week , 29 December 2006.

"The two best-known present-day Holocaust deniers are the discredited historian David Irving, jailed last year in Austria for the offence, and the Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who wants Israel wiped off the map." Wills, Clair. " Ben Kiely and the 'Holocaust denial'", Irish Independent , 10 March 2007.

"[Irving] claimed that Lipstadt's book accuses him of falsifying historical facts to support his theory that the Holocaust never happened. This of course discredited his reputation as a historian. ... On 11 April, High Court judge Charles Gray ruled against Irving, concluding that he qualified as a Holocaust denier and anti-Semite, and that as such he distorted history to defend his hero, Adolf Hitler." Wyden, Peter.

The Hitler Virus: the Insidious Legacy of Adolf Hitler , Arcade Publishing, 2001, ISBN 1-55970-532-9 , p. 164.

"Now that holocaust denier David Irving has been discredited, what is the future of history?" Kustow, Michael.

"History after Irving" Archived 16 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Red Pepper , June 2000.

"In Britain, which does not have a Holocaust denial law, Irving had already been thoroughly discredited when he unsuccessfully sued historian Deborah Lipstadt in 1998 for describing him as a Holocaust denier." Callamard, Agnès . "Debate: can we say what we want?", Le Monde diplomatique , April 2007.

"Holocaust denier and discredited British historian David Irving, for example, asserts. ... that Auschwitz gas chambers were constructed after World War II." "Hate-Group Web Sites Target Children, Teens" , Psychiatric News , American Psychiatric Association , 2 February 2001.

"Holocaust denier: An Austrian court hears discredited British historian David Irving's appeal against his jail sentence for denying the Nazi genocide of the Jews.", "The world this week" , BBC News , 20 December 2006.

"Discredited British historian David Irving began serving three years in an Austrian prison yesterday for denying the Holocaust, a crime in the country where Hitler was born." Schofield, Matthew.

"Controversial Nazi apologist backs down, but still jailed for three years" , The Age , 22 February 2006.

^ Laws against denying the Holocaust: Philip Johnston " Britons face extradition (to Germany) for 'thought crime' on net " in The Daily Telegraph , 18 February 2003 Brendan O'Neill "Irving? Let the guy go home" [from Austria] BBC 4 January 2006 Malte Herwig The Swastika Wielding Provocateur in Der Spiegel 16 January 2006 "German neo-Nazi revisionist Zuendel goes on trial" . European Jewish Press. 12 February 2006. Archived from the original on 22 February 2006 . Retrieved 12 February 2006 .

14 July 1990 Act prohibiting racist, antisemitic and xenophobic acts – loi Gayssot "Row over anti-revisionist laws" . 4 January 2006. Archived from the original on 2 March 2006 . Retrieved 12 February 2006 .

"Belgian Holocaust denier held at Schiphol" . Expatica News. 5 August 2005. Archived from the original on 16 May 2006 . Retrieved 12 February 2006 .

About Switzerland laws Archived 25 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine by the Stephen Roth Institute for the Study of Antisemitism and Racism Philip Johnston, " Blair's pledge on Holocaust denial law abandoned " in The Daily Telegraph , 21 January 2000 and Lithuania.

^ In retaliation against the law, Algerian president Abdelaziz Bouteflika refused to sign a prepared "friendly treaty" with France. On 26 June 2005, Bouteflika declared that the law "approached mental blindness, negationism and revisionism". In Martinique , Aimé Césaire , author of the Négritude literary movement, refused to receive UMP leader Nicolas Sarkozy , the incumbent president of France.

References [ edit ] ^ The term negationism derives from the French neologism négationnisme , denoting Holocaust denial.(Kornberg, Jacques.

The Future of a Negation: Reflections on the Question of Genocide.(Review) (book review) Archived 22 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Shofar , January 2001). It is now also sometimes used for more general political historical revisionism as (PDF) UNESCO against racism world conference 31 August – 7 September 2001. "Given the ignorance with which it is treated, the slave trade comprises one of the most radical forms of historical negationism." Pascale Bloch has written in International law: Response to Professor Fronza's The punishment of Negationism (Accessed ProQuest Database, 12 October 2011) that revisionists are understood as negationists in order to differentiate them from historical revisionists, since their goal is either to prove that the Holocaust did not exist or to introduce confusion regarding the victims and German executioners regardless of historical and scientific methodology and evidence. For those reasons, the term revisionism is often considered confusing, since it conceals misleading ideologies that purport to avoid disapproval by presenting revisions of the past based on pseudo-scientific methods, while they are in fact a part of negationism.

^ Kriss Ravetto (2001).

The Unmaking of Fascist Aesthetics , University of Minnesota Press ISBN 0-8166-3743-1 . p. 33 ^ Watts, Philip (2009). "Rewriting history: Céline and Kurt Vonnegut".

Kurt Vonnegut's Slaughterhouse-five . Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4381-2874-0 .

^ Pohl, Dieter (2020).

"Holocaust Studies in Our Societies" .

S:I.M.O.N. Shoah: Intervention. Methods. Documentation .

7 (1): 133– 141.

ISSN 2408-9192 .

In addition, Holocaust research can support the fight against the falsification of history, not only Nazi negationism, but also lighter forms of historical propaganda.

^ H. Foxman, Abraham (27 January 2014).

"Inappropriate Comparisons Trivialize the Holocaust" .

Anti Defamation League . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Addressing Anti-Semitism through Education: Addressing Holocaust Denial, Distortion and Trivialization (Teaching Aid 6 ed.). Europe: Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . 4 December 2019. pp.

2– 3.

^ "The two leading critical exposés of Holocaust denial in the United States were written by historians Deborah Lipstadt (1993) and Michael Shermer and Alex Grobman (2000). These scholars make a distinction between historical revisionism and denial. Revisionism, in their view, entails a refinement of existing knowledge about an historical event, not a denial of the event itself, that comes through the examination of new empirical evidence or a re-examination or reinterpretation of existing evidence. Legitimate historical revisionism acknowledges a 'certain body of irrefutable evidence' or a 'convergence of evidence' that suggest that an event – like the black plague, American slavery, or the Holocaust – did in fact occur (Lipstadt 1993:21; Shermer & Grobman 200:34). Denial, on the other hand, rejects the entire foundation of historical evidence. ... " Ronald J. Berger.

Fathoming the Holocaust: A Social Problems Approach , Aldine Transaction, 2002, ISBN 0-202-30670-4 , p. 154.

^ a b Lying About Hitler: History, Holocaust, and the David Irving Trial , by Richard J. Evans , 2001, ISBN 0-465-02153-0 . p. 145. The author is a professor of Modern History, at the University of Cambridge , and was a major expert-witness in the Irving v. Lipstadt trial; the book presents his perspective of the trial, and the expert-witness report, including his research about the Dresden death count.

^ a b Trafzer, Clifford E.; Lorimer, Michelle (5 August 2013). "Silencing California Indian Genocide in Social Studies Texts".

American Behavioral Scientist .

58 (1): 64– 82.

doi : 10.1177/0002764213495032 .

S2CID 144356070 .

^ a b Fenelon, James V.; Trafzer, Clifford E. (4 December 2013). "From Colonialism to Denial of California Genocide to Misrepresentations: Special Issue on Indigenous Struggles in the Americas".

American Behavioral Scientist .

58 (1): 3– 29.

doi : 10.1177/0002764213495045 .

S2CID 145377834 .

^ a b c Klaus Mehnert, Stalin Versus Marx: the Stalinist historical doctrine (Translation of Weltrevolution durch Weltgeschichte ) Port Washington NY: Kennikat Press 1972 (1952), on the illegitimate use of history in the 1934–1952 period.

^ a b c Roger D. Markwick, Rewriting history in Soviet Russia : the politics of revisionist historiography, 1956–1974 New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001, on legitimate Soviet historiography particularly in the post 1956 period.

^ "Nakba of 1948 and Today Are Not Separate Events, but Ongoing Process of Palestinian Displacement, Replacement, Speakers Tell Panel, Urging Immediate Ceasefire in Gaza | Meetings Coverage and Press Releases" .

press.un.org . Retrieved 22 November 2024 .

^ Nations, United.

"Social media feeds Holocaust denial and distortion, finds UN report" .

United Nations . Retrieved 22 November 2024 .

^ Finkielkraut, Alain (1998).

The Future of a Negation: Reflections on the Question of Genocide . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. p.

125 .

ISBN 978-0-8032-2000-3 .

^ "Truth or Denial" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 3 June 2025 .

^ Taisia Osipova, "Peasant rebellions: Origin, Scope, Design and Consequences", in Vladimir N. Brovkin (ed.), The Bolsheviks in Russian Society: The Revolution and the Civil Wars , Yale University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-300-06706-2 . pp. 154–76.

^ Roger D. Markwick, Donald J. Raleigh, Rewriting History in Soviet Russia: The Politics of Revisionist Historiography , Palgrave Macmillan, 2001, ISBN 0-333-79209-2 , pp. 4–5.

^ Tennent H. Bagley, Spy Wars ¸ Yale University Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-300-12198-8 , p. 105.

^ Dionne, E.J. Jr.

Cold War Scholars Fault Stalin: Soviet Historians Lean to U.S. View . The Washington Post. 26 July 1990. LexisNexis Database (Retrieved 12 October 2011). First Section, p. A3.

^ Nagorski, Andrew.

Russia's New Normal: The Cold War may be over, but that doesn't mean the threat from the Kremlin has entirely disappeared.

Newsweek; World Affairs. 17 March 2008. LexisNexis Database(. Retrieved 12 October 2011)Vol. 151 No 11.

ISSN 0163-7053 ^ Richard J. Evans . David Irving, Hitler and Holocaust Denial: Electronic Edition, 6. General Conclusion Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Paragraphs 6.20,6.21 ^ Jon Silverman How 'Holocaust denier' fought and lost on the BBC web-site 18 November 2005 ^ Malte Herwig " The Swastika Wielding Provocateur " in Der Spiegel 16 January 2006 ^ Barry Loberfeld, "Denying the Other Holocausts" : Professor Lipstadt's Own Assault on Truth and Memory, Liberty , May 2002 ^ Linehan, Hugh.

"Sinn Féin not allowing facts derail good 'Irish slaves' yarn" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 30 March 2021 .

^ Kennedy, Liam (2015).

Unhappy the Land: The Most Oppressed People Ever, the Irish?

. Dublin: Irish Academic Press. p. 19.

ISBN 9781785370472 .

^ Cf. Gouvea, Jornada (Coimbra, 1606);Geddes,"History of the Malabar Church", London, 1694 ^ Fadhil, Muna (26 February 2015).

"Isis destroys thousands of books and manuscripts in Mosul libraries" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

^ Shiji Chapter 6. "The Basic Annals of the First Emperor of Qin" thirty-fourth year: "所不去者，醫藥卜筮種樹之書。" ^ Hebert, Olivia (23 May 2025).

"National parks ordered to police 'negative' history under Trump directive" .

SFGate . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

^ Joselow, Maxine (22 July 2025).

"Trump Told Park Workers to Report Displays That 'Disparage' Americans. Here's What They Flagged" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ David Barton (December 2008).

"Confronting Civil War Revisionism: Why the South Went to War" .

Wall Builders . Archived from the original on 31 December 2013 . Retrieved 30 December 2013 .

^ Barrett Brown (27 December 2010).

"Neoconfederate civil war revisionism: Those who commemorate the South's fallen heroes are entitled to do so, but not to deny that slavery was the war's prime cause" .

TheGuardian.com . Retrieved 30 December 2013 .

^ "Howard Swint: Confederate revisionism warps U.S. history" .

Charleston Daily Mail . 15 June 2011. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013 . Retrieved 30 December 2013 .

^ "Arizona State Professor Brooks D. Simpson Discusses Neo-Confederate Movement" .

Intelligence Report . Southern Poverty Law Center. 15 September 2000.

^ Blight, David W.

Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory . (2001) p. 289 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Blight, David W.

Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory . (2001) p. 290 ^ Madley, Benjamin (2016).

"Understanding Genocide in California under United States Rule, 1846–1873" .

The Western Historical Quarterly .

47 (4): 449– 461.

doi : 10.1093/whq/whw176 .

^ Madley, Benjamin (1 August 2008). "California's Yuki Indians: Defining Genocide in Native American History".

The Western Historical Quarterly .

39 (3): 303– 332.

doi : 10.1093/whq/39.3.303 .

^ Madley, Benjamin (2004).

"Patterns of frontier genocide 1803–1910: the aboriginal Tasmanians, the Yuki of California, and the Herero of Namibia" .

Journal of Genocide Research .

6 (2): 167– 192.

doi : 10.1080/1462352042000225930 .

S2CID 145079658 .

^ Sousa, Ashley Riley (2004).

" "They will be hunted down like wild beasts and destroyed!": a comparative study of genocide in California and Tasmania" .

Journal of Genocide Research .

6 (2): 193– 209.

doi : 10.1080/1462352042000225949 .

S2CID 109131060 .

^ Madley, Benjamin (2016).

An American Genocide: The United States and the California Indian Catastrophe, 1846–1873 . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0300181364 .

^ Adhikari, Mohamed (2022).

Destroying to Replace: Settler Genocides of Indigenous Peoples . Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company. pp.

72– 115.

ISBN 978-1647920548 .

^ Lindsay, Brendan C. (March 2015).

Murder State: California's Native American Genocide, 1846–1873 . University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0-8032-6966-8 .

^ "Forgiving the culprits: Japanese historical revisionism in a post-cold war context" Archived 5 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine published in the International Journal of Peace Studies ^ "Now Tojo is a Hero" The Daily Telegraph . Sydney, Australia. 12 May 1998.

LexisNexis Database . Retrieved 23 November 2011.

(subscription required) ^ " No government coercion in war's sex slavery : Abe ", Japan Times , 2 March 2007 ^ "Japan's Revisionist History" .

Los Angeles Times . 11 April 2005.

^ "Revenge of the Doves" .

Newsweek . 6 February 2006. Archived from the original on 6 February 2006.

^ "Japan's Atomic Bomb Victims Complain that Their Government Still Neglects Them & Refuses to Take Responsibility" . History News Network. 8 December 2005.

^ Sledge, Eugene (2002).

China Marine . University of Alabama Press. p. 160.

ISBN 978-0-8173-1161-2 .

^ Hill, Joshua; Koshiro, Yukiko (15 December 1997).

"Remembering the Atomic Bomb" .

Fresh Writing . Archived from the original on 5 February 2008.

^ Drago Hedl (10 November 2005).

"Croatia's Willingness To Tolerate Fascist Legacy Worries Many" .

BCR Issue 73 .

IWPR . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Sadkovich, James J. (13 October 2004).

"Father of His Country? Franjo Tudjman and the Creation of Contemporary Croatia" . Wilson Center.

^ a b Sindbaek, Tia (2012).

Usable History?: Representations of Yugoslavia's Difficult Past from 1945 to 2002 . ISD LLC. pp.

178– 179.

ISBN 978-8-77124-107-5 .

^ Milekic, Sven (31 January 2018).

"Croatia's Jasenovac Death Toll: A Political Numbers Game" .

Balkan Insight . BIRN.

^ "Croatia probes why Hitler image was on sugar packets" .

Reuters . 20 February 2007.

Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 October 2012 .

^ a b c Milekic, Sven (24 January 2017).

"Croatia Ex-President Shown Downplaying WWII Crimes" .

Balkan Insight . BIRN.

^ "Mesić na snimci iz devedesetih: 'Jasenovac nije bio logor smrti. Tko je stigao tamo, bio je spašen' " .

Novi list . 23 January 2017.

^ a b Vladisavljevic, Anja (7 January 2019).

"Book Event Questioning WWII Crimes Planned for Zagreb Church" .

Balkan Insight . BIRN.

^ "Simon Wiesenthal Centre urges Croatia to ban Jasenovac revisionist works" .

hr.n1info.com . N1 Zagreb. 9 January 2019. Archived from the original on 9 October 2020 . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

^ "Jewish rights group urges Croatia to ban pro-Nazi book" . Associated Press. 9 January 2019.

^ Milekic, Sven (21 April 2017).

"Dishonour for Zagreb Over 'Alternative Facts' About Holocaust" .

BalkanInsight . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

^ "Jakov Sedlar bi zbog filma 'Jasenovac – istina' mogao u zatvor" (in Croatian). Telegram. 18 April 2016.

^ a b Perica 2002 , p. 151.

^ Ramet, Sabrina (2007).

"The denial syndrome and its consequences: Serbian political culture since 2000" .

Communist and Post-Communist Studies .

40 : 41– 58.

doi : 10.1016/j.postcomstud.2006.12.004 . Retrieved 17 April 2020 .

^ Ridgeway, James; Udovickii, Jasminka (2000).

Burn This House: The Making and Unmaking of Yugoslavia . Duke University Press. p. 133.

^ Cohen 1996 , pp. 76–81.

^ Cohen 1996 , p. 113.

^ "Rehabilitacija Milana Nedića" . BBC Serbian. 7 July 2008 . Retrieved 28 January 2017 .

^ "How Serbia Changed its Mind about World War II History" .

Balkan Insight . 6 February 2020.

^ "Brief Record" . US Library of Congress . Retrieved 22 April 2009 .

^ a b Gordana Katana (a correspondent with Voice of America in Banja Luka).

Regional Report: Bosnian Serbs Play Down Srebrenica , website of the Institute for War & Peace Reporting. Retrieved 25 October 2009 ^ Judgement against Miroslav Deronjic ICTY ^ "Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Newsline, 02-09-03" . 3 September 2005 . Retrieved 3 July 2009 .

^ Daria Sito-Sucic (6 June 2017).

"Serb president bans teaching about Sarajevo siege, Srebrenica genocide" .

Reuters . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ Peled, Daniella (3 October 2019).

"Why Are Israel's Top Holocaust Scholars So Willing to Deny This Genocide?" .

Haaretz .

^ a b Ilyushin, p. 15 ^ Ilyushin, p. 16 ^ Portnov, Andrii (2013).

"Ukraińskie interpretacje rzezi wołyńskiej" .

Więź (in Polish).

LVI (652): 158– 166.

ISSN 0511-9405 .

^ "WW2 massacre of Poles by Ukrainians must be called genocide, says head of Polish church" . 7 July 2023.

^ a b Zurbuchen, Mary S. (July/August 2002). "History, Memory, and the '1965 Incident' in Indonesia".

Asian Survey Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 564–581.

^ a b Friend (2003), p. 115; Chris Hilton (writer and director) (2001).

Shadowplay .

Vagabond Films and Hilton Cordell Productions (Television documentary).

; Vickers (1995).

^ Schwarz (1994), p. 21; Cribb (1990), pp. 2–3; Indonesian academics fight burning of books on 1965 coup Archived 26 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine , The Sydney Morning Herald , 9 August 2007.

^ a b c Allard, Tom (12 June 2009).

"Indonesia unwilling to tackle legacy of massacres" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 27 April 2023 .

^ Teaching and Remembering Inside Indonesia History Textbooks Suharto Era Transitional Justice Archived 27 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . People.uncw.edu. Retrieved 25 December 2010.

^ Jacobson, Philip (22 October 2013).

"Book Review: Indonesia and the World Circa 1965" .

tempo.co . Retrieved 9 June 2014 .

^ Marchand, Laure; Perrier, Guillaume (2015).

Turkey and the Armenian Ghost: On the Trail of the Genocide .

McGill-Queen's Press . pp.

111– 112.

ISBN 9780773597204 .

The Iğdır genocide monument is the ultimate caricature of the Turkish government's policy of denying the 1915 genocide by rewriting history and transforming victims into guilty parties.

^ Sarah Rainsford Author's trial set to test Turkey BBC 14 December 2005.

^ a b Madeleine Brand speaks with Hugh Pope Charges Against Turkish Writer Pamuk Dropped NPR 25 January 2005.

^ "Turkey's new penal code touches raw nerves" EurActiv 2 June 2005, updated 14 November 2005.

^ Writer Hrant Dink acquitted; trials against other journalists continue IFEX 9 February 2006.

^ Sarah Rainsford Turkey bans 'genocide' conference BBC News 22 September 2005.

^ Benjamin Harvey Fight halts Turkish journalists' trial Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine in The Independent 8 February 2006.

^ Associated Press Case Against 4 Turkish Journalists Dropped in The Guardian 11 April 2006.

^ Griffiths, James.

"The 'forgotten' My Lai: South Korea's Vietnam War massacres" .

CNN . Retrieved 27 May 2018 .

^ "The Forgotten History of South Korean Massacres in Vietnam" .

thediplomat.com .

Archived from the original on 11 September 2020.

^ "South Korean defense minister denies Vietnam War massacres" .

AP News . 17 February 2023.

^ "Apocalypse Then" .

Newsweek . 9 April 2000.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018.

^ "It's Time for South Korea to Acknowledge Its Atrocities in Vietnam" .

Foreign Policy . 30 December 2022.

^ "South Korea appeals court ruling to compensate Vietnam war victim" .

Reuters . 9 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2023 .

^ Moinipour, Shabnam (2021).

"The Islamic Republic of Iran and children's right to education: acceptability and adaptability" .

Human Rights Education Review .

4 (2): 26– 48.

doi : 10.7577/hrer.3930 .

ISSN 2535-5406 .

S2CID 236595174 .

^ "Khamenei.ir" .

Twitter .

^ "In Iran new year's address, Khamenei questions Holocaust" .

al-monitor.com . Archived from the original on 24 March 2014 . Retrieved 23 March 2014 .

^ "What does Iran's Supreme Leader really think about the Holocaust?" .

News – Telegraph Blogs . Archived from the original on 2 October 2013.

^ "Newseum: The Commissar Vanishes" . Archived from the original on 11 June 2008 . Retrieved 19 July 2008 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (2019).

The Stalin School of Falsification . Pickle Partners Publishing. pp. vii–89.

ISBN 978-1-78912-348-7 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (2019).

The Stalin School of Falsification . Pickle Partners Publishing. pp. vii–89.

ISBN 978-1-78912-348-7 .

^ The Historian (journal) Encounters with Soviet Historians in The Historian (journal) November 1957. Vol 20. No 1. pp. 80–95 ^ John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr .

In Denial: Historians, Communism, and Espionage.

Encounter Books , 2003.

ISBN 1-893554-72-4 pp. 15–17 ^ John Keep.

Recent Writing on Stalin's Gulag: An Overview . 1997 ^ Rosefielde, Steven (2009).

Red Holocaust . Routledge. pp.

173– 213.

ISBN 978-0-415-77757-5 .

^ "Russia panel to 'protect history' " . BBC News. 19 May 2009 . Retrieved 24 May 2009 .

^ Osborn, Andrew (20 May 2009).

"Medvedev Creates History Commission" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 24 May 2009 .

^ a b Victor Schnirelmann : The Value of the Past: Myths, Identity and Politics in Transcaucasia. Senri Ethnological Studies. pp. 160, 196–97: "The republication of classical and medieval sources with omissions, with the replacement of the term "Armenian state" by "Albanian state" and with other distortions of the original manuscripts was another way to play down the Armenian role in early and medieval Transcaucasia. ... The Azeri scholars did all of this by order of the Soviet and Party authorities of Azerbaijan, rather than through free will." ^ Victor Schnirelmann : Why to attribute the dominant views in Azerbaijan to the "world science"?

// REGNUM, 12 February 2013 ( Translation ) ^ a b Willem M. Floor, Hasan Javadi. "Abbas-Kuli-aga Bakikhanov. The Heavenly Rose-Garden: A History of Shirvan & Daghestan". Mage Publishers, 2008. p. xvi: "This is in particular disturbing because he suppresses, for example, the mention of territory inhabited by Armenians, thus not only falsifying history, but also not respecting Bakikhanov's dictum that a historian should write without prejudice, whether religious, ethnic, political or otherwise" ^ a b Robert Hewsen.

Armenia: A Historical Atlas.

University of Chicago Press , 2001. p. 291: "Scholars should be on guard when using Soviet and post-Soviet Azeri editions of Azeri, Persian, and even Russian and Western European sources printed in Baku. These have been edited to remove references to Armenians and have been distributed in large numbers in recent years. When utilizing such sources, the researchers should seek out pre-Soviet editions wherever possible." ^ George Bournoutian . A brief history of the Aghuankʻ region. Mazda Publishers, 2009. pp. 8–14: "Therefore, in order to substantiate their political claims, Bunyatov and his fellow academics chose to set aside all scholarly integrity and print large numbers of re-edited versions of these not easily accessible primary sources on Karabagh, while deleting or altering references to the Armenians" ^ a b George Bournoutian . Rewriting History: Recent Azeri Alterations of Primary Sources Dealing with Karabakh // Research note from Volume 6 of the "Journal of the Society for Armenian Studies" (1992, 1993) ^ Philip L. Kohl, Clare P. Fawcett. Nationalism, politics, and the practice of archaeology. Cambridge University Press, 1995. p. 154: "Thus, minimally, two points must be made. Patently false cultural origin myths are not always harmless. The political context within which such myths are articulated is critical, and this context continually changes: given the events of the last nine years, assertion that today's Azerbaijan was the original homeland of Turkic-speaking peoples is charged with political significance" ^ Pickman, Sarah (30 June 2006).

"Tragedy on the Araxes" .

Archaeology .

Archaeological Institute of America .

^ "High-Resolution Satellite Imagery and the Destruction of Cultural Artifacts in Nakhchivan, Azerbaijan" .

American Association for the Advancement of Science . 8 December 2010.

^ Алиев В. "Кампанией вокруг хачкаров армяне хотят отвлечь внимание мира от агрессии Армении против Азербайджана"/В. Алиев // Наш век, 2006.-5-11 мая, N N18.-С.6 ^ Castle, Stephen (23 October 2011).

"Azerbaijan 'flattened' sacred Armenian site" .

The Independent .

^ Abbasov, Idrak; Rzayev, Shahin; Mamedov, Jasur; Muradian, Seda; Avetian, Narine; Ter-Sahakian, Karine (27 April 2006).

"Azerbaijan: Famous Medieval Cemetery Vanishes" .

Institute for War and Peace Reporting .

^ Maghakyan, Simon (November 2007).

"Sacred Stones Silenced in Azerbaijan" .

History Today .

57 (11): 4– 5.

^ Antonyan, Yulia; Siekierski, Konrad (2014). "A neopagan movement in Armenia: the children of Ara". In Aitamurto, Kaarina; Simpson, Scott (eds.).

Modern Pagan and Native Faith Movements in Central and Eastern Europe . Routledge. p.

280 .

By analogy, other tragic events or threatening processes are designated today by Armenians as "cultural genocide" (for example, the destruction by Azerbaijanis of the Armenian cemetery in Julfa)...

^ Ghazinyan, Aris (13 January 2006).

"Cultural War: Systematic destruction of Old Julfa khachkars raises international attention" .

ArmeniaNow . Archived from the original on 25 November 2015 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

...another "cultural genocide being perpetrated by Azerbaijan." ^ Uğur Ümit Üngör (2015). "Cultural genocide: Destruction of material and non-material human culture". In Carmichael, Cathie; Maguire, Richard C. (eds.).

The Routledge History of Genocide . Routledge. p.

250 .

ISBN 9781317514848 .

^ Махмудов Я.М. Самый опасный вымысел в истории: (Ложь о "Великой Армении" – "идеология" террора, геноцида и захвата чужих земель) // Бакинский рабочий. – 2009:27 января. – N 16. – С. 2–3. ( copy ) ^ Day.Az. 02 Мая 2007 [18:13].

Как реагировать на затягивание Россией ответов на ноты протеста?

( copy ) ^ Керимов Р. Молчание Кремля: РФ рассматривает ноту протеста Азербайджана, в МИД АР ждут извинений и исправлений ошибок, а НАНА готова помочь соседу документами/Р. Керимов // Эхо, 2007.-3 мая, N N 77.-С.1.3 ^ "Посол России был вызван в МИД Азербайджана" . 24 April 2007.

^ a b c d "Studies prove that before 1918, there was no Armenian state in S.Caucasus" . Azernews. 13 February 2018 . Retrieved 27 August 2019 .

^ Lornejad, Siavash; Doostzadeh, Ali (2012). Arakelova, Victoria; Asatrian, Garnik (eds.).

On the modern politicization of the Persian poet Nezami Ganjavi (PDF) . Caucasian Centre for Iranian Studies. p. 85 (note 277). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 September 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2020 .

^ a b c d e Croissant, Michael P. (1998).

The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: Causes and Implications . Praeger Publishers. p. 61.

^ Lornejad, Siavash; Doostzadeh, Ali (2012). Arakelova, Victoria; Asatrian, Garnik (eds.).

On the modern politicization of the Persian poet Nezami Ganjavi (PDF) . Caucasian Centre for Iranian Studies. pp. 9–10 (note 26). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 September 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2020 .

^ Ahmadi, Hamid (2017). "The Clash of Nationalisms: Iranian response to Baku's irredentism". In Kamrava, Mehran (ed.).

The Great Game in West Asia: Iran, Turkey and the South Caucasus . Oxford University Press. pp.

109– 110.

ISBN 978-0190869663 .

^ Lornejad, Siavash; Doostzadeh, Ali (2012). Arakelova, Victoria; Asatrian, Garnik (eds.).

On the modern politicization of the Persian poet Nezami Ganjavi . Caucasian Centre for Iranian Studies. p. 17.

^ Lornejad, Siavash; Doostzadeh, Ali (2012). Arakelova, Victoria; Asatrian, Garnik (eds.).

On the modern politicization of the Persian poet Nezami Ganjavi (PDF) . Caucasian Centre for Iranian Studies. p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 September 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2020 .

^ a b Lornejad, Siavash; Doostzadeh, Ali (2012). Arakelova, Victoria; Asatrian, Garnik (eds.).

On the modern politicization of the Persian poet Nezami Ganjavi . Caucasian Centre for Iranian Studies. pp. i, 91– 92.

^ a b Talattof, Kamran (2012). "Reviewed Work: Ali Doostzadeh, On the Modern Politicization of the Persian Poet Nezami Ganjavi (Yerevan Series for Oriental Studies – 1) by Siavash Lornejad".

Iran & the Caucasus .

16 (3): 380– 383.

doi : 10.1163/1573384X-20120025 .

^ Lornejad, Siavash; Doostzadeh, Ali (2012). Arakelova, Victoria; Asatrian, Garnik (eds.).

On the modern politicization of the Persian poet Nezami Ganjavi . Caucasian Centre for Iranian Studies. pp. 18, 85 (note 277).

^ Bournoutian, George (2016).

The 1820 Russian Survey of the Khanate of Shirvan: A Primary Source on the Demography and Economy of an Iranian Province prior to its Annexation by Russia . Gibb Memorial Trust. p. xvi.

^ Bournoutian, George (2016).

The 1820 Russian Survey of the Khanate of Shirvan: A Primary Source on the Demography and Economy of an Iranian Province prior to its Annexation by Russia . Gibb Memorial Trust. pp. xvii, xv, xviii.

^ "U.S. Order to Start Korean War", Korean Central News Agency, 12 June 2000.

^ Ho Jong Ho, Kang Sok Hui, and Pak Thae Ho, US Imperialists Started the Korean War (Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1993), p. 11.

^ Balázs Szalontai. "Captives of the Past: The Questions of Responsibility and Reconciliation in North Korea's Narratives of the Korean War", Inherited Responsibility and Historical Reconciliation in East Asian Context , Jun-Hyeok Kwak and Melissa Nobles, eds., London: Routledge, 2013, pp. 165–82.

^ Korean Central News Agency, 19 January 1998.

^ "Holocaust deniers often refer to themselves as 'revisionists', in an attempt to claim legitimacy for their activities". ( The nature of Holocaust denial: What is Holocaust denial?

Archived 12 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , JPR report No. 3, 2000. Retrieved 16 May 2007) ^ Alan L. Berger, "Holocaust Denial: Tempest in a Teapot, or Storm on the Horizon?", In Peace, in Deed: Essays in Honor of Harry James Cargas , Eds. Zev Garber and Richard Libowitz: Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1998, p. 154.

^ "Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory" by Deborah E. Lipstadt .

ISBN 0-452-27274-2 ^ David Pallister Author fights Holocaust denier judgment in The Guardian 21 June 2001 ^ Oliver Duff David Irving: An anti-Semitic racist who has suffered financial ruin Archived 22 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine 21 February 2006 ^ Holocaust denier Irving to appeal BBC 21 February 2006. "Austria is one of 11 countries with laws against denying the Holocaust." ^ Eugene N. Borza, Macedonia Redux in The Eye Expanded: Life and the Arts in Greco-Roman Antiquity with Frances B. Titchener, and Richard F. Moorton as ed. University of California Press, 1999, ISBN 0520210298 , p. 259.

^ Dichev, Ivaylo, Eros Identiteta, In: Dušan Bjelić, Obrad Savić (eds.), Balkan kao metafora: između globalizacije i fragmentacije. Beograd: Beogradski krug, 2003, pp. 269–284.

^ Ulf Brunnbauer, "Serving the Nation: Historiography in the Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) after Socialism", Historien, Vol. 4 (2003–04), pp. 174-175.

^ Klaus Roth, Asker Kartarı as authors and ed., Cultures of Crisis in Southeast Europe, Volume 2, LIT Verlag Münster, 2017, ISBN 3643907915 , p. 169.

^ Sinisa Jakov Marusic, New Statue Awakens Past Quarrels in Macedonia. BalkanInsight, 13 July 2012, cited in War in the Balkans: Conflict and Diplomacy before World War I by James Pettifer, I.B. Tauris, 2015, ISBN 0857739689 .

^ Kyril Drezov, Macedonian identity: an overview of the major claims in The New Macedonian Question with J. Pettifer as ed., Springer, 1999, ISBN 0230535798 , p. 55.

^ The past was systematically falsified to conceal the fact that many prominent 'Macedonians' had supposed themselves to be Bulgarian, and generations of students were taught the "pseudo-history" of the 'Macedonian nation." For more see: Michael L. Benson, Yugoslavia: A Concise History , 2nd ed., Springer, 2003, ISBN 1403997209 , p. 89.

^ a b Evans, Brad (4 May 2020).

"Histories of Violence: The Violence of Denial — Rwanda and the Lived Memory of Genocide" .

Los Angeles Review of Books . Retrieved 25 June 2023 .

^ Ismail, Omer ; Prendergast, John (1 March 2010).

"Genocide in Darfur: How Sudan covers it up" .

Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 26 June 2023 .

^ Shinta, Ichiro (2001).

"「つくる会」の歴史教科書を読む (Reading Thukuru-kai's History Textbook)" .

Zenchokyo Osaka (National Association for Education and Research of Korean Residents in Japan, Osaka) .

^ Okinawa slams history text rewrite , The Japan Times , 23 June 2007.

^ Gheddo, Piero.

"Okinawa against Tokyo's attempts to rewrite history" . Asianews.it . Retrieved 4 December 2013 .

^ Curriculum of hatred , Dawn , 20 May 2009 ^ Jamil, Baela Raza.

"Curriculum Reforms in Pakistan – A Glass Half Full or Half Empty?" (PDF) . Idara-e-Taleem-o-Aagahi . Retrieved 10 April 2011 .

^ Jalal, Ayesha.

"Conjuring Pakistan: History as Official Imagining" (PDF) .

International Journal of Middle East Studies, 27, (1995), 73–89 . Retrieved 10 April 2011 .

^ The threat of Pakistan's revisionist texts , The Guardian , 18 May 2009 ^ Herald, The Korea (12 October 2015).

"Ministry unveils plan for history textbook publication system" . Retrieved 17 October 2016 .

^ a b c d Akcam: Textbooks and the Armenian Genocide in Turkey: Heading Towards 2015 , Armenian Weekly ^ Arango, Tim (16 April 2015).

"A Century After Armenian Genocide, Turkey's Denial Only Deepens" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

^ Kafanov, Lucy (24 April 2015).

"Turkey, Armenians battle over genocide 100 years later" .

USA Today . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

^ Kolander, Patricia (1999).

" "Malevolent Partnership of Blatant Opportunism?" Croat-German Relations, 1919–1941" . In Bullivant, Keith; Giles, Geoffrey J.; Pape, Walter (eds.).

Germany and Eastern Europe: Cultural identities and cultural differences . Rodopi. p. 267.

ISBN 9789042006782 .

^ Brunnbauer, Ulf (2011).

"Historical Writing in the Balkans" . In Woolf, Daniel; Schneider, Axel (eds.).

The Oxford History of Historical Writing: Volume 5: Historical Writing Since 1945 . Oxford University Press. p. 364.

ISBN 9780199225996 .

^ a b Perica 2002 , p. 147.

^ Bieber, Florian; Galijaš, Armina (2016).

Debating the End of Yugoslavia . Routledge. p. 117.

ISBN 9781317154242 .

^ Ramet, Sabrina Petra (2002).

Balkan Babel: The Disintegration of Yugoslavia From The Death of Tito to the Fall of Milošević . Westview Press. p.

19 .

ISBN 9780813339054 .

Serbian historians debates.

^ Ramet, Sabrina P. (2006).

The three Yugoslavias: State-building and legitimation, 1918–2005 . Indiana University Press. p. 322.

ISBN 9780253346568 .

^ Perica 2002 , p. 150.

^ a b Ramet, Sabrina P. (2005).

Serbia since 1989: Politics and Society under Milopevic and After . University of Washington Press. p. 129.

ISBN 9780295802077 .

^ Emmert, Thomas; Ingrao, Charles (2013).

Conflict in Southeastern Europe at the End of the Twentieth Century: A" Scholars' Initiative" Assesses Some of the Controversies . Routledge. p. 42.

ISBN 9781317970163 .

^ Drapac, Vesna (2014).

"Catholic resistance and collaboration in the Second World War: From Master Narrative to Practical Application" . In Rutar, Sabine (ed.).

Beyond the Balkans: Towards an Inclusive History of Southeastern Europe . LIT Verlag. p. 282.

ISBN 9783643106582 .

^ Stojanović, Dubravka (2011). Ramet, Sabrina; Listhaug, Ole (eds.).

Serbia and the Serbs in World War Two . Springer. p. 249.

ISBN 9780230347816 .

^ MacDonald, David Bruce (2003).

Balkan Holocausts?: Serbian and Croatian victim centred propaganda and the war in Yugoslavia . Manchester University Press. p. 138.

ISBN 9780719064678 .

^ Subotic, Jelena (2015).

"The Mythologizing of Communist Violence" . In Stan, Lavinia; Nedelsky, Nadya (eds.).

Post-communist Transitional Justice: Lessons from Twenty-five Years of Experience . Cambridge University Press. p. 201.

ISBN 9781107065567 .

^ Finney, Patrick (2010).

"Land of Ghosts: Memories of War in the Balkans" . In Buckley, John; Kassimeris, George (eds.).

The Ashgate research companion to modern warfare . Routledge. p. 353.

ISBN 9781409499534 .

^ Bećirević 2014 , p. 46 ^ Djilas 1998 .

^ Emmert 1999 .

^ a b Anscombe 2006 , p. 770. "Noel Malcolm, who offers a detailed critique of the competing versions of Kosovo's history... Here is a remarkable reversal, as Malcolm, like other Western historians, had previously accepted the Serbian account." ^ a b Anscombe 2006 , pp. 770–71. "Malcolm is criticized for being anti-Serbian, and for using his sources as selectively as the Serbs, though the more restrained of his critics only suggest that his arguments are unconvincing. Most of the documents he relies on were written by enemies of the Ottoman Empire, or by officials with limited experience of the Ottoman Balkans... Malcolm, like the historians of Serbia and Yugoslavia who ignore his findings, overlooks the most valuable indigenous evidence. Unwillingness to consider Ottoman evidence when constructing national history is exemplified by the Serbian historians..." ^ "Loi n° 2005-158 du 23 février 2005 portant reconnaissance de la Nation et contribution nationale en faveur des Français rapatriés (1). - Légifrance" .

^ "Les principales prises de position" .

L'Obs (in French). 26 January 2006 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 .

^ * "French Revisionism: Case of Positive Role of French Colonisation" .

The Cameroun Post . 18 December 2005.

"France under pressure to defend its colonial past" . Agence France-Presse. 8 December 2005. Archived from the original on 22 June 2006 . Retrieved 13 February 2006 .

^ "EDSA People Power: Inadequate Challenge to Marcos Revisionism | CMFR" . 10 March 2016.

^ "UP faculty vows to fight historical revisionism" . Archived from the original on 24 September 2018 . Retrieved 16 November 2018 .

^ "Why has Marcos' propaganda lived on?" .

^ Report of an Amnesty International Mission to The Republic of the Philippines: 22 November ~ 5 December 1975 Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine amnesty.org ^ Ayee Macaraig (26 August 2015).

"Marcos on dad's regime: What am I to apologize for?" .

Rappler .

^ "PCGG welcomes Singapore court decision on Marcos' Swiss funds" . 4 January 2014.

^ a b c García Sanjuán, Alejandro (2018).

"La creciente difusión de un fraude historiográfico: la negación de la conquista musulmana de la península ibérica" (PDF) .

Vínculos de Historia (7). Huelva: Universidad de Huelva : 173– 193.

doi : 10.18239/vdh_2018.07.10 (inactive 1 July 2025).

hdl : 10272/16207 .

ISSN 2254-6901 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Blanco, Patricia R. (9 April 2018).

"El "fraude" que intenta tergiversar la historia de Al Andalus" .

El País .

^ "Terra nullius" .

Australian Museum . 15 February 2024.

^ "Mapping the massacres of Australia's colonial frontier" .

www.newcastle.edu.au . University of Newcastle. 5 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 .

^ Marten, J.A. (2002) Children and War , NYU Press, New York, p. 229 ISBN 0-8147-5667-0 ^ "Indigenous Australia: Family Life" . Australian Museum. 2004. Archived from the original on 5 February 2008 . Retrieved 28 March 2008 .

^ Whitewash : on Keith Windschuttle's Fabrication of Aboriginal history . Internet Archive. Melbourne, Vic. : Black Inc. Agenda. 2003.

ISBN 978-0-9750769-0-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Attwood, Bain (2001).

"The Stolen Generations and genocide: Robert Manne's" .

Aboriginal History .

25 .

ANU Press : 163– 172.

ISSN 0314-8769 .

JSTOR 45135477 . Retrieved 10 November 2024 .

^ Manne, Robert (9 September 2006).

"The cruelty of denial" .

The Age . Retrieved 20 May 2025 .

^ Ben Salem, Lobna (2021).

"Humanizing the Enemy: Transcending Victimhood Narratives in Mahmoud Darwish'S and Yehuda Amichai'S Poetry" .

Postcolonial Text .

16 (1): 1– 18 . Retrieved 31 January 2024 – via Docslib.org.

^ "Abbas signs decree criminalizing 'Nakba' denial" .

The Times of Israel . 30 May 2023.

^ Fischbach, Michael R. (2021). "Nakba Denial: Israeli Resistance to Palestinian Refugee Reparations". In Bhabha, Jacqueline ; Matache, Margareta ; Elkins, Caroline (eds.).

Time for Reparations: A Global Perspective . Pennsylvania Studies in Human Rights.

University of Pennsylvania Press . pp.

183– 200.

doi : 10.9783/9780812299915-014 .

ISBN 978-0-8122-9991-5 .

^ Nassar, Maha (2023). "Exodus, Nakba Denialism, and the Mobilization of Anti-Arab Racism".

Critical Sociology .

49 (6): 1037– 1051.

doi : 10.1177/08969205221132878 .

S2CID 253134415 .

^ Mori, Mariko (July 2009).

"Zionism and the Nakba: The Mainstream Narrative, the Oppressed Narratives, and the Israeli Collective Memory" (PDF) .

Kyoto Bulletin of Islamic Area Studies .

3 (1): 89–107 [95–97].

ISSN 1881-8323 .

^ a b c Frequently asked questions and answers Council of Europe Convention on cyber-crime Archived 9 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine by the United States Department of Justice ^ Protocol to the Convention on cybercrime, concerning the criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems on the Council of Europe web site ^ a b "Additional Protocol to the Convention on cybercrime, concerning the criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (Chart of signatures and ratifications) Status as of: 30/11/2011" . Council of Europe website . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ a b "Liste complète" . Retrieved 17 October 2016 .

^ APCoc Treaty open for signature by the States which have signed the Treaty ETS 185.

on the Council of Europe web site ^ 148. Bundesverfassungsgesetz: Verbotsgesetz-Novelle 1992 , Austrian federal law gazette, 19 March 1992, (in German) ^ "2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Belgium" .

U. S. Department of State . 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Czech Republic" .

U. S. Department of State . 20 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ Text of §130(3) of the German penal code (in German).

^ "2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Hungary" .

U. S. Department of State . 20 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "Denial of Holocaust -Prohibition- Law- 5746-1986-" .

Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs . 8 July 1986 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Lithuania" .

U. S. Department of State . 20 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Luxembourg" .

U. S. Department of State . 20 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "The Act on the Institute of National Remembrance" .

Institute of National Remembrance . 16 June 2016. Archived from the original on 30 August 2019 . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ "Comparative study on legislation sanctioning hate speech and discrimination in the member states of the European Union" (PDF) .

Comparative Study on Legislation Sanctioning Hate Speech and Discrimination in the Member States of the European Union : 46, 47, 48. October 2014.

^ "Comparative study on legislation sanctioning hate speech and discrimination in the member states of the European Union" (PDF) .

Comparative Study on Legislation Sanctioning Hate Speech and Discrimination in the Member States of the European Union : 57, 58, 59, 60. October 2014.

^ "Comparative study on legislation sanctioning hate speech and discrimination in the member states of the European Union" (PDF) .

Comparative Study on Legislation Sanctioning Hate Speech and Discrimination in the Member States of the European Union : 48, 49, 50, 51. October 2014.

^ Gorton, Sean (2015). "THE UNCERTAIN FUTURE OF GENOCIDE DENIAL LAWS IN THE EUROPEAN UNION".

George Washington International Law Review .

47 (2): 421– 445.

^ a b The Laws Banning Holocaust Denial Archived 27 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine Genocide Prevention Now. Retrieved 28 November 2011. pp. 1–9 ^ "2007 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Czech Republic" . 11 March 2008 . Retrieved 17 October 2016 .

^ Holodomor and Holocaust denial to be a criminal offense , The Day ^ "SparkNotes: 1984: Themes, Motifs & Symbols" . Retrieved 17 October 2016 .

^ Orwell, George Nineteen Eighty-four New American Library 1961 ISBN 978-0-451-52493-5 ^ Orwell, George.

1984 , New American Library , 1961 ISBN 978-0-451-52493-5 , p. 37.

^ * Literature by and about Franz Kurowski in the German National Library catalogue Sources [ edit ] Anscombe, Frederick (2006).

"The Ottoman Empire in Recent International Politics – II: The Case of Kosovo" (PDF) .

The International History Review .

28 (4): 758– 793.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.2006.9641103 .

JSTOR 40109813 .

S2CID 154724667 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2019 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

Bećirević, Edina (2014).

Genocide on the Drina River .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 9780300192582 – via Google Books .

Cohen, Philip J. (1996).

Serbia's Secret War: Propaganda and the Deceit of History .

College Station, Texas : Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 0-89096-760-1 .

Djilas, Aleksa (September–October 1998). "Imagining Kosovo: A Biased New Account Fans Western Confusion".

Foreign Affairs .

77 (5): 124– 131.

doi : 10.2307/20049055 .

JSTOR 20049055 .

Emmert, Thomas (1999). "Challenging myth in a short history of Kosovo".

Journal of Southern Europe and the Balkans Online .

1 (2): 217– 221.

doi : 10.1080/14613199908414002 .

Howe, K (6 October 2003).

The Quest for Origins - Who First Discovered and Settled New Zealand and the Pacific Islands?

. Penguin Books Press.

ISBN 9780143008453 .

Perica, Vjekoslav (2002).

Balkan idols: Religion and nationalism in Yugoslav states . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195174298 .

Further reading [ edit ] Elst, Koenraad (1992).

Negationism in India: Concealing the Record of Islam . Voice of India.

Shourie, Arun . 2014. Eminent historians: their technology, their line, their fraud. HarperCollins.

ISBN 9789351365921 .

Arun Shourie , Sita Ram Goel, Harsh Narain, J. Dubashi & Ram Swarup. Hindu Temples – What Happened to Them Vol. I, (A Preliminary Survey) (1990) ISBN 81-85990-49-2 .

Sisson, Jonathan (2010) “A Conceptual Framework for Dealing with the Past.” Politorbis Nr. 50 - 3 / 2010.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Historical negationism .

Untruth in the Classroom, 1994 Why "revisionism" isn't Mad Revisionist: A parody site on historical revisionism Expert Witness Report by Richard J. Evans FBA Archived 20 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine presented at the trial "Irving vs. (1) Lipstadt and (2) Penguin Books" Revisionist History – a satirical look at historical revisionism 43-page long academic paper about revisionism concerning the Amerindians by The Arizona Journal of International and Comparative Law Vol. 18, No. 3 Nizkor Project Web site answering Holocaust deniers v t e Historical negationism Denialism Disinformation Knowledge falsification Pseudohistory school textbook controversies Rationalization Victim blaming Genocide denial / denial of mass killings and atrocities Armenian genocide Atrocities against Indigenous peoples Bosnian genocide Cambodian genocide Genocide of Serbs during WWII Croatian Wikipedia Holodomor Katyn massacre Khojaly massacre Nanjing Massacre U.S. cover-up of Japanese war crimes Rohingya genocide Rwandan genocide Denial of the 7 October attacks Holocaust Austria victim theory Clean Wehrmacht Rommel / Speer myth Italians, the good people Trivialization Double genocide theory Vichy syndrome Sonderaktion 1005 Other whitewashing of governments or time periods Cuba de ayer Czechoslovak myth Denial of state terrorism in Argentina Driftwood theory Ferdinand Marcos apologism Lost Cause of the Confederacy Dunning School Negationism of the military dictatorship of Brazil [ pt ] / Chile Merry England Neo-Stalinism Operation Legacy (UK) Other manifestations Allah as a lunar deity Ancient astronauts Ancient Egyptian race controversy Antiquization Book burnings list Censorship of Great Zimbabwe Christ myth theory Dacianism Damnatio memoriae Destruction of cultural heritage Islamic State Saudi Arabia Gaza Strip Lebanon Sudan Myth of English aid [ es ] Izbrisani Khazar hypothesis LGBT erasure Like sheep to the slaughter Myth of the golden exile Phantom time hypothesis / New chronology Western Pseudohistory Theory Shakespeare authorship question Territorial losses of Thailand Azerbaijan Destruction of Armenian heritage Cemetery in Julfa Nakhchivan [ ru ] Nizami Ganjavi Western Azerbaijan Germany Borussian myth Myth of Langemarck [ de ] Stab-in-the-back myth Israel / Palestine Denial of the 7 October attacks Nakba denial Temple denial There was no such thing as Palestinians Russia Allegations of genocide in Donbas All-Russian nation On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians Soviet Union Censorship of images Denial of Crimean Tatars Turkey Denial of Kurds History Thesis Sun Language Theory United States 1776 Commission Irish slaves myth Vietnam stab-in-the-back myth Organizations Adelaide Institute ASİMKK Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War CODOH Dalit Voice FactCheckArmenia.com Gesellschaft zur Rechtlichen und Humanitären Unterstützung HIAG Iğdır Genocide Memorial and Museum Institute for Armenian Research Institute for Historical Review Nippon Kaigi Turkish Historical Society United Daughters of the Confederacy Zeitgeschichtliche Forschungsstelle Ingolstadt Publications A Town Betrayed A Verdade Sufocada The Birth of a Nation Coverage of the Hillsborough disaster by The Sun Did Six Million Really Die?

Falsifiers of History Flatline Folk og Land A History of the Palestinian People (2017) Hitler Diaries The Hoax of the Twentieth Century I Am More Than a Wolf Whistle Jasenovac – istina Journal of Historical Review Leuchter report The Other Side: The Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism The Ottoman Lieutenant Report about Case Srebrenica Conferences International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust Publishing houses Arndt Verlag J.J. Fedorowicz Publishing Munin Verlag Nation Europa Verlag Legal status Statute law Austria Belgium France Germany Case law R v Zundel (1992) Lehideux and Isorni v France (1998) Irving v Penguin Books Ltd (2000) Perinçek v. Switzerland (2013) International law Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime Right to truth Related Historical fiction Historical revisionism Historical misconceptions Accusation in a mirror Ash heap of history Censorship Cherry picking Conspiracy theories False attribution Furtive fallacy Genocide justification Propaganda Category Links to related articles v t e Antisemitism See also: Massacres or pogroms against Jews Core topics Canards Economics Eliminationist antisemitism Geography History Religious antisemitism Persecution of Jews Antisemitism studies Nazism Adolf Hitler Americas Propaganda New antisemitism Three Ds Working definition Racial antisemitism Rootless cosmopolitan Secondary antisemitism Stereotypes of Jews Timeline 19th C.

20th 21st Antisemitism and Christianity New Testament Healthcare Islam Middle Ages Nation of Islam Olympic Games Soviet mathematics Social media Reddit Universities Columbia Related topics Anti-Indigenous sentiment Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-Polish sentiment Anti-Romani sentiment Anti-Zionism Christian Identity Cultural Marxism Double genocide theory International Jewish conspiracy The International Jew Jewish Bolshevism Żydokomuna Khazar theory Ku Klux Klan Mein Kampf in Arabic in English Normalization of antisemitism Persecution of Jews during the Black Death On the Jews and Their Lies Philosemitism The Protocols of the Elders of Zion Contemporary imprints Racism Rothschild conspiracy theories The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews Self-hating Jew George Soros conspiracy theories Xenophobia Weaponization White genocide conspiracy theory Zhyd Zionist antisemitism Religious antisemitism Anti-Judaism Jewish deicide Catholic Inquisition Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Rhineland massacres Martin Luther Blood curse Blood libel Host desecration Judensau Pogrom Antisemitic laws, policies and government actions Ghetto benches Hep-Hep riots Pogroms in the Russian Empire May Laws 1968 Polish political crisis Jewish Anti-Zionist League Leo Frank trial (US) Expulsions of Poles and Jews by Germany (DE/PL) Prussian deportations Act of 5th November Generalplan Ost Dreyfus affair (FR) Beilis trial (Russian Empire) Farhud (Iraq) Anti-Zionist League (IQ) General Order No. 11 (US, 1862) Racial policy of Nazi Germany Madagascar Plan Final Solution The Holocaust Anti-cosmopolitan campaign Night of the Murdered Poets Slánský trial Doctors' plot Holocaust denial Yellow badge ZOG conspiracy Antisemitism on the internet Bible Believers The Daily Stormer Institute for Historical Review Jew Watch Metapedia Podblanc QAnon Radio Islam Redwatch The Right Stuff (blog) Stormfront Terrorgram Wikipedia and antisemitism Persecution Rhineland massacres Black Death persecutions Boycotts Expulsions Jewish quarter Ghettos in Europe Mellah The Holocaust Jewish hat Jewish quota Judensau Martyrdom in Judaism Nuremberg Laws Pale of Settlement Pogroms Refuseniks Segregation Spanish Inquisition Expulsion Yellow badge Organizations working against antisemitism Anti-Defamation League (ADL) Bay Area Holocaust Oral History Project (BAHOHP) Community Security Trust Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Stephen Roth Institute Yad Vashem By region Arab world Saudi Arabia Argentina Australia Canada China Chile Costa Rica Europe Austria Belgium France 21st century Germany Greece Hungary Italy Norway Romania Russia Imperial Soviet Spain Sweden Ukraine United Kingdom Conservative Party Labour Party Japan Mexico New Zealand Palestinian Territories Pakistan South Africa Turkey United States History 21st century Venezuela v t e Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By location Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Media manipulation Context Bias Crowd psychology Deception Dumbing down False balance Half-truths Media Obfuscation Persuasion Manipulation (psychology) Activism Advocacy group Alternative media Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstrations Deplatforming Grassroots Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Internet Media Occupations Petitions Protests Youth Advertising Advertorial / Native advertising Billboards False Infomercials Mobiles Modeling Radio Sex Slogans Testimonials TV Criticism of advertising Annoyance factor Censorship and mass media regulation Books Broadcast law Burying of scholars Catch and kill Corporate Cover-ups Euphemism Films Historical negationism Internet Political Religious Self Hoaxing Alternative facts April Fools' Deepfake audio Fake news websites Fakelore Fictitious entries Firehose of falsehood Forgery Gaslighting List Literary Lying press Photograph manipulation Racial Urban legend Virus Video manipulation Marketing Branding Loyalty Product Product placement Publicity Research Word of mouth News media Agenda-setting Broadcasting Circus Cycle Emotive conjugation False balance Infotainment Managing Narcotizing dysfunction Newspeak Pseudo-event Scrum Sensationalism Tabloid journalism Political campaigning Advertising Astroturfing Attack ad Canvassing Character assassination Dog whistle Election promises Lawn signs Party platforms (or manifestos) Name recognition Negative Push polling Smear campaign Wedge issue Propaganda Bandwagon Big lie Crowd manipulation Disinformation Fearmongering Framing Indoctrination Loaded language National mythology Rally 'round the flag effect Techniques Psychological warfare Airborne leaflets False flag Fifth column Information (IT) Lawfare Political Public diplomacy Sedition Subversion Public relations Cult of personality Doublespeak Non-apology apology Reputation management Slogans Sound bites Spin Transfer Understatement Weasel words Corporate propaganda Sales Cold calling Door-to-door Pricing Product demonstrations Promotion Spaving Promotional merchandise Telemarketing Related Influence-for-hire Media bias United States Media concentration Media democracy Media ecology Media ethics Media franchise Media influence Media proprietor v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation v t e Pseudoscience List of topics characterized as pseudoscience Terminology Cargo cult science Charlatan Crank Fringe theory Fringe science Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Pseudomathematics Junk science Paranormal Pathological science Quackery Snake oil Superseded scientific theory True-believer syndrome Voodoo Science Topics characterized as pseudoscience Medicine Acupuncture Aromatherapy Adrenal fatigue Alternative medicine Anthroposophic medicine Applied kinesiology Ayurveda Bates method Biorhythms Bloodletting Body memory Chiropractic Chromotherapy Correactology Cryonics Crystal healing Cupping Detoxification Colon cleansing Doctrine of signatures Doktor Koster's Antigaspills Ear candling Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Energy medicine Fad diet FasciaBlaster Germ theory denialism HIV/AIDS denialism Homeopathy Humorism Iridology Leaky gut syndrome LGBTQ chemicals conspiracy theory Lunar effect Macrobiotic diet Magnet therapy Miracle Mineral Supplement Naturopathy Palmistry Panchagavya Patent medicine Phrenology Primal therapy Radionics Reiki Traditional medicine Traditional Chinese medicine Trepanning Vertebral subluxation Wind turbine syndrome Young blood transfusion Social science 2012 phenomenon Ancient astronauts Arabian Judah theory Catastrophism Conspiracy theory 5G conspiracy 9/11 conspiracy theories Chemtrail conspiracy theory Climate change denial COVID-19 misinformation Moon landing conspiracy theories Opposition to water fluoridation Conversion therapy Expanding Earth Theory Generational theory Generationism Strauss–Howe generational theory Hollow Earth theory Indigo children Japhetic theory Mediumship Nazi archaeology Nibiru cataclysm Parapsychology Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Genocide denial Historical negationism Holocaust denial Tartarian Empire Pseudolaw Recovered-memory therapy Past life regression Scientific racism Aryan race Melanin theory Myers–Briggs Type Indicator Enneagram of Personality Physics Anti-gravity Cold fusion Faster-than-light travel Perpetual motion Quantum mysticism Reactionless drive Dean drive EMDrive Teleportation Tractor beam Water-fueled car Other Alchemy Aquatic ape hypothesis Astrology Biodynamic agriculture Biological transmutation Creation science Cryptozoology Dianetics Auditing Dowsing Electronic voice phenomenon Eugenics Facilitated communication Feng shui Flat Earth theory Modern flat Earth beliefs Graphology Intelligent design Laundry ball Law of attraction Levitation Lysenkoism Numerology Orgone Polygraph Pseudoscientific metrology Rapid prompting method Statement analysis Ufology Voice stress analysis Water memory Promoters of pseudoscience Sucharit Bhakdi Del Bigtree Igor and Grichka Bogdanoff Brigitte Boisselier Rhonda Byrne Robert Charroux Deepak Chopra Clonaid Vernon Coleman Michael Crichton Ignatius L. Donnelly Gaia, Inc.

Max Gerson Nicholas Gonzalez Goop (company) Graham Hancock David Icke William Donald Kelley Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

Corentin Louis Kervran The Light (newspaper) Mike Lindell Jenny McCarthy Joseph Mercola Judy Mikovits Ministry of Ayush Theodor Morell Hans Alfred Nieper Mehmet Oz Raël ( Claude Vorilhon ) Robby Starbuck Randolph Stone Paul Joseph Watson Andrew Wakefield Related topics Bogdanov affair Bourgeois pseudoscience Demarcation problem Scientific method Suppressed research in the Soviet Union Resources Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Cults of Unreason An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science Fortean Times James Randi Educational Foundation Quackwatch Skeptical Inquirer The Demon-Haunted World The Natural History of Quackery The Psychology of the Occult The Ragged Edge of Science The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience The Skeptic's Dictionary v t e Propaganda techniques Accusation in a mirror Ad hominem Appeal to fear Appeal to emotion Atrocity propaganda Bandwagon effect Big lie Black propaganda Blood libel Buzzword Cartographic propaganda Computational propaganda Censorship Cherry picking Cult of personality Demonizing the enemy Disinformation Dog whistle Doublespeak Emotive conjugation Exaggeration False accusation False balance False dilemma Fake news Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Flag-waving Framing Gish gallop Glittering generality Half-truth Historical negationism Ideograph Indoctrination Lawfare Loaded language Newspeak Managing the news Minimisation Monumental propaganda Moralistic fallacy New generation warfare Obscurantism Overcomplication Oversimplification Plain folks Psychological warfare Propaganda of the deed Public relations Rally 'round the flag effect Scapegoating Senbu Shooting and crying Slogan Spin Weasel word Whataboutism White propaganda NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐ss8lk
Cached time: 20250814215718
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.686 seconds
Real time usage: 3.027 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19384/1000000
Revision size: 185698/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1024318/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 199923/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 106/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 823023/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.523/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18742377/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2371.489      1 -total
 48.82% 1157.738      2 Template:Reflist
 12.78%  303.137     45 Template:Cite_book
 12.57%  297.986     27 Template:Navbox
 11.33%  268.598     58 Template:Cite_web
  9.53%  225.918      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.30%  196.842     32 Template:Cite_news
  7.29%  172.827      1 Template:Historiography
  7.19%  170.512     27 Template:Cite_journal
  7.16%  169.776      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26092:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215718 and revision id 1305719220. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historical_negationism&oldid=1305719220 " Categories : Historical negationism Pseudohistory Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: url-status Pages with missing ISBNs Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 maint: others Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from September 2024 Use dmy dates from September 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 18:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historical negationism 27 languages Add topic

