Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early history (to 15th century) 1.1.1 Ancient Greece 1.1.2 China 1.1.3 England 1.2 Modern period (1500 CE – present) 2 Legal theory and philosophy Toggle Legal theory and philosophy subsection 2.1 Formalist conception 2.2 Substantive conception 3 Social science analyses Toggle Social science analyses subsection 3.1 Economics 3.2 Comparative approaches 3.3 Education 3.4 Political science 4 Status in various jurisdictions Toggle Status in various jurisdictions subsection 4.1 Europe 4.1.1 United Kingdom 4.2 Americas 4.2.1 United States 4.2.2 Canada 4.3 Asia 4.3.1 China 4.3.2 India 4.3.3 Japan 4.3.4 Singapore 5 Organisations Toggle Organisations subsection 5.1 EU Commission 5.2 The Council of Europe 5.3 International Commission of Jurists 5.4 United Nations 5.5 International Bar Association 5.6 World Justice Project 5.7 International Development Law Organization 5.8 International Network to Promote the Rule of Law 6 See also Toggle See also subsection 6.1 Legal scholars 7 Sources 8 Notes and references 9 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Rule of law 64 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Naijá Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political situation in which everyone is subject to the law "Rule of Law" redirects here. For other uses, see Rule of Law (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Rule according to higher law .

A mosaic representing both the judicial and legislative aspects of law. The woman on the throne holds a sword to chastise the guilty and a palm branch to reward the meritorious.

Glory surrounds her head and the aegis of Minerva signifies the armor of righteousness and wisdom.

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Conflict resolution Principles Democracy Might makes right Non-aggression Nonviolence Pacifism Rule of man Speaking truth to power Toleration paradox Law Collaborative Dispute resolution Right to an effective remedy Rule of law Management Arbitration Alternative dispute resolution Auction Conciliation Family therapy Mediation Party-directed Negotiation Nonviolent Communication Peacebuilding International relations Appeasement Armistice Ceasefire Diplomacy Multilateralism Peacebuilding Peacemaking Peace process Peace treaty Track II diplomacy War Models and theories Brinkmanship Conflict escalation Conflict avoidance Conflict continuum Conflict style inventory Deterrence theory Game theory Prisoner's dilemma v t e The essence of the rule of law is that all people and institutions within a political body are subject to the same laws.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This concept is sometimes stated simply as "no one is above the law" or "all are equal before the law". According to Encyclopædia Britannica , it is defined as "the mechanism, process, institution, practice, or norm that supports the equality of all citizens before the law, secures a nonarbitrary form of government, and more generally prevents the arbitrary use of power." [ 4 ] Legal scholars have expanded the basic rule of law concept to encompass, first and foremost, a requirement that laws apply equally to everyone. "Formalists" add that the laws must be stable, accessible and clear. More recently, "substantivists" expand the concept to include rights, such as human rights, and compliance with international law.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Use of the phrase can be traced to 16th-century Britain . In the following century, Scottish theologian Samuel Rutherford employed it in arguing against the divine right of kings .

[ 8 ] John Locke wrote that freedom in society means being subject only to laws written by a legislature that apply to everyone, with a person being otherwise free from both governmental and private restrictions of liberty. The phrase "rule of law" was further popularized in the 19th century by British jurist A. V. Dicey . However, the principle, if not the phrase itself, was recognized by ancient thinkers.

Aristotle wrote: "It is more proper that law should govern than any one of the citizens." [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The term rule of law is closely related to constitutionalism as well as Rechtsstaat . It refers to a political situation, not to any specific legal rule.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Distinct is the rule of man , where one person or group of persons rule arbitrarily.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] Although credit for popularizing the expression "the rule of law" in modern times is usually given to A. V. Dicey , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] development of the legal concept can be traced through history to many ancient civilizations, including ancient Greece , Mesopotamia , India , and Rome .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Early history (to 15th century) [ edit ] The earliest conception of rule of law can be traced back to the Indian epics Ramayana and Mahabharata - the earliest versions of which date around to 8th or 9th centuries BC.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] The Mahabharata deals with the concepts of Dharma (used to mean law and duty interchangeably), Rajdharma (duty of the king) and Dharmaraja . It states in one of its slokas that,"The people should execute a king who does not protect them, but deprives them of their property and assets and who takes no advice or guidance from any one. Such a king is not a king but misfortune." [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Other sources for the philosophy of rule of law can be traced to the Upanishads which state that, "The law is the king of the kings. No one is higher than the law. Not even the king." Other commentaries include Kautilya 's Arthashastra (4th-century BC), Manusmriti (dated to the 1st to 3rd century CE), Yajnavalkya-Smriti (dated between the 3rd and 5th century CE), Brihaspati Smriti (dated between 15 CE and 16 CE).

[ 24 ] [ 23 ] Ancient Greece [ edit ] Several scholars have also traced the concept of the rule of law back to 4th-century BC Athens , seeing it either as the dominant value of the Athenian democracy , [ 25 ] or as one held in conjunction with the concept of popular sovereignty .

[ 26 ] However, these arguments have been challenged and the present consensus is that upholding an abstract concept of the rule of law was not "the predominant consideration" of the Athenian legal system.

[ 27 ] Aristotle , in his Politics , wrote: "It is more proper that law should govern than any one of the citizens: upon the same principle, if it is advantageous to place the supreme power in some particular persons, they should be appointed to be only guardians, and the servants of the laws." [ 28 ] The idea of the rule of law can be regarded as a modern iteration of the ideas of ancient Greek philosophers, who argued that the best form of government was rule by the best men.

[ 29 ] Plato advocated a benevolent monarchy ruled by an idealized philosopher king , who was above the law.

[ 29 ] Plato nevertheless hoped that the best men would be good at respecting established laws, explaining that "Where the law is subject to some other authority and has none of its own, the collapse of the state, in my view, is not far off; but if law is the master of the government and the government is its slave, then the situation is full of promise and men enjoy all the blessings that the gods shower on a state." [ 30 ] Similarly, Aristotle flatly opposed letting the highest officials wield power beyond guarding and serving the laws.

[ 29 ] In other words, Aristotle advocated the rule of law: It is more proper that law should govern than any one of the citizens: upon the same principle, if it is advantageous to place the supreme power in some particular persons, they should be appointed to be only guardians, and the servants of the laws.

[ 28 ] The Roman statesman Cicero is often cited as saying, roughly: "We are all servants of the laws in order to be free." [ 31 ] During the Roman Republic, controversial magistrates might be put on trial when their terms of office expired. Under the Roman Empire, the sovereign was personally immune ( legibus solutus ), but those with grievances could sue the treasury.

[ 15 ] China [ edit ] In China, members of the school of legalism during the 3rd century BC argued for using law as a tool of governance, but they promoted "rule by law" as opposed to "rule of law," meaning that they placed the aristocrats and emperor above the law.

[ 32 ] In contrast, the Huang–Lao school of Daoism rejected legal positivism in favor of a natural law that even the ruler would be subject to.

[ 33 ] The ancient concept of rule of law can be distinguished from rule by law, according to political science professor Li Shuguang: "The difference ... is that, under the rule of law, the law is preeminent and can serve as a check against the abuse of power. Under rule by law, the law is a mere tool for a government, that suppresses in a legalistic fashion." [ 34 ] England [ edit ] Alfred the Great , Anglo-Saxon king in the 9th century, reformed the law of his kingdom and assembled a law code (the Doom Book ) which he grounded on biblical commandments. He held that the same law had to be applied to all persons, whether rich or poor, friends or enemies. This was likely inspired by Leviticus 19:15: "You shall do no iniquity in judgment. You shall not favor the wretched and you shall not defer to the rich. In righteousness you are to judge your fellow." [ 35 ] [ better source needed ] In 1215, Archbishop Stephen Langton gathered the Barons in England and restricted the powers of King John and future sovereigns and magistrates under the rule of law, preserving ancient liberties by Magna Carta in return for exacting taxes.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] The influence of Magna Carta ebbed and waned across centuries. The weakening of royal power it demonstrated was based more upon the instability presented by contested claims than thoughtful adherence to constitutional principles. Until 1534, the Church excommunicated people for violations, but after a time Magna Carta was simply replaced by other statutes considered binding upon the king to act according to "process of the law". Magna Carta's influence is considered greatly diminished by the reign of Henry VI , after the Wars of the Roses .

[ 38 ] The ideas contained in Magna Carta are widely considered to have influenced the United States Constitution .

[ 39 ] The first known use of this English phrase occurred around 1500.

[ 40 ] Another early example of the phrase "rule of law" is found in a petition to James I of England in 1610, from the House of Commons : Amongst many other points of happiness and freedom which your majesty's subjects of this kingdom have enjoyed under your royal progenitors, kings and queens of this realm, there is none which they have accounted more dear and precious than this, to be guided and governed by the certain rule of the law which giveth both to the head and members that which of right belongeth to them, and not by any uncertain or arbitrary form of government ...

[ 41 ] Modern period (1500 CE – present) [ edit ] See also: Rechtsstaat Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e In 1481, during the reign of Ferdinand II of Aragon , the Constitució de l'Observança was approved by the General Court of Catalonia , establishing the submission of royal power (included its officers) to the laws of the Principality of Catalonia .

[ 42 ] In 1607, English Chief Justice Sir Edward Coke said in the Case of Prohibitions "that the law was the golden met-wand and measure to try the causes of the subjects; and which protected His Majesty in safety and peace: with which the King ( James I ) was greatly offended, and said, that then he should be under the law, which was treason to affirm, as he said; to which I said, that Bracton saith, quod Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo et lege (that the King ought not to be under any man but under God and the law.)." Among the first modern authors to use the term and give the principle theoretical foundations was Samuel Rutherford in Lex, Rex (1644).

[ 8 ] The title, Latin for "the law is king", subverts the traditional formulation rex lex ("the king is law").

[ 43 ] James Harrington wrote in Oceana (1656), drawing principally on Aristotle's Politics , that among forms of government an "Empire of Laws, and not of Men" was preferable to an "Empire of Men, and not of Laws".

[ 44 ] John Locke also discussed this issue in his Second Treatise of Government (1690): The natural liberty of man is to be free from any superior power on earth, and not to be under the will or legislative authority of man, but to have only the law of nature for his rule. The liberty of man, in society, is to be under no other legislative power, but that established, by consent, in the commonwealth; nor under the dominion of any will, or restraint of any law, but what that legislative shall enact, according to the trust put in it. Freedom then is not what Sir Robert Filmer tells us, Observations, A. 55. a liberty for every one to do what he lists, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied by any laws: but freedom of men under government is, to have a standing rule to live by, common to every one of that society, and made by the legislative power erected in it; a liberty to follow my own will in all things, where the rule prescribes not; and not to be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, arbitrary will of another man: as freedom of nature is, to be under no other restraint but the law of nature.

[ 45 ] The principle was also discussed by Montesquieu in The Spirit of Law (1748).

[ 46 ] The phrase "rule of law" appears in Samuel Johnson 's Dictionary (1755).

[ 47 ] In 1776, the notion that no one is above the law was popular during the founding of the United States. For example, Thomas Paine wrote in his pamphlet Common Sense that "in America, the law is king . For as in absolute governments the King is law, so in free countries the law ought to be king; and there ought to be no other." [ 48 ] In 1780, John Adams enshrined this principle in Article VI of the Declaration of Rights in the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts : No man, nor corporation, or association of men, have any other title to obtain advantages, or particular and exclusive privileges, distinct from those of the community, than what arises from the consideration of services rendered to the public; and this title being in nature neither hereditary, nor transmissible to children, or descendants, or relations by blood, the idea of a man born a magistrate, lawgiver, or judge, is absurd and unnatural.

[ 49 ] The term "rule of law" was popularised by British jurist A. V. Dicey , [ 15 ] who viewed the rule of law in common law systems as comprising three principles. First, that government must follow the law that it makes; second, that no one is exempt from the operation of the law and that it applies equally to all; and third, that general rights emerge from particular cases decided by the courts.

[ 50 ] The influence of Britain, France and the United States contributed to spreading the principle of the rule of law to other countries around the world.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Legal theory and philosophy [ edit ] The Oxford English Dictionary has defined rule of law as: [ 53 ] The authority and influence of law in society, esp. when viewed as a constraint on individual and institutional behaviour; (hence) the principle whereby all members of a society (including those in government) are considered equally subject to publicly disclosed legal codes and processes.

Despite wide use by politicians, judges and academics, the rule of law has been described as "an exceedingly elusive notion".

[ 54 ] In modern legal theory , there are at least two principal conceptions of the rule of law: a formalist or "thin" definition, and a substantive or " thick " definition. Formalist definitions of the rule of law do not make a judgment about the justness of law itself, but define specific procedural attributes that a legal framework must have in order to be in compliance with the rule of law. Substantive conceptions of the rule of law, generally from more recent authors, go beyond this and include certain substantive rights that are said to be based on, or derived from, the rule of law.

[ 55 ] One occasionally encounters a third "functional" conception.

[ 56 ] The functional interpretation of the term rule of law contrasts the rule of law with the rule of man .

[ 57 ] According to the functional view, a society in which government officers have a great deal of discretion has a low degree of "rule of law", whereas a society in which government officers have little discretion has a high degree of "rule of law".

[ 57 ] Upholding the rule of law can sometimes require the punishment of those who commit offenses that are justifiable under natural law but not statutory law.

[ 58 ] The rule of law is thus somewhat at odds with flexibility, even when flexibility may be preferable.

[ 57 ] Formalist conception [ edit ] Formalist theorists claim that the rule of law requires procedural generality (general rules that apply to classes of persons and behaviors as opposed to individuals), publicity (no secret laws), prospective application (little or no retroactive laws), consistency (no contradictory laws), [ 59 ] equality (applied equally throughout all society), and certainty (certainty of application for a given situation), but that there are no requirements with regard to the substantive content of the law.

[ 56 ] [ 60 ] Formalists include A. V. Dicey , F. A. Hayek , Joseph Raz , and Joseph Unger .

British constitutional theorist Albert Venn Dicey is often associated with the thin conception of the rule of law According to Dicey, the rule of law in the United Kingdom has three dominant characteristics: [ 61 ] First, the absolute supremacy of regular law – a person is to be judged by a fixed set of rules and punished for breaching only the law, and is not to be subject to "the exercise by persons in authority of wide, arbitrary, or discretionary powers of constraint".

[ 62 ] Second, the equality of law — "the universal subjection of all classes to one law administered by the ordinary Courts".

[ 63 ] Third, the fact that, in the United Kingdom, the constitution is the result of the common law , being not the source but the consequence of citizens' rights.

[ 64 ] A 1977 article by Joseph Raz argued that the rule of law means that people should obey the law and be ruled by it.

[ 65 ] Construed more narrowly, the rule of law would also mean that the government should be ruled by and subjected to the law. Following from Raz's general conception of the rule of law, he argued for the existence of two groups of principles of the rule of law: First, that the law is capable of guiding the behaviour of its subjects; second, that there exists an effective legal machinery that secures actual compliance with the rule of law.

[ 66 ] The first group comprises principles such as the accessibility, clarity, and prospective nature of the law; [ 67 ] the stability of the law; [ 68 ] and the compliance of lawmaking with "open, stable, clear and general rules" that create a stable framework, [ 69 ] with such rules empowering authorities to make orders and providing guidelines for the exercise of such powers.

[ 69 ] The second group includes principles including judicial independence , [ 70 ] natural justice , [ 71 ] judicial review , [ 71 ] and limited administrative discretion.

[ 72 ] Joseph Raz in February 2009. He stated in a 1977 article that the rule of law requires that "the making of particular laws should be guided by open and relatively stable general rules" In Raz's view, one of the virtues of the rule of law is the restraint it imposes on authorities. It aims to exclude arbitrary power, as most of the exercises of arbitrary power violate the rule of law. Arbitrary power is excluded when courts hold themselves accountable only to the law and observe "fairly strict procedures". Another virtue is the protection it accords to individual freedom, namely, "the sense of freedom in which it is identified with an effective ability to choose between as many options as possible". Most importantly, to adhere to the rule of law is to respect human dignity by "treating humans as persons capable of planning and plotting their future".

[ 73 ] Raz also identified some of the potential pitfalls of the rule of law. He opined that as the rule of law is designed "to minimise the harm to freedom and dignity which the law may cause in its pursuit of its goals however laudable these may be", the strict pursuit of the rule of law may prevent one from achieving certain social goals which may be preferable to the rule of law: "Sacrificing too many social goals on the altar of the rule of law may make the law barren and empty".

[ 74 ] Substantive conception [ edit ] Substantive theorists believe that the rule of law necessarily entails protection of individual rights. Some substantive theorists believe that democracy is part of the rule of law.

[ 57 ] Substantivists include Ronald Dworkin , Sir John Laws , Lon Fuller , Trevor Allan , and Tom Bingham holding that the rule of law intrinsically protects some or all individual rights.

Ronald Dworkin in September 2008. Dworkin's conception of the rule of law is "thick", as it encompasses a substantive theory of law and adjudication .

Ronald Dworkin defines what he terms the "rights conception" of the rule of law as follows: [ 75 ] It assumes that citizens have moral rights and duties with respect to one another, and political rights against the state as a whole. It insists that these moral and political rights be recognized in positive law, so that they may be enforced upon the demand of individual citizens through courts or other judicial institutions of the familiar type, so far as this is practicable. The rule of law on this conception is the ideal of rule by an accurate public conception of individual rights. It does not distinguish, as the rule book conception does, between the rule of law and substantive justice; on the contrary it requires, as part of the ideal of law, that the rules in the book capture and enforce moral rights.

Paul Craig , in analysing Dworkin's view, drew three conclusions. First, Dworkin rejects the need to distinguish between "legal" rules and a more complete political philosophy , since the rule of law is basically the theory of law and adjudication that he believes is correct. Secondly, the rule of law is not simply the thin or formal rule of law; the latter forms part of Dworkin's theory of law and adjudication. Thirdly, since taking a substantive view of the rule of law requires choosing what the best theory of justice is, it is necessary to articulate particular conceptions of what liberty, equality and other freedoms require.

[ 76 ] In his book, "What Is the Rule of Law?" Lon Fuller rejects legal positivism, the idea that law is no higher than a particular authority, that the law is morally neutral, and he sets out a list of requirements to include in his definition of the rule of law.

[ 77 ] Laws must exist and those laws should be obeyed by all, including government officials.

Laws must be published.

Laws must be prospective in nature so that the effect of the law may only take place after the law has been passed. For example, the court cannot convict a person of a crime committed before a criminal statute prohibiting the conduct was passed.

Laws should be written with reasonable clarity to avoid unfair enforcement.

Law must avoid contradictions.

Law must not command the impossible.

Law must stay constant through time to allow the formalization of rules; however, law also must allow for timely revision when the underlying social and political circumstances have changed.

Official action should be consistent with the declared rule.

In his book, "The rule of law" Tom Bingham further has requirements not only on how the laws must be handled, but also requirements that the laws must follow to include in his definition of the rule of law.

[ 78 ] The Law Must Be Accessible As far as possible, use law, not discretion Equality before the law Exercise of power must be used for the purpose for which the power were conferred Respect for Human Rights Means must be for resolving disputes for which the parties themselves are not able to resolve Everyone should have a right to legal redress and to fair trials The laws must be in compliance with international law Social science analyses [ edit ] Economics [ edit ] Economists and lawyers have studied and analysed the rule of law's impact on economic development . In particular, a major question in the area of law and economics is whether the rule of law matters to economic development, particularly in developing nations .

[ 79 ] The economist F. A. Hayek analyzed how the rule of law might be beneficial to the free market. Hayek proposed that under the rule of law, individuals would be able to make wise investments and future plans with some confidence in a successful return on investment when he stated: "under the Rule of Law the government is prevented from stultifying individual efforts by ad hoc action. Within the known rules of the game the individual is free to pursue his personal ends and desires, certain that the powers of government will not be used deliberately to frustrate his efforts." [ 80 ] Studies have shown that weak rule of law (for example, discretionary regulatory enforcement) discourages investment. Economists have found, for example, that a rise in discretionary regulatory enforcement caused US firms to abandon international investments.

[ 81 ] Constitutional economics is the study of the compatibility of economic and financial decisions within existing constitutional law frameworks. Aspects of constitutional frameworks relevant to both the rule of law and public economics include government spending on the judiciary , which, in many transitional and developing countries , is completely controlled by the executive. Additionally, judicial corruption may arise from both the executive branch and private actors. Standards of constitutional economics such as transparency can also be used during annual budget processes for the benefit of the rule of law. Further, the availability of an effective court system in situations of unfair government spending and executive impoundment of previously authorized appropriations is a key element for the success of the rule of law.

[ 82 ] Nobel laureates Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson emphasize the importance of the rule of law for promoting inclusive institutions, which are key to sustained economic growth and prosperity by ensuring that laws apply equally to everyone, including elites and government officials.

[ 83 ] The authors highlight historical examples, such as the French Revolution, where the rule of law helped dismantle absolutism and feudal privileges, paving the way for inclusive institutions. They also discuss how pluralistic political institutions are essential for the rule of law to thrive, as they create broad coalitions that support fairness and equality.

Comparative approaches [ edit ] Legal systems of the world, with common law in red, and civil law in blue.

[ 84 ] The term "rule of law" has been used primarily in the English-speaking countries, and it is not yet fully clarified with regard to such well-established democracies such as Sweden, Denmark, France, Germany, or Japan. A common language between lawyers of common law and civil law countries is critically important for research of links between the rule of law and real economy.

[ 85 ] The rule of law can be hampered when there is a disconnect between legal and popular consensus. For example, under the auspices of the World Intellectual Property Organization , nominally strong copyright laws have been implemented throughout most of the world; but because the attitude of much of the population does not conform to these laws, a rebellion against ownership rights has manifested in rampant piracy , including an increase in peer-to-peer file sharing .

[ 86 ] Similarly, in Russia, tax evasion is common and a person who admits he does not pay taxes is not judged or criticized by his colleagues and friends, because the tax system is viewed as unreasonable.

[ 87 ] Bribery likewise has different normative implications across cultures.

[ 88 ] Education [ edit ] UNESCO has argued that education has an important role in promoting the rule of law and a culture of lawfulness, providing an important protective function by strengthening learners' abilities to face and overcome difficult life situations. Young people can be important contributors to a culture of lawfulness, and governments can provide educational support that nurtures positive values and attitudes in future generations.

[ 89 ] A movement towards education for justice seeks to promote the rule of law in schools.

[ 89 ] Political science [ edit ] Francis Fukuyama in his book The Origins of Political Order states the rule of law is a requirement for stability.

Status in various jurisdictions [ edit ] Countries by adherence to the Rule of Law according to the 2017–18 World Justice Project report The rule of law has been considered one of the key dimensions that determine the quality and good governance of a country.

[ 90 ] Research, like the Worldwide Governance Indicators , defines the rule of law as "the extent to which agents have confidence and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, the police and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime or violence." [ 90 ] Based on this definition the Worldwide Governance Indicators project has developed aggregate measurements for the rule of law in more than 200 countries, as seen in the map at right.

[ 91 ] Other evaluations such as the World Justice Project Rule of Law Index [ 92 ] show that adherence to rule of law fell in 61% of countries in 2022. Globally, this means that 4.4 billion people live in countries where rule of law declined in 2021.

[ 93 ] Lapses in the rule of law can arise in conflict between two or more countries.

[ 94 ] Europe [ edit ] The preamble of the rule of law European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms says "the governments of European countries which are like-minded and have a common heritage of political traditions, ideals, freedom and the rule of law".

In France and Germany the concepts of rule of law ( Etat de droit and Rechtsstaat respectively) are analogous to the principles of constitutional supremacy and protection of fundamental rights from public authorities, particularly the legislature .

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] France was one of the early pioneers of the ideas of the rule of law.

[ 97 ] The German interpretation is more rigid but similar to that of France and the United Kingdom.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Rule of law in the United Kingdom See also: History of the constitution of the United Kingdom In the United Kingdom the rule of law is a long-standing principle of the way the country is governed, dating from England's Magna Carta in 1215 and the Bill of Rights 1689 .

[ 43 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] In the 19th century classic work Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (1885), A. V. Dicey , a constitutional scholar and lawyer, wrote of the twin pillars of the British constitution : the rule of law and parliamentary sovereignty .

[ 102 ] Americas [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Constitutional law of the United States Overview Articles Amendments History Judicial review Principles Separation of powers Individual rights Rule of law Federalism Republicanism Equal footing Tiers of scrutiny Government structure Legislative branch Executive branch Judicial branch State government Local government Individual rights Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Freedom of assembly Right to petition Freedom of association Right to keep and bear arms Right to trial by jury Criminal procedural rights Right to privacy Freedom from slavery Due process Equal protection Citizenship Voting rights Right to candidacy Comprehensible rules Theory Living Constitution Originalism Substantive due process Political process theory Judicial restraint Purposivism Textualism Strict constructionism Common good constitutionalism Unitary executive theory v t e All government officers of the United States, including the President , Justices of the Supreme Court , state judges and legislators, and all members of Congress , pledge first and foremost to uphold the Constitution , affirming that the rule of law is superior to the rule of any human leader.

[ 103 ] At the same time, the federal government has considerable discretion: the legislative branch is free to decide what statutes it will write, as long as it stays within its enumerated powers and respects the constitutionally protected rights of individuals . Likewise, the judicial branch has a degree of judicial discretion , [ 104 ] and the executive branch also has various discretionary powers including prosecutorial discretion .

James Wilson said during the Philadelphia Convention in 1787 that, "Laws may be unjust, may be unwise, may be dangerous, may be destructive; and yet not be so unconstitutional as to justify the Judges in refusing to give them effect." George Mason agreed that judges "could declare an unconstitutional law void. But with regard to every law, however unjust, oppressive or pernicious, which did not come plainly under this description, they would be under the necessity as judges to give it a free course." [ 105 ] Chief Justice John Marshall a similar position in 1827: "When its existence as law is denied, that existence cannot be proved by showing what are the qualities of a law." [ 106 ] Scholars continue to debate whether the U.S. Constitution adopted a particular interpretation of the "rule of law", and if so, which one. For example, John Harrison asserts that the word "law" in the Constitution is simply defined as that which is legally binding, rather than being "defined by formal or substantive criteria", and therefore judges do not have discretion to decide that laws fail to satisfy such unwritten and vague criteria.

[ 107 ] Law professor Frederick Mark Gedicks disagrees, writing that Cicero , Augustine , Thomas Aquinas , and the framers of the U.S. Constitution believed that " an unjust law was not really a law at all ".

[ 108 ] Some modern scholars contend that the rule of law has been corroded during the past century by the instrumental view of law promoted by legal realists such as Oliver Wendell Holmes and Roscoe Pound . For example, Brian Tamanaha asserts: "The rule of law is a centuries-old ideal, but the notion that law is a means to an end became entrenched only in the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries." [ 109 ] Others argue that the rule of law has survived but was transformed to allow for the exercise of discretion by administrators. For much of American history, the dominant notion of the rule of law in administrative law has been some version of Dicey's, that is, individuals should be able to challenge an administrative order by bringing suit in a court of general jurisdiction. The increased number of administrative cases led to fears that excess judicial oversight over administrative decisions would overwhelm the courts and destroy the advantages of specialization that led to the creation of administrative agencies in the first place. By 1941, a compromise had emerged. If administrators adopted procedures that more or less tracked "the ordinary legal manner" of the courts, further review of the facts by "the ordinary Courts of the land" was unnecessary. Thus Dicey's rule of law was recast into a purely procedural form.

[ 110 ] Numerous definitions of "rule of law" are used in United States governmental bodies. An organization's definition might depend on that organization's goal. For instance, military occupation or counterinsurgency campaigns may necessitate prioritising physical security over human rights.

[ 111 ] U.S. Army doctrine and U.S. Government (USG) interagency agreements might see the rule of law as a principle of governance: [ 111 ] Outlines of different definitions are given in a JAG Corps handbook for judge advocates deployed with the US Army.

[ 111 ] [ non-primary source needed ] [ original research?

] On July 1, 2024, in Trump v. United States , the Supreme Court held that presidents have absolute immunity for acts committed as president within their core constitutional purview, at least presumptive immunity for official acts within the outer perimeter of their official responsibility, and no immunity for unofficial acts.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Legal scholars have warned of the negative impact of this decision on the status of rule of law in the United States.

[ 114 ] Prior to that, in 1973 and 2000 the Office of Legal Counsel within the Department of Justice issued opinions saying that a sitting president cannot be indicted or prosecuted , [ 115 ] [ 116 ] but it is constitutional to indict and try a former president for the same offenses for which the President was impeached by the House of Representatives and acquitted by the Senate under the Impeachment Disqualification Clause of Article I, Section III .

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] Trump's second term has raised concerns among experts, including the American Bar Association , [ 120 ] that the rule of law in the United States is seriously threatened.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] A particular point of concern is whether the administration will follow court orders.

[ 126 ] Canada [ edit ] In Canada, the rule of law is associated with A.V. Dicey 's view. It is mentioned in the preamble to the Constitution Act, 1982 .

The Constitution of Canada is "similar in principle" to the British constitution , and includes unwritten constitutional principles of democracy, judicial independence, federalism, constitutionalism and the rule of law, and the protection of minorities.

[ 127 ] In 1959, Roncarelli v Duplessis , the Supreme Court of Canada called the Rule of Law a "fundamental postulate" of the Canadian Constitution . According to Reference Re Secession of Quebec , it encompasses, "a sense of orderliness, of subjection to known legal rules and of executive accountability to legal authority." In Canadian law , it means that the relationship between the state and the individual must be regulated by law and that the Constitution binds all governments, both federal and provincial , including the executive . With the adoption of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , the Canadian system of government was transformed to a significant extent from a system of Parliamentary supremacy to one of constitutional supremacy. The principle of the rule of law and constitutionalism is aided by acknowledging that the constitution is entrenched beyond simple majority rule .

[ 128 ] However, the notwithstanding clause operates to provide a limited "legislative override" of certain fundamental freedoms contained in the Charter, and has been invoked at different times by provincial legislatures.

In Canadian administrative law , "all exercises of public authority must find their source in law.  All decision-making powers have legal limits, derived from the enabling statute itself, the common or civil law or the Constitution.

Judicial review is the means by which the courts supervise those who exercise statutory powers, to ensure that they do not overstep their legal authority. The function of judicial review is therefore to ensure the legality, the reasonableness and the fairness of the administrative process and its outcomes." [ 129 ] Administrative decision makers must adopt a culture of justification and demonstrate that their exercise of delegated public power can be “justified to citizens in terms of rationality and fairness.” [ 130 ] Asia [ edit ] East Asian cultures are influenced by two schools of thought, Confucianism , which advocated good governance as rule by leaders who are benevolent and virtuous, and legalism , which advocated strict adherence to law. The influence of one school of thought over the other has varied throughout the centuries. One study indicates that throughout East Asia, only South Korea, Singapore, Japan, Taiwan and Hong Kong have societies that are robustly committed to a law-bound state.

[ 131 ] According to Awzar Thi, a member of the Asian Human Rights Commission , the rule of law in Cambodia and most of Asia is weak or nonexistent: Apart from a number of states and territories, across the continent there is a huge gulf between the rule of law rhetoric and reality. In Thailand, the police force is favor over the rich and corrupted. In Cambodia, judges are proxies for the ruling political party ... That a judge may harbor political prejudice or apply the law unevenly are the smallest worries for an ordinary criminal defendant in Asia. More likely ones are: Will the police fabricate the evidence? Will the prosecutor bother to show up? Will the judge fall asleep? Will I be poisoned in prison? Will my case be completed within a decade?

[ 132 ] In countries such as China and Vietnam, the transition to a market economy has been a major factor in a move toward the rule of law, because the rule of law is important to foreign investors and to economic development. It remains unclear whether the rule of law in countries like China and Vietnam will be limited to commercial matters or will spill into other areas as well, and if so whether that spillover will enhance prospects for related values such as democracy and human rights.

[ 133 ] China [ edit ] See also: Chinese law § Rule of law , and Three Supremes In China, the phrase fǎzhì (法治), which can be translated as "rule of law," means using the law as an instrument to facilitate social control.

[ 134 ] Late Qing dynasty legal reforms unsuccessfully sought to implement Western legal principles including the rule of law and judicial independence.

[ 135 ] : 122–123 Judicial independence further decreased in the Republic of China under Chiang Kai-shek per the Kuomintang 's policy of particization ( danghua ), under which administrative judges were required to have "deep comprehension" of the KMT's principles.

[ 135 ] : 123 After China's reform and opening-up , the Communist Party emphasized the rule of law as a basic strategy and method for state management of society.

[ 136 ] : 110 Jiang Zemin first called for establishing a socialist rule of law at the Fifteenth Party Congress in 1997.

[ 136 ] : 110 Despite the CCP's Document 9 arguing that Western values have corrupted many people's understanding of the rule of law, the CCP has simultaneously endorsed governing the country in accordance with the rule of law.

[ 137 ] These factors likely suggest that the CCP is creating a rule of law with Chinese characteristics, which may simply entail modifying the Western notion of rule of law to best match China's unique political, social, and historical conditions. As Document 9 suggests, the CCP does not see judicial independence, separation of power, or constitutional forms of governance as defined by Western society, as suiting China's unique form of governance.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] This unique version of the rule of law with Chinese characteristics has led to different attempts to define China's method of governing the country by rule of law domestically and internationally.

[ 140 ] [ 139 ] In his writings on socialist rule of law in China, Xi Jinping has emphasized traditional Chinese concepts including people as the root of the state ( mingben ), "the ideal of no lawsuit" ( tianxia wusong ), "respecting rite and stressing law" ( longli zhongfa ), "virtue first, penalty second" ( dezhu xingfu ), and "promoting virtue and being prudent in punishment" ( mingde shenfa ).

[ 136 ] : 110–111 Xi states that the two fundamental aspects of the socialist rule of law are: that the political and legal organs (including courts, the police, and the procuratorate) must believe in the law and uphold the law; and all political and legal officials must follow the Communist Party.

[ 136 ] : 115 India [ edit ] The Constitution of India is intended to limit opportunities for governmental discretion, and the judiciary uses judicial review to uphold the Constitution, especially the Fundamental Rights .

[ 141 ] Although some people have criticized the Indian judiciary for its judicial activism , [ 142 ] others believe such actions are needed to safeguard the rule of law based on the Constitution as well as to preserve judicial independence , an important part of the basic structure doctrine .

[ 143 ] Japan [ edit ] Japan had centuries of tradition prior to World War II , during which there were laws, but they did not provide a central organizing principle for society, and they did not constrain the powers of government.

[ 144 ] As the 21st century began, the percentage of people who were lawyers and judges in Japan remained very low relative to western Europe and the United States, and legislation in Japan tended to be terse and general, leaving much discretion in the hands of bureaucrats.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Singapore [ edit ] Main article: Rule of law doctrine in Singapore Organisations [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources at this section.

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Various organizations are involved in promoting the rule of law.

EU Commission [ edit ] Further information: Category:Rule of law missions of the European Union The rule of law is enshrined in Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union as one of the common values for all Member States. Under the rule of law, all public powers always act within the constraints set out by law, in accordance with the values of democracy and fundamental rights, and under the control of independent and impartial courts. The rule of law includes principles such as legality, implying a transparent, accountable, democratic and pluralistic process for enacting laws; legal certainty; prohibiting the arbitrary exercise of executive power; effective judicial protection by independent and impartial courts, effective judicial review including respect for fundamental rights; separation of powers; and equality before the law. These principles have been recognised by the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights. In addition, the Council of Europe has developed standards and issued opinions and recommendations which provide well-established guidance to promote and uphold the rule of law.

[ 147 ] The Council of Europe [ edit ] The Statute of the Council of Europe characterizes the rule of law as one of the core principles which the establishment of the organization based on. The paragraph 3 of the preamble of the Statute of the Council of Europe states: "Reaffirming their devotion to the spiritual and moral values which are the common heritage of their peoples and the true source of individual freedom, political liberty and the rule of law, principles which form the basis of all genuine democracy." The Statute lays the compliance with the rule of law principles as a condition for the European states to be a full member of the organization.

[ 148 ] International Commission of Jurists [ edit ] In 1959, an event took place in New Delhi and speaking as the International Commission of Jurists , made a declaration as to the fundamental principle of the rule of law. The event consisted of over 185 judges, lawyers, and law professors from 53 countries. This later became known as the Declaration of Delhi . During the declaration they declared that the rule of law implied certain rights and freedoms, an independent judiciary, and social, economic and cultural conditions conducive to human dignity. One aspect not included in The Declaration of Delhi was for rule of law requiring legislative power to be subject to judicial review .

[ 149 ] United Nations [ edit ] The Secretary-General of the United Nations defines the rule of law as: [ 150 ] a principle of governance in which all persons, institutions and entities, public and private, including the State itself, are accountable to laws that are publicly promulgated, equally enforced and independently adjudicated, and which are consistent with international human rights norms and standards. It requires, as well, measures to ensure adherence to the principles of supremacy of law, equality before the law, accountability to the law, fairness in the application of the law, separation of powers, participation in decision-making, legal certainty, avoidance of arbitrariness and procedural and legal transparency.

The General Assembly has considered rule of law an agenda item since 1992, with renewed interest since 2006 and has adopted resolutions at its last three sessions.

[ 151 ] The Security Council has held a number of thematic debates on the rule of law, [ 152 ] and adopted resolutions emphasizing the importance of these issues in the context of women, peace and security, [ 153 ] children in armed conflict, [ 154 ] and the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

[ 155 ] The Peacebuilding Commission has also regularly addressed rule of law issues with respect to countries on its agenda.

[ 156 ] The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action also requires the rule of law be included in human rights education .

[ 157 ] Additionally, the Sustainable Development Goal 16 , a component of the 2030 Agenda is aimed at promoting the rule of law at national and international levels.

[ 158 ] In Our Common Agenda, the United Nations Secretary General wrote in paragraph 23: "In support of efforts to put people at the center of justice systems, I will promote a new vision for the rule of law, building on Sustainable Development Goal 16 and the 2012 Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels." [ 159 ] International Bar Association [ edit ] The Council of the International Bar Association passed a resolution in 2009 endorsing a substantive or "thick" definition of the rule of law: [ 160 ] An independent, impartial judiciary; the presumption of innocence; the right to a fair and public trial without undue delay; a rational and proportionate approach to punishment; a strong and independent legal profession; strict protection of confidential communications between lawyer and client; equality of all before the law; these are all fundamental principles of the Rule of Law. Accordingly, arbitrary arrests; secret trials; indefinite detention without trial; cruel or degrading treatment or punishment; intimidation or corruption in the electoral process, are all unacceptable. The Rule of Law is the foundation of a civilised society. It establishes a transparent process accessible and equal to all. It ensures adherence to principles that both liberate and protect. The IBA calls upon all countries to respect these fundamental principles. It also calls upon its members to speak out in support of the Rule of Law within their respective communities.

World Justice Project [ edit ] "With law shall land be built", the preface of Codex Holmiensis above Copenhagen Court House . In 2023, the WJP ranked Denmark no. 1 on their Rule of Law Index [ 161 ] The World Justice Project (WJP) [ 162 ] is an international organization that produces independent research and data, in order to build awareness, and stimulate action to advance the rule of law.

[ 163 ] The World Justice Project defines the rule of law as a durable system of laws, institutions, norms, and country commitment that uphold four universal principles: [ 164 ] Accountability : the government and its officials and agents are accountable under the law.

Just Law: the law is clear, publicized, and stable, and is applied evenly. It ensures human rights as well as properly, contract, and procedural rights.

Open Government: the processes enforced are accessible, fair, and efficient.

Accessible and Impartial Justice: justice is delivered timely by competent, ethical, and independent representatives and neutrals who are accessible, have adequate resources, and reflect the makeup of the communities they serve.

Their flagship WJP Rule of Law Index, [ 165 ] measures the extent to which 140 countries and jurisdictions [ 166 ] adhere to the rule of law across eight dimensions: [ 167 ] Constraints on Government Powers , Absence of Corruption , Open Government , Fundamental Rights , Order and Security , Regulatory Enforcement , Civil Justice , and Criminal Justice .

International Development Law Organization [ edit ] The International Development Law Organization (IDLO) is an intergovernmental organization with a joint focus on the promotion of rule of law and development. It works to empower people and communities to claim their rights, and provides governments with the know-how to realize them.

[ 168 ] It supports emerging economies and middle-income countries to strengthen their legal capacity and rule of law framework for sustainable development and economic opportunity.

[ 169 ] It is the only intergovernmental organization with an exclusive mandate to promote the rule of law and has experience working in more than 90 countries around the world.

[ 170 ] The International Development Law Organization has a holistic definition of the rule of law: More than a matter of due process, the rule of law is an enabler of justice and development. The three notions are interdependent; when realized, they are mutually reinforcing. For IDLO, as much as a question of laws and procedure, the rule of law is a culture and daily practice. It is inseparable from equality, from access to justice and education, from access to health and the protection of the most vulnerable. It is crucial for the viability of communities and nations, and for the environment that sustains them.

[ 171 ] International Network to Promote the Rule of Law [ edit ] The International Network to Promote the Rule of Law is an international network of law practitioners working on rule of law issues in post-conflict and developing countries from a policy, practice and research perspective. INPROL is based at the US Institute of Peace in partnership with the US Department of State Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Strategic Police Matters Unit, the Center of Excellence for Police Stability Unit, and William and Mary School of Law in the United States.

[ 172 ] See also [ edit ] Abuse of process – Legal tort of misusing  court processes unjustified by legal actions being taken Consent of the governed – Consent as source of political legitimacy Constitutional liberalism – Form of government Crime statistics – Official statistics on criminal behavior Dark figure of crime – Term used by criminologists and sociologists Due process – Requirement that courts respect all legal rights owed to people Equality before the law – Judicial principle Habeas corpus – Court action challenging unlawful detention International Network to Promote the Rule of Law Judicial activism – Controversial judicial practice Justice delayed is justice denied – Legal maxim Kritarchy – Ancient Israeli system of rule by Biblical judges Law of the jungle – Expression for behavior without rule of law Lawfare – Weaponization of legal systems Law enforcement – Enforcement of the law by some members of society Legal certainty – Legal principle Legal doctrine – Set of rules or procedures through which judgements can be determined in a legal case Liberal international order – International system established after World War II Might makes right – View that morality is, or ought to be, determined by those in power Minority rights – Rights of members of minority groups Moral absolutism – Metaethical position that some actions are intrinsically right or wrong Nuremberg principles – Guidelines for determining what constitutes a war crime Ochlocracy – Democracy spoiled by demagoguery and the rule of passion over reason Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets (mob rule) Perverting the course of justice – Criminal offence Philosophy of law – Theoretical study of law Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Public interest law – Legal practices undertaken to help poor or marginalized people Rechtsstaat – Continental European legal doctrine Right of conquest – Concept in political science Right to an effective remedy – Right of a person whose human rights have been violated to legal remedy Rule of man – Type of personal rule Separation of powers – Division of a state's government into branches Social contract – Concept in political philosophy Sovereign immunity – Legal doctrine Strategic litigation – Litigation intended to change society Legal scholars [ edit ] Thomas Bingham, Baron Bingham of Cornhill – British judge (1933–2010) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets A. V. Dicey – British jurist and constitutional theorist (1835–1922) Joseph Raz – Israeli philosopher (1939–2022) Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from Strengthening the rule of law through education: A guide for policymakers​ , 63, UNESCO.

Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Cole, John et al. (1997).

The Library of Congress , W. W. Norton & Company. p. 113 ^ Sempill, Julian (2020). "The Rule of Law and the Rule of Men: History, Legacy, Obscurity".

Hague Journal on the Rule of Law .

12 (3): 511– 540.

doi : 10.1007/s40803-020-00149-9 .

S2CID 256425870 .

^ Hobson, Charles.

The Great Chief Justice: John Marshall and the Rule of Law , p. 57 (University Press of Kansas, 1996): according to John Marshall , "the framers of the Constitution contemplated that instrument as a rule for the government of courts, as well as of the legislature." ^ "rule of law | Definition, Implications, Significance, & Facts | Britannica" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 29 January 2022 .

^ Sempill, Julian (2020). "The Rule of Law and the Rule of Men: History, Legacy, Obscurity".

Hague Journal on the Rule of Law .

12 (3): 511– 540.

doi : 10.1007/s40803-020-00149-9 .

S2CID 256425870 .

^ Hobson, Charles.

The Great Chief Justice: John Marshall and the Rule of Law , p. 57 (University Press of Kansas, 1996): according to John Marshall , "the framers of the Constitution contemplated that instrument as a rule for the government of courts, as well as of the legislature." ^ Paul Craig (1997), "Formal and Substantive Conceptions of the Rule of Law: An Analytical Framework", Public Law : 467–487 at 478 .

^ a b Rutherford, Samuel.

Lex, rex: the law and the prince, a dispute for the just prerogative of king and people, containing the reasons and causes of the defensive wars of the kingdom of Scotland, and of their expedition for the ayd and help of their brethren of England , p. 237 (1644): "The prince remaineth, even being a prince, a social creature, a man, as well as a king; one who must buy, sell, promise, contract, dispose: ergo, he is not regula regulans, but under rule of law ..." ^ Stein, Robert A. (2019-10-18).

"What Exactly Is the Rule of Law?" .

Houston Law Review .

57 (1): 185– 201.

^ Ellis, William (1895).

Aristotle's Politics: a treatise on government, CHAPTER XVI . George Routledge, London.

^ Ten, C. l (2017), "Constitutionalism and the Rule of Law", A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy , John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp.

493– 502, doi : 10.1002/9781405177245.ch22 , ISBN 978-1405177245 ^ Reynolds, Noel B. (1986).

"Constitutionalism and the Rule of Law" .

All Faculty Publications (BYU ScholarsArchive) .

Archived from the original on 2019-11-07 . Retrieved 2020-02-21 .

^ "Constitutionalism, Rule of Law, PS201H-2B3" .

www.proconservative.net .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 12 November 2019 .

^ Paul. "Resisting the Rule of Men." . Louis ULJ 62 (2017): 333.

"I will say that we have "the rule of men" or "personal rule" when those who wield the power of the state are not obliged to give reasons to those over whom that power is being wielded—from the standpoint of the ruled, the rulers may simply act on their brute desires." ^ a b c Wormuth, Francis.

The Origins of Modern Constitutionalism , p. 28 (1949).

^ Bingham, Thomas .

The Rule of Law , p. 3 (Penguin 2010).

^ Black, Anthony.

A World History of Ancient Political Thought (Oxford University Press 2009).

ISBN 0-19-928169-6 [ page needed ] ^ Krygier, Martin (2016).

"The Rule of Law: Pasts, Presents, and Two Possible Futures" .

Annual Review of Law and Social Science .

12 : 199– 229.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-lawsocsci-102612-134103 .

^ Austin, Christopher R. (2019).

Pradyumna: Lover, Magician, and Son of the Avatara . Oxford University Press. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-19-005411-3 .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2023 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

^ Brockington (1998, p. 26) ^ Buitenen (1973) pp. xxiv–xxv ^ Cowell, Herbert (1872).

History and Constitution of the Courts and Legislative Authorities in India . Michigan: University of Michigan Press. pp.

37– 56.

ISBN 1278155406 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Giri, Ananta Kumar (5 November 2001). "1".

Rule of Law and Indian Society: Colonial Encounters,post-colonial experiments and beyond (PDF) (PhD thesis). Madras Institute of Development Studies . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ "The Indian Judicial System | A Historical Survey" .

Allahabad High Court . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ Ostwald, Martin (1986).

From popular sovereignty to the sovereignty of law : law, society, and politics in fifth-century Athens . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

412– 496.

ISBN 9780520067981 .

^ Ober, Josiah (1989).

Mass and elite in democratic Athens : rhetoric, ideology, and the power of the people . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. pp.

144– 7, 299– 300.

ISBN 9780691028644 .

^ Liddel, Peter P. (2007).

Civic obligation and individual liberty in ancient Athens . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

130– 131.

ISBN 978-0-19-922658-0 .

^ a b Aristotle, Politics 3.16 ^ a b c David Clarke, " The many meanings of the rule of law Archived 2016-04-08 at the Wayback Machine " in Kanishka Jayasuriya, ed., Law, Capitalism and Power in Asia (New York: Routledge, 1998).

^ Cooper, John et al.

Complete Works By Plato , p. 1402 (Hackett Publishing, 1997).

^ In full: "The magistrates who administer the law, the judges who act as its spokesmen, all the rest of us who live as its servants, grant it our allegiance as a guarantee of our freedom."— Cicero (1975).

Murder Trials . Penguin Classics. Translated by Michael Grant. Harmondsworth: Penguin. p. 217.

Original Latin:  "Legum ministri magistratus, legum interpretes iudices, legum denique idcirco omnes servi sumus ut liberi esse possimus."— "Pro Cluentio" .

The Latin Library . 53:146 . Retrieved 5 March 2018 .

^ Xiangming, Zhang.

On Two Ancient Chinese Administrative Ideas: Rule of Virtue and Rule by Law Archived 17 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine , The Culture Mandala: Bulletin of the Centre for East-West Cultural and Economic Studies (2002): "Although Han Fei recommended that the government should rule by law, which seems impartial, he advocated that the law be enacted by the lords solely. The lords place themselves above the law. The law is thereby a monarchical means to control the people, not the people's means to restrain the lords. The lords are by no means on an equal footing with the people. Hence we cannot mention the rule by law proposed by Han Fei in the same breath as democracy and the rule of law advocated today." Bevir, Mark.

The Encyclopedia of Political Theory , pp. 161–162.

Munro, Donald.

The Concept of Man in Early China . p. 4.

Guo, Xuezhi.

The Ideal Chinese Political Leader: A Historical and Cultural Perspective . p. 152.

^ Peerenboom, Randall (1993).

Law and morality in ancient China: the silk manuscripts of Huang-Lao . SUNY Press. p. 171.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1237-4 .

^ Tamanaha, Brian (2004).

On the Rule of Law . Cambridge University Press. p. 3 ^ Alter, Robert (2004).

The Five Books of Moses: A Translation with Commentary . W.W. Norton & Company. p.

627 .

ISBN 978-0-393-01955-1 .

^ Magna Carta (1215) translation, British Library ^ Magna Carta (1297) U.S. National Archives Archived 2016-10-07 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Turner, Ralph (2016).

Magna Carta . Routledge.

^ "Magna Carta Legacy" .

National Archives . 2015-10-06 . Retrieved 2025-02-15 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary (OED), " Rule of Law, n.

", accessed 27 April 2013.  According to the OED, this sentence from about 1500 was written by John Blount : "Lawes And constitutcions be ordeyned be cause the noysome Appetit of man maye be kepte vnder the Rewle of lawe by the wiche mankinde ys dewly enformed to lyue honestly."  And this sentence from 1559 is attributed to William Bavand : "A Magistrate should..kepe rekenyng of all mennes behauiours, and to be carefull, least thei despisyng the rule of lawe, growe to a wilfulnes." ^ Hallam, Henry .

The Constitutional History of England , vol. 1, p. 441 (1827).

^ Ferro, Víctor: El Dret Públic Català.

Les Institucions a Catalunya fins al Decret de Nova Planta ; Eumo Editorial; ISBN 84-7602-203-4 [ page needed ] ^ a b "The Rule of Law" . The Constitution Society. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 3 October 2014 .

^ Harrington, James (1747). Toland, John (ed.).

The Oceana and other works (3 ed.). London: Millar. p. 37 (Internet Archive: copy possessed by John Adams ).

^ Locke, John.

Second Treatise of Civil Government , Ch. IV, sec. 22 (1690).

^ Tamanaha, Brian.

On the Rule of Law , p. 47 (Cambridge University Press, 2004).

^ Peacock, Anthony Arthur, Freedom and the rule of law , p. 24. 2010.

^ Lieberman, Jethro.

A Practical Companion to the Constitution , p. 436 (University of California Press 2005).

^ Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1780) , Part the First, Art. VI.

^ Albert Venn Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution, 5th ed (London: Macmillan and Co, 1897) at 175-84, cited in "Rule of Law" , Centre for Constitutional Studies, July 4, 2019 ^ Winks, Robin W. (1993).

World civilization: a brief history (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Collegiate Press. p. 406.

ISBN 978-0-939693-28-3 .

^ Billias, George Athan (2011).

American constitutionalism heard round the world, 1776–1989: a global perspective . New York: New York University Press. pp.

53– 56.

ISBN 978-0-8147-2517-7 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary online (accessed 13 September 2018;  spelling Americanized).  The phrase "the rule of law" is also sometimes used in other senses.

See Garner, Bryan A. (Editor in Chief).

Black's Law Dictionary , 9th Edition, p. 1448. (Thomson Reuters, 2009).

ISBN 978-0-314-26578-4 . Black's provides five definitions of "rule of law":  the lead definition is "A substantive legal principle"; the second is the "supremacy of regular as opposed to arbitrary power".

^ Tamanaha, Brian Z. (2004).

On the Rule of Law .

Cambridge University Press . p. 3.

^ Craig, Paul P. (1997). "Formal and Substantive Conceptions of the Rule of Law: An Analytical Framework".

Public Law : 467.

^ a b Tamanaha, Brian.

"The Rule of Law for Everyone?" , Current Legal Problems , vol. 55, via SSRN (2002).

^ a b c d Stephenson, Matthew.

"Rule of Law as a Goal of Development Policy" , World Bank Research (2008).

^ Heidi M. Hurd (Aug 1992).

"Justifiably Punishing the Justified" .

Michigan Law Review .

90 (8): 2203– 2324.

doi : 10.2307/1289573 .

JSTOR 1289573 .

^ Donelson, Raff (2019). "Legal Inconsistencies".

Tulsa Law Review .

55 (1): 15– 44.

SSRN 3365259 .

^ Ronald M. Dworkin (1985), A Matter of Principle , Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press , p. 11, ISBN 978-0-674-55461-0 .

^ A[lbert] V[enn] Dicey (1927) [1915], "The Rule of Law: Its Nature and General Applications" , An Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (8th ed.), London: Macmillan & Co.

, pp. 179–201 at 198–199, OCLC 5755153 ; see also A[lbert] V[enn] Dicey (1959), An Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (10th ed.), London: Macmillan & Co., p. 202, ISBN 978-1-4212-9044-7 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) .

^ Dicey (8th ed.), pp. 183–184.

^ See also Dicey (8th ed.), p. 189.

^ See also Dicey (8th ed.), p. 191.

^ Joseph Raz (1977), "The Rule of Law and Its Virtue", Law Quarterly Review , 93 : 195–211 at 196 and 198 .

^ Raz, p. 202.

^ Raz, pp. 198–199.

^ Raz, p. 199.

^ a b Raz, pp. 199–200.

^ Raz, pp. 200–201.

^ a b Raz, p. 201.

^ Raz, pp. 201–202.

^ Raz, pp. 202–204.

^ Raz, p. 211.

^ Dworkin, pp. 11–12.

^ Paul Craig (1997), "Formal and Substantive Conceptions of the Rule of Law: An Analytical Framework", Public Law : 467–487 at 478 .

^ "The Rule of Law Concept" .

www.lawteacher.net . Retrieved 2025-04-06 .

^ "Book Review: The Rule of Law by Tom Bingham" .

Immerse Education . Retrieved 2025-04-06 .

^ Luis Flores Ballesteros. "Corruption and development. Does the 'rule of law' factor weigh more than we think?" 54 Pesos May. 2008:54 Pesos 15 November 2008.

[1] ^ Hayek, F.A. (1994).

The Road to Serfdom . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-0-226-32061-8 .

^ Graham, Brad; Stroup, Caleb (2016).

"Does Anti-bribery enforcement deter foreign investment?" (PDF) .

Applied Economics Letters .

23 : 63– 67.

doi : 10.1080/13504851.2015.1049333 .

S2CID 218640318 – via Taylor and Francis.

^ Peter Barenboim, "Defining the rules", The European Lawyer , Issue 90, October 2009 ^ Acemoglu, Daron, and Robinson, James A, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty (Crown Business, 2012).

^ Alphabetical Index of the 192 United Nations Member States and Corresponding Legal Systems ^ Peter Barenboim, Natalya Merkulova.

"The 25th Anniversary of Constitutional Economics: The Russian Model and Legal Reform in Russia, in The World Rule of Law Movement and Russian Legal Reform" Archived 2021-02-24 at the Wayback Machine , edited by Francis Neate and Holly Nielsen, Justitsinform, Moscow (2007).

^ Bica-Huiu, Alina, White Paper: Building a Culture of Respect for the Rule of Law , American Bar Association ^ Pope, Ronald R.

"The Rule of Law and Russian Culture – Are They Compatible?" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 April 2017 .

^ Licht, Amir N. (December 2007).

"Culture rules: The foundations of the rule of law and other norms of governance" (PDF) .

Journal of Comparative Economics .

35 (4): 659– 688.

doi : 10.1016/j.jce.2007.09.001 .

hdl : 2027.42/39991 .

^ a b UNESCO and UNODC (2019).

"Strengthening the rule of lawthrough education: A guide for policymakers" .

Archived from the original on 2020-02-25 . Retrieved 2019-05-22 .

^ a b Kaufman, Daniel et al.

"Governance Matters VI: Governance Indicators for 1996–2006, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4280" (July 2007).

^ "Governance Matters 2008" Archived 28 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine , World Bank .

^ "WJP Rule of Law Index" .

worldjusticeproject.org . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ "WJP Rule of Law Index Insights" .

worldjusticeproject.org . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ 深津 1989 , p. 272, original source: Bishop 1961 , p. 554.

^ Pech, Laurent (10 September 2006). "Rule of Law in France".

Middlesex University – School of Law .

SSRN 929099 .

^ Letourneur, M.; Drago, R. (1958). "The Rule of Law as Understood in France".

The American Journal of Comparative Law .

7 (2): 147– 177.

doi : 10.2307/837562 .

JSTOR 837562 .

^ Peerenboom, Randall (2004).

"Rule of Law in France" .

Asian discourses of rule of law : theories and implementation of rule of law in twelve Asian countries, France and the U.S.

(Digital printing. ed.). RoutledgeCurzon. p. 81.

ISBN 978-0-415-32612-4 .

^ Rule of Law in China: A Comparative Approach . Springer. 2014. pp.

77– 78.

ISBN 978-3-662-44622-5 .

^ Zurn, Michael; Nollkaemper, Andre; Peerenboom, Randy, eds. (2012).

Rule of Law Dynamics: In an Era of International and Transnational Governance . Cambridge University Press. pp.

116– 117.

ISBN 978-1-139-51097-4 .

^ "Rule of Law" . The British Library . Retrieved 3 October 2014 .

^ See also "The rule of law and the prosecutor" . Attorney General's Office. 9 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2019 . Retrieved 20 November 2014 .

^ Hostettler, John (2011).

Champions of the rule of law . Waterside Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-904380-68-9 .

^ Vile, Josh (2006).

A Companion to the United States Constitution and its Amendments . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 80 ^ Osborn v. Bank of the United States , 22 U.S. 738 (1824): "When [courts] are said to exercise a discretion, it is a mere legal discretion, a discretion to be exercised in discerning the course prescribed by law; and, when that is discerned, it is the duty of the court to follow it." ^ Snowiss, Sylvia.

Judicial Review and the Law of the Constitution , pp. 41–42 (Yale University Press 1990).

^ Ogden v. Saunders , 25 U.S.

213, 347 (1827). This was Marshall's only dissent in a constitutional case. The individualist anarchist Lysander Spooner later denounced Marshall for this part of his Ogden dissent. See Spooner, Lysander (2008).

Let's Abolish Government . Ludwig Von Mises Institute. p. 87.

These same issues were also discussed in an earlier U.S. Supreme Court case, Calder v. Bull , 3 U.S.

386 (1798), with Justices James Iredell and Samuel Chase taking opposite positions. See Presser, Stephen. "Symposium: Samuel Chase: In Defense of the Rule of Law and Against the Jeffersonians", Vanderbilt Law Review , vol. 62, p. 349 (March 2009).

^ Harrison, John. "Substantive Due Process and the Constitutional Text," Virginia Law Review , vol. 83, p. 493 (1997).

^ Gedicks, Frederick .

"An Originalist Defense of Substantive Due Process: Magna Carta, Higher-Law Constitutionalism, and the Fifth Amendment" , Emory Law Journal , vol. 58, pp. 585–673 (2009). See also Edlin, Douglas, " Judicial Review without a Constitution" , Polity , vol. 38, pp. 345–368 (2006).

^ Tamanaha, Brian.

How an Instrumental View of Law Corrodes the Rule of Law , twelfth annual Clifford Symposium on Tort Law and Social Policy.

^ Ernst, Daniel R. (2014).

Tocqueville's Nightmare: The Administrative State Emerges in America, 1900–1940 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-992086-0 [ page needed ] ^ a b c US Army Rule of Law Handbook: A Practitioner's Guide for Judge Advocates .

United States Army Center for Law and Military Operations . 2010.

ISSN 2328-3394 .

LCCN 2013230550 .

^ Hurley, Lawrence (July 1, 2024).

"Supreme Court provides win to Trump, ruling he has immunity for many acts in election interference indictment" . NBC News.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2024 . Retrieved July 1, 2024 .

^ Fisher, Joe (2024-07-01).

"Supreme Court rules Trump has partial immunity for official acts only" .

United Press International . Archived from the original on 2024-07-01 . Retrieved 2024-07-01 .

^ For example , Lempinen, Edward High court ruling on presidential immunity threatens the rule of law, scholars warn . Berkely News ^ "Can a sitting U.S. president face criminal charges?" .

Reuters . 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 8 January 2022 .

^ A Sitting President's Amenability to Indictment and Criminal Prosecution (PDF) (Report). Vol. 24, Opinions. Office of Legal Counsel. October 16, 2000. pp.

222– 260 . Retrieved January 4, 2024 .

^ Whether a Former President May Be Indicted and Tried for the Same Offenses for Which He Was Impeached by the House and Acquitted by the Senate (PDF) (Report). Vol. 24, Opinions. Office of Legal Counsel. August 18, 2000. pp.

110– 155 . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

^ Rossiter, Clinton , ed. (2003) [1961].

The Federalist Papers .

Signet Classics . p. 544.

ISBN 978-0-451-52881-0 .

^ Cole, Jared P.; Garvey, Todd (December 6, 2023).

Impeachment and the Constitution (Report).

Congressional Research Service . pp.

14– 15 . Retrieved December 29, 2023 .

^ Sloan, Karen (February 11, 2025).

"American Bar Association says rule of law is under 'attack' " .

Reuters .

^ "Why 2025 will bring a reckoning for the rule of law in America" .

The Economist . November 20, 2024.

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ Liptak, Adam (2025-02-10).

"Trump's Actions Have Created a Constitutional Crisis, Scholars Say" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ Betts, Anna (2025-03-10).

"US added to international watchlist for rapid decline in civic freedoms" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ Gass, Henry (March 19, 2025).

"Threats to judges mount, challenging independence, norms, and rule of law" .

Christian Science Monitor .

ISSN 0882-7729 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ "Trump's Jan. 6 pardons 'undermined rule of law' " .

dw.com . January 25, 2025 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ Pilkington, Ed (2025-03-09).

" 'Nothing like this in American history': the crisis of Trump's assault on the rule of law" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ Reference re Secession of Quebec , 1998 CanLII 793 (SCC), [1998] 2 S.C.R. 217, at paras 44-49, see also, Toronto (City) v Ontario (Attorney General) , 2021 SCC 34 at para 49 ^ Reference Re Secession of Quebec , [1998] 2 SCR 217, at paras 70-78 ^ Dunsmuir v New Brunswick , 2008 SCC 9 (CanLII), [2008] 1 SCR 190, at para 28 ^ Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v Vavilov , 2019 SCC 65, at para 14, citing the Rt. Hon. B. McLachlin, “The Roles of Administrative Tribunals and Courts in Maintaining the Rule of Law” (1998), 12 C.J.A.L.P. 171, at p. 174 ^ Chu, Yun-Han et al.

How East Asians View Democracy , pp. 31–32.

^ Thi, Awzar.

"Asia needs a new rule-of-law debate" Archived 2013-05-07 at the Wayback Machine , United Press International , UPIAsia.com (2008-08-14).

^ Peerenboom, Randall in Asian Discourses of Rule of Law , p. 39 (Routledge 2004).

^ Linda Chelan Li, The “Rule of Law” Policy in Guangdong: Continuity or Departure? Meaning, Significance and Processes. (2000), 199-220.

^ a b Fang, Qiang (2024). "Understanding the Rule of Law in Xi's China". In Fang, Qiang; Li, Xiaobing (eds.).

China under Xi Jinping: A New Assessment .

Leiden University Press .

ISBN 9789087284411 .

JSTOR jj.15136086 .

^ a b c d Fang, Qiang (2024). "Understanding the Rule of Law in Xi's China". In Fang, Qiang; Li, Xiaobing (eds.).

China under Xi Jinping: A New Assessment .

Leiden University Press .

ISBN 9789087284411 .

^ Wang, Zhengxu (2016).

"Xi Jinping: the game changer of Chinese elite politics?" .

Contemporary Politics .

22 (4): 469– 486.

doi : 10.1080/13569775.2016.1175098 .

S2CID 156316938 . Retrieved 24 September 2023 .

^ Creemers, Rogier.

"Communiqué on the Current State of the Ideological Sphere (Document No. 9)" .

DigiChina . Stanford University . Retrieved 24 September 2023 .

^ a b Rudolf, Moritz (2021).

"Xi Jinping Thought on the Rule of Law" .

SWP Comment . Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik.

doi : 10.18449/2021C28 .

S2CID 235350466 . Retrieved 24 September 2023 .

^ Chen, Wang.

"Xi Jinping Thought on the Rule of Law Is a New Development and New Leap ..." CSIS Interpret: China . CSIS . Retrieved 24 September 2023 .

^ Baxi, Upendra in Asian Discourses of Rule of Law , pp. 336–337 (Routledge 2004).

^ Robinson, Simon.

"For Activist Judges, Try India" , Time Magazine (8 November 2006).

^ Staff writer (2 September 2011).

"Do we need judicial activism?" . Retrieved 15 January 2022 .

^ (Boadi, 2001) ^ Green, Carl.

"Japan: 'The Rule of Law Without Lawyers' Reconsidered" Archived 23 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine , Speech to the Asia Society (14 March 2001).

^ See also Goodman, Carl F. (2008).

The rule of law in Japan : a comparative analysis (2nd rev. ed.). Wolters Kluwer Law & Business.

ISBN 978-90-411-2750-1 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Communication From the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions 2020 Rule of Law Report The rule of law situation in the European Union" .

EUR-Lex . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License Archived 2017-10-16 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Statute of the Council of Europe" . Council of Europe.

Archived from the original on 2019-12-30 . Retrieved 2017-12-07 .

^ Goldsworthy, Jeffrey.

"Legislative Sovereignty and the Rule of Law" in Tom Campbell, Keith D. Ewing and Adam Tomkins (eds), Sceptical Essays on Human Rights (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), p. 69.

^ What is the Rule of Law?

Archived 24 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine , United Nations Rule of Law.

^ See United Nations General Assembly Resolutions A/RES/61/39, A/RES/62/70, A/RES/63/128.

^ See United Nations Security Council debates S/PRST/2003/15, S/PRST/2004/2, S/PRST/2004/32, S/PRST/2005/30, S/PRST/2006/28.

^ See United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1325 and 1820.

^ E.g. see United Nations Security Council Resolution 1612.

^ E.g. see United Nations Security Council Resolution 1674.

^ United Nations and the Rule of Law .

^ Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action Part II, paragraph 79 ^ Doss, Eric.

"Sustainable Development Goal 16" .

United Nations and the Rule of Law .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2021 . Retrieved 25 September 2020 .

^ "Secretary-General's report on "Our Common Agenda" " .

www.un.org .

^ Resolution of the Council of the International Bar Association of October 8, 2009, on the Commentary on Rule of Law Resolution (2005) Archived February 24, 2021, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "WJP Rule of Law Index 2023 Global Press Release" .

World Justice Project . 2023-10-25 . Retrieved 2024-12-11 .

^ "World Justice Project | Advancing the rule of law worldwide" .

World Justice Project . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ "WJP | Our Work" .

World Justice Project . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ "WJP | What is Rule of Law?" .

World Justice Project . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ "WJP | Explore the methodology, insights, dataset, and interactive data" .

worldjusticeproject.org . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ "WJP | Download the full report" .

worldjusticeproject.org . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ "WJP Rule of Law Index Factors" .

worldjusticeproject.org . Retrieved 2023-02-08 .

^ "IDLO – What We Do" .

idlo.int . 24 February 2014 . Retrieved 7 February 2015 .

^ "IDLO Strategic Plan" . Archived from the original on 8 February 2015.

^ "About IDLO" .

IDLO – International Development Law Organization . 26 February 2014.

Archived from the original on 2 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "Rule of Law" .

IDLO – International Development Law Organization . February 24, 2014.

Archived from the original on October 2, 2019 . Retrieved February 15, 2022 .

^ "INPROL | Home" . Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bingham, Thomas (2010).

The rule of law . London New York: Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-1-84614-090-7 .

OCLC 458734142 .

Dworkin, Ronald (1985).

A Matter of Principle . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0674554604 .

Gowder, Paul (Winter 2018).

"Resisting the Rule of Men" .

Saint Louis University Law Journal .

62 (2).

Oakeshott, Michael (2006). "Chapters 31 and 32". In Terry Nardin and Luke O'Sullivan (ed.).

Lectures in the History of Political Thought . Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic. p. 515.

ISBN 978-1-84540-093-4 .

OCLC 63185299 .

Shlaes, Amity , The Forgotten Man: A New History of the Great Depression , "The Rules of the Game and Economic Recovery" .

Torre, Alessandro, United Kingdom , Il Mulino, Bologna, 2005.

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] 深津栄一 (1989-01-10). "国際裁判と「法の支配」". In 染野義信博士古希記念論文集刊行会 (ed.).

染野義信博士古希記念論文集：法と現代司法 (第1版 ed.). 勁草書房. pp.

269– 288.

ISBN 4-326-40120-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barry, Norman (2008).

"Rule of Law" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

445– 447.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n273 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Bishop, William W. (February 1961).

"The International Rule of Law" .

Michigan L. R.

59 (4).

Kessler, Jeremy (13 December 2024).

"The Origins of 'The Rule of Law'" .

Law & Contemporary Problems , Volume 87, 2025.

McDermott, John (1 January 1997).

"The Rule of Law in Hong Kong after 1997" .

Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Rule of law .

Hague Journal on the Rule of Law , includes academic articles, practitioner reports, commentary, and book reviews.

The World Justice Project A multinational, multidisciplinary initiative to strengthen the rule of law worldwide.

"Understandings of the Rule of Law in various Legal Orders of the World" , Wiki-Project of Freie Universitaet Berlin.

Eau Claire County Bar Association rule of law talk Frithjof Ehm "The Rule of Law: Concept, Guiding Principle and Framework" Mańko, Rafał.

"Using 'scoreboards' to assess justice systems" (PDF) .

Library Briefing . Library of the European Parliament . Retrieved 23 July 2013 .

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Miscarriage of justice Types of misconduct Prosecutorial misconduct Police misconduct Police corruption Selective prosecution Malicious prosecution Selective enforcement Abuse of process Attorney misconduct Bad apples Abuse of discretion Entrapment False arrest Gaming the system Justice delayed is justice denied Legal malpractice Kangaroo court Sentencing disparity Show trial Trial by media Sharp practice Jury tampering Witness tampering Brady disclosure Spoliation of evidence Civil wrong False evidence False confession Forced confession False accusation Rape Child sexual abuse Police perjury Mistaken identity Eyewitness memory Eyewitness identification Cross-race effect Misinformation effect Tampering with evidence Frameup Wrongful convictions List of wrongful convictions in the United States List of exonerated death row inmates List of miscarriage of justice cases Overturned convictions in the United States Wrongful execution Advocacy Innocence Project National Registry of Exonerations Investigating Innocence Contributing factors Correlates of crime Race and crime Race in the United States criminal justice system Sex differences in crime Judicial misconduct Innocent prisoner's dilemma Obstructionism Offender profiling Racial profiling Perverting the course of justice Blue wall of silence Loophole Ineffective assistance of counsel Prosecutor's fallacy Norms and remedies Legal ethics Exculpatory evidence Right to a fair trial Actual innocence Equal Protection Clause Innocence Protection Act Related concepts Capital punishment in the United States Batson v. Kentucky List of death row inmates in the United States Law portal v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases : National Japan Latvia Portals : Law Politics NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tq5fg
Cached time: 20250817135401
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.951 seconds
Real time usage: 2.353 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17214/1000000
Revision size: 105329/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 403159/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 29498/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 486190/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.150/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20567436/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1939.015      1 -total
 43.16%  836.917      1 Template:Reflist
 12.85%  249.245     37 Template:Annotated_link
 12.32%  238.959      2 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 12.17%  236.031      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.76%  189.205     29 Template:Cite_book
  9.61%  186.384     17 Template:Cite_journal
  8.54%  165.602     35 Template:Cite_web
  6.61%  128.187      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
  6.09%  118.021      1 Template:Politics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25166191:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817135401 and revision id 1304905929. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rule_of_law&oldid=1304905929 " Categories : Legal concepts Political concepts Philosophy of law Separation of powers Conservatism Liberalism Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2022 CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2022 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from May 2025 Articles needing additional references from October 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2023 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Free-content attribution Free content from UNESCO Pages with missing ISBNs This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 22:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rule of law 64 languages Add topic

