Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Phenomenon 2 Significance 3 Dilatancy cut-off 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Dilatancy (granular material) 6 languages Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Reynolds' dilatancy ) Volume change of a granular material under shearing Not to be confused with Dilatant .

Typical curves of stress -difference as a function of strain in dense sands.

In soil mechanics , dilatancy or shear dilatancy [ 1 ] is the volume change observed in granular materials when they are subjected to shear deformations .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This effect was first described scientifically by Osborne Reynolds in 1885/1886 [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and is also known as Reynolds dilatancy . It was brought into the field of geotechnical engineering by Peter Walter Rowe [ de ] .

[ 6 ] Unlike most other solid materials, the tendency of a compacted dense granular material is to dilate (expand in volume) as it is sheared.  This occurs because the grains in a compacted state are interlocking and therefore do not have the freedom to move around one another.  When stressed, a lever motion occurs between neighboring grains, which produces a bulk expansion of the material.  On the other hand, when a granular material starts in a very loose state it may continuously compact instead of dilating under shear.  A sample of a material is called dilative if its volume increases with increasing shear and contractive if the volume decreases with increasing shear.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Dilatancy is a common feature of soils and sands .  Its effect can be seen when the wet sand around the foot of a person walking on beach appears to dry up.  The deformation caused by the foot expands the sand under it and the water in the sand moves to fill the new space between the grains.

Phenomenon [ edit ] Dilatancy of a sample of dense sand in simple shear.

The phenomenon of dilatancy can be observed in a drained simple shear test on a sample of dense sand. In the initial stage of deformation, the volumetric strain decreases as the shear strain increases.  But as the stress approaches its peak value, the volumetric strain starts to increase.  After some more shear, the soil sample has a larger volume than when the test was started.

The amount of dilation depends strongly on the initial density of the soil.  In general, the denser the soil, the greater the amount of volume expansion under shear.  It has also been observed that the angle of internal friction decreases as the effective normal stress is decreased.

[ 9 ] The relationship between dilation and internal friction is typically illustrated by the sawtooth model of dilatancy where the angle of dilation is analogous to the angle made by the teeth to the horizontal. Such a model can be used to infer that the observed friction angle is equal to the dilation angle plus the friction angle for zero dilation.

[ citation needed ] Significance [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Because of dilatancy, the angle of friction increases as the confinement increases until it reaches a peak value. After the peak strength of the soil is mobilized the angle of friction abruptly decreases. As a result, geotechnical engineering of slopes, footings, tunnels, and piles in such soils have to consider the potential decrease in strength after the soil strength reaches this peak value.

Poorly / uniformly graded silt with trace sand to sandy that is non-plastic can be associated with challenges during construction, even when they are hard.  These materials often appear to be granular because the silt is so coarse and thus may be described as dense to very dense.
Vertical excavations below the water table in these soil types exhibit short term stability, similar to many dense sandy soil deposits, in part due to matric suction.
However, as shearing of the soil occurs in the active wedge due to gravity forces, strength is lost and the rate of failure accelerates.  This can be exacerbated by hydrostatic forces developing at the location(s) where water (drains to and) collects in tension cracks in or near the back of the active wedge.   Generally retrogressive spalling manifests, often accompanied by piping / internal erosion.
The use of appropriate filters is critical to managing these materials; a preferred filter might be a #4 sized clear gravel / coarse-grained sand as a commercial aggregate which is generally readily available.  Some non- woven filter fabrics are also suitable.  As with all filters, D15 and D50 compatibility criteria should be checked.

Dilatancy cut-off [ edit ] After extensive shearing, dilating materials arrive in a state of critical density where dilatancy has come to an end. This phenomenon of soil behaviour can be included in the Hardening Soil model by means of a dilatancy cut-off. In order to specify this behaviour, the initial void ratio, e i n i t {\displaystyle e_{init}} , and the maximum void ratio, e m a x {\displaystyle e_{max}} , of the material must be entered as general parameters. As soon as the volume change results in a state of maximum void, the mobilised dilatancy angle, ψ ψ m {\displaystyle \psi _{m}} , is automatically set back to zero.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Triaxial shear tests μ(I) rheology : one model of the rheology of a granular flow.

References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Category:Dilatancy .

^ Tighe, Brian P. (April 2014). "Shear dilatancy in marginal solids".

Granular Matter .

16 (2): 203– 208.

arXiv : 1305.5574 .

doi : 10.1007/s10035-013-0436-6 .

^ Nedderman, R. M. (1992).

Statics and Kinematics of Granular Materials .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511600043 .

ISBN 978-0-521-40435-8 .

[ page needed ] ^ Andreotti, Bruno; Forterre, Yoël; Pouliquen, Olivier (2013).

Granular Media: Between Fluid and Solid . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-03479-2 .

[ page needed ] ^ Reynolds, Osborne (December 1885). "LVII. On the dilatancy of media composed of rigid particles in contact. With experimental illustrations".

The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science .

20 (127): 469– 481.

doi : 10.1080/14786448508627791 .

^ Reynolds, Osborne (12 February 1886).

Experiments showing dilatancy, a property of granular material, possibly connected with gravitation . Royal Institution of Great Britain. Weekly evening meeting.

OCLC 1440246508 .

^ Rowe, P. W. (9 October 1962). "The stress-dilatancy relation for static equilibrium of an assembly of particles in contact".

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences .

269 (1339): 500– 527.

Bibcode : 1962RSPSA.269..500R .

doi : 10.1098/rspa.1962.0193 .

^ Casagrande, A., Hirschfeld, R. C., & Poulos, S. J. (1964). Fourth Report: Investigation of Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics of Compacted Clays. HARVARD UNIV CAMBRIDGE MA SOIL MECHANICS LAB.

^ Poulos, S. J. (1971). The stress-strain curves of soils. Geotechnical Engineers Incorporated. Chicago.

^ Houlsby, G. T. (28 May 1991).

How the dilatancy of soils affects their behaviour (PDF) . 10th European Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering. Florence, Italy.

Bibcode : 1991smfe.conf.....H .

^ PLAXIS 2D CE V20.02: 3 - Material Models Manual.pdf page 78 [ full citation needed ] v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dilatancy_(granular_material)&oldid=1306342628 " Category : Soil mechanics Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Articles needing additional references from March 2020 All articles needing additional references Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 07:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dilatancy (granular material) 6 languages Add topic

