Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 19th century 1.2 20th century 1.3 21st century 2 Arts Quadrangle 3 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 3.1 Majors 4 Admissions 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornell University College of Arts and Sciences 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°26′57″N 76°29′1″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44917°N 76.48361°W ﻿ / 42.44917; -76.48361 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia College of Arts and Sciences An aerial view of the Arts Quad at Cornell University in June 2007 Type Private Established 1865 Dean Peter Loewen Academic staff 526 [ 1 ] Undergraduates 4,251 Postgraduates 1,301 Location Ithaca , New York , U.S.

Website as .cornell .edu The Cornell University College of Arts and Sciences ( CAS or A&S ) is an academic college at Cornell University . It has been part of the university since its founding in 1865, although its name has changed over time. It is the largest of Cornell University's colleges and schools with 4,251 undergraduate and 1,301 students and 526 faculty.

The college grants bachelor's degrees, and masters and doctorates through affiliation with the Cornell University Graduate School . Its major academic buildings are located on the Arts Quad of Cornell University's main campus in Ithaca, New York , which includes some of the university's oldest and most historic buildings.

History [ edit ] 19th century [ edit ] The Arts Quad in 1919 When it was founded in 1865, Cornell University 's faculty was initially undifferentiated. With the founding of the Cornell Law School in 1886 and the concomitant self-segregation of the school's lawyers , however, departments and colleges began to be formed at the university.

20th century [ edit ] In 1903, the academic division that ultimately became the College of Arts and Sciences was renamed as the Academic Department. The College endowed the first professorships in American history , musicology , and American literature .

From 1923 to 1945, Cornell professor Robert Morris Ogden , a professor of psychology and expert on Gestalt psychology , served as the dean of the College of Arts and Sciences.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] 21st century [ edit ] As of 2009, the College of Arts and Sciences teaches 4,100 undergraduates, with 600 full-time faculty members plus a number of lecturers, who teach 2,200 courses.

[ 4 ] In June 2018, Ray Jayawardhana was named the 22nd dean.

[ 5 ] On July 13, 2023, Rachel Bean succeeded Jayawardhana as interim dean.

[ 6 ] Arts Quadrangle [ edit ] 1. Sibley Hall 2. Tjaden Hall 3. White Hall 4. McGraw Hall 5. Morrill Hall 6.

Uris Library 7.

Olin Library 8.

Stimson Hall 9.

Goldwin Smith Hall 10. Klarman Hall 11. Lincoln Hall The Arts Quad on the campus of Cornell University is the site of the university's original academic buildings, which are associated with most of the College of Arts and Sciences' classes and programs. On the western side of the quad, at the top of Libe Slope , are Morrill Hall (completed in 1866), McGraw Hall (1872) and White Hall (1868). All of these buildings are built with native Cayuga bluestone to reflect Ezra Cornell 's utilitarianism and are known as Stone Row. The statue of Ezra Cornell , dating back to 1919, stands between Morrill and McGraw Halls. Across from this statue, in front of Goldwin Smith Hall, sits the statue of Andrew Dickson White , Cornell's other co-founder and its first president.

Lincoln Hall (1888) also stands on the eastern face of the quad next to Goldwin Smith Hall. On the northern face are the domed Sibley Hall and Tjaden Hall (1883). Just off of the quad on the Slope, next to Tjaden, stands the Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art , designed by I. M. Pei (1973).

Stimson Hall (1902), Olin Library (1959) and Uris Library (1892), with Cornell's landmark clocktower, McGraw Tower, stand on the southern end of the quad.

Olin Library replaced Boardman Hall (1892), the original location of the Cornell Law School . In 1992, an underground addition was made to the quad with Kroch Library, an extension of Olin Library that houses several special collections of the Cornell University Library , including the Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections.

[ 7 ] Klarman Hall, the first new humanities building at Cornell in over 100 years, opened in 2016.

[ 8 ] Klarman houses the offices of Comparative Literature and Romance Studies.

[ 8 ] The building is connected to, and surrounded on three sides by, Goldwin Smith Hall and fronts East Avenue.

[ 8 ] Legends and lore about the Arts Quad and its statues can be found at Cornelliana .

White Hall McGraw Hall Morrill Hall Goldwin Smith Hall Lincoln Hall Academics [ edit ] 1987 Arts and Sciences commencement procession On the left, the shield of A&S as seen at the entrance of Willard Straight Hall . On the right, the banner of A&S used at commencement ceremonies.

Majors [ edit ] Programs and courses announcement for 1972–73 The College of Arts and Sciences offers both undergraduate and graduate (through the Graduate School ) degrees. The only undergraduate degree is the Bachelor of Arts . 
The faculties within the college are: Africana Studies and Research Center * American Studies Anthropology Archaeology Asian-American Studies Asian Studies Astronomy/Astrophysics Biological Sciences (with the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences ) Biology & Society Major (with the Colleges of Agriculture and Life Sciences and Human Ecology ) Chemistry and Chemical Biology China and Asia-Pacific Studies Classics Cognitive Studies College Scholar Program (frees up to 40 selected students in each class from all degree requirements and allows them to fashion a plan of study conducive to achieving their ultimate intellectual goals; a senior thesis is required) Comparative Literature Computer Science (with the College of Engineering ) Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (with the Colleges of Agriculture and Life Sciences and Engineering ) Economics Department of Literatures in English* Feminist, Gender, and Sexuality Studies German Studies Government History History of Art Human Biology Independent Major Information Science  (with the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences and College of Engineering ) Jewish Studies John S. Knight Institute for Writing in the Disciplines Latin American Studies Latino Studies Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Studies Linguistics Mathematics Medieval Studies Modern European Studies Concentration Music Near Eastern Studies Philosophy Physics Psychology Religious Studies Romance Studies Russian Science and Technology Studies Society for the Humanities Sociology Theatre, Film, and Dance Visual Studies Undergraduate Concentration *Africana Studies was an independent center reporting directly to the Provost until July 1, 2011.

*The English department was renamed the Department of Literatures in English in October 2020 in response to national anti-racism movements.

[ 9 ] Admissions [ edit ] Admission into the college is extremely competitive. The undergraduate program's 7.3% acceptance rate is below Cornell's 8.4% overall undergraduate acceptance rate. Furthermore, Arts and Sciences has the second lowest acceptance rate of any Cornell college, behind the Dyson School (2.9%).

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Cornell Factbook ^ Dallenbach, Karl M. (September 1959). "Robert Morris Ogden: 1877-1959".

The American Journal of Psychology .

72 (3): 472– 477.

JSTOR 1420068 .

^ F. S. Freeman, Harry Caplan, P. M. O’Leary, Robert Morris Ogden: July 6, 1877 — March 2, 1959 , Cornell University Faculty Memorial Statement ^ College of Arts and Sciences at Cornell University Archived 2009-11-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kelley, Susan (June 26, 2018).

"Ray Jayawardhana named dean of Arts and Sciences" .

Cornell Chronicle . Retrieved August 17, 2018 .

^ Fleischman, Tom (July 12, 2023).

"A&S dean Jayawardhana named provost at Johns Hopkins | Cornell Chronicle" .

Cornell Chronicle . Retrieved 2023-07-15 .

^ Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections ^ a b c Wheeler, Simon (1 February 2016).

"Klarman Hall opens at Cornell University" . The Ithaca Journal . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ Braveboy, Esat (2020-10-14).

"English Faculty Vote to Change Name to 'Department of Literatures in English' " .

The Cornell Daily Sun . Retrieved 2022-11-15 .

^ "Undergraduate admissions" .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Authority control databases International ISNI Other Yale LUX 42°26′57″N 76°29′1″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.44917°N 76.48361°W ﻿ / 42.44917; -76.48361 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornell_University_College_of_Arts_and_Sciences&oldid=1274871102 " Categories : Colleges and schools of Cornell University 1865 establishments in New York (state) Liberal arts colleges at universities in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 18:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornell University College of Arts and Sciences 1 language Add topic

