Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1970s 1.2 1980s 1.3 1990s 1.4 2000s 1.5 Current feminist viewpoints 1.6 Perspectives on lesbian BDSM 1.7 BDSM practitioners 2 Major figures Toggle Major figures subsection 2.1 Patrick Califia 2.2 Andrea Dworkin 2.3 Susan Griffin 2.4 Gayle Rubin 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Feminist views on BDSM 3 languages Español Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Acceptance or rejection of BDSM by feminists The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the English-speaking world and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminist views on BDSM vary widely from acceptance to rejection.

BDSM refers to bondage and discipline, dominance and submission, and Sado-Masochism. In order to evaluate its perception, two polarizing frameworks are compared. Some feminists, such as Gayle Rubin and Patrick Califia , perceive BDSM as a valid form of expression of female sexuality , [ 1 ] while other feminists, such as Andrea Dworkin and Susan Griffin , have stated that they regard BDSM as a form of woman-hating violence .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Some lesbian feminists practice BDSM and regard it as part of their sexual identity.

[ 4 ] The historical relationship between feminists and BDSM practitioners has been controversial.

[ 5 ] The two most extreme positions reflect those who believe that feminism and BDSM are mutually exclusive beliefs, and those who believe that BDSM practices are a fundamental expression of sexual freedom. Much of the controversy is left over from the feminist sex wars (acrimonious debates over sex issues) and the battle between the anti-pornography feminists and the pro-pornography feminists .

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] 1970s [ edit ] In the 1970s, many different divisions of the feminist movement emerged.   As Andrew McBride writes, "During the 1970s, much of the discourse in the feminist movement was dominated by discussions of lesbian feminism . Toward the end of the decade, however, the conversations within feminism began to focus on a new topic: sexuality. This included sexuality of all types, not just lesbian sexuality. Included in the discussions and debates were heterosexuality, pornography, sadomasochism, butch/femme roles, and sex work." [ 6 ] The Lavender Menace and their concept of the woman identified woman and the Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media both came out strongly believing that engaging in BDSM play was contradictory to being a feminist.

[ citation needed ] Samois , a San Francisco-based lesbian BDSM group, maintained that feminists could engage in BDSM without being hypocritical.

[ citation needed ] 1980s [ edit ] During the 1980s, this sex war continued and reached the attention of several academics who attempted to dissect why such a division had occurred. Ardill and O'Sullivan explained the history using the conflict in the London Lesbian and Gay Center as an example.

[ 7 ] Similar conflicts were continuations of the issues in the 1970s.
The Lesbian Sex Mafia founded by Dorothy Allison appeared in New York advocating sex positive feminism and promoting the idea that all women had the right to explore their sexuality in whatever ways they saw fit. The controversial 1982 Barnard Conference on Sexuality , which brought these issues to the attention of academic feminists, is often regarded as officially launching the feminist sex wars.

[ 5 ] [ 8 ] 1990s [ edit ] In the 1990s feminist scholars continued to research and apply different feminist academic frameworks to the questions of sexuality and BDSM in an effort to find a way to bridge the gap between the two groups.  Hopkins, in 1994 applied critical analysis to the feminist viewpoints against Sadomasochistic acts.

[ 9 ] She takes each argument put forth against BDSM practice by women and answers it from within a feminist framework.  In the end, she points out that the issue is not as concrete as feminists may try and paint it and that they may need to examine the concepts in more detail.  In 1995, Teresa Hornsby also applied feminist frameworks to the subject of BDSM and came down on the side that the two were not contradictory.

[ 10 ] Hornsby went further to examine whether or not violence itself was only a masculine activity.

2000s [ edit ] After 2000, advances in technology were opening up the world to more people and BDSM started coming out more and more in popular culture.  Maneesha Deckha applied a postcolonial feminist approach where she suggests treating BDSM as a cultural practice as a means to put to rest the divide between feminists and BDSM practitioners.

[ 11 ] She came to the conclusion as did those in the 1990s that perhaps a more in depth look is needed to determine if feminist viewpoints on BDSM hold up under closer scrutiny.  In addition, Deckha did some work on the concepts of consent and the legality of BDSM, [ 12 ] specifically addressing the question on whether or not women can give consent and whether BDSM activities should be regulated in the context of violence or the context of sexuality.  One point she makes is: if legislation is made in the context of regulating it around sex, then aren't we simply giving the patriarchy further control over women's expression of sexual identity?

[ clarification needed ] Current feminist viewpoints [ edit ] Current [ when?

] feminist viewpoints on BDSM practices continue to be controversial and at odds with one another. Some feminists view SM as an ideal feminist expression of sexual freedom while other feminists say that BDSM, and more particularly SM, reinforce patriarchy and that these practices are contradictory to feminism. Feminists who view BDSM as contradictory to feminism also often believe that women who engage in BDSM practices, and specifically those who play a submissive role in them, have been led by sexist power structures to believe that they enjoy these acts. This feminist viewpoint argues that the individuals who enjoy playing a submissive role in the bedroom only enjoy it because they have been led to believe that it is what is expected of them and that they should enjoy it. This viewpoint argues that if these individuals, particularly women, were able to explore their sexual desires without the influence of a sexist power structure that they would come to very different conclusions about what they enjoy.

[ 13 ] Female submission in BDSM has come under fire by some feminist groups who believe the act oppresses women. However, female subs believe that those who condemn female submission do not understand that it is simply a sexual preference that is far removed from violence against women and patriarchal dominance.

[ 14 ] Perspectives on lesbian BDSM [ edit ] Lesbian SM (Sadism, Submission, Masochism) has been problematic in the analysis of feminist viewpoints on BDSM, especially with regards to whether or not lesbians are recreating patriarchal structures.  Many academic critics do not even tackle the idea of lesbian BDSM. Maneesha Deckha in her article, "Pain, pleasure, and consenting women: Exploring feminist responses to S/M and its legal regulation in Canada through Jelinek's The Piano Teacher " admitted that covering lesbian BDSM made her theories too convoluted to see.

[ 15 ] Such lesbian erasure has been fairly common in second and third wave feminism as lesbian identity has frequently been subsumed in feminist identity. This concept is explained by Calhoun in "The Gender Closet: Lesbian disappearance under the sign 'woman'" [ 16 ] Some, such as Deckha, believe that although lesbians do practice BDSM, they are doing so in an effort to merely recreate the patriarchal power structure in the rest of society. Be it through domination and submission exchange of power, or the butch/femme dynamic, lesbians who interact in this way are convincing themselves that they are outside of patriarchy, when in reality they are reinforcing it because their sexuality is trapped within the patriarchal structure, true consent cannot occur.

[ 17 ] Others, such as Hornsby, believe that lesbians can in fact practice BDSM without recreating patriarchal systems because they have already declared themselves to be outside of those systems.

[ 18 ] BDSM practitioners [ edit ] Feminist writer Clarisse Thorn released a book in 2012 called The S&M Feminist, [ 19 ] in which she often discusses her own experiences. The high-profile feminist anthology Yes Means Yes , published in 2008, also featured an essay about BDSM and feminism by Stacey May Fowles.

Jessica Wakeman wrote of her own experience with SM activities in a follow-up interview after her article First Time For Everything: Getting Spanked was published in 2009. At the time of the interview in October 2010, Wakeman had been writing about feminist issues, including feminism and media criticism, feminism and politics, and feminism and sex for about eight years and considered herself to be a rather active feminist.

[ 20 ] Wakeman discussed how she is able to enjoy spanking play and being dominated and still be a feminist. She discussed how spanking play is a fetish and is no different from other fetishes that individuals have, even though it does involve being hit by one's partner. She also commented that it is important to remember that when an individual is involved with BDSM play, such as spanking, if it is true BDSM play it has been discussed by both partners and either of them can stop the play at any time with a safe word, phrase or action. Furthermore, a real physically or emotionally abusive relationship is not safe and consensual like BDSM play is. There is a difference between what happens in the bedroom and what happens in real life. Wakeman wrote that she is able to enjoy things in the context of sex or flirting that she would not want to happen in her day-to-day life.

[ 20 ] Like other feminist BDSM practitioners, Wakeman rejects the argument that women are taught what they enjoy and led to be submissive by a dominant sexist power structure. Within BDSM communities, it is often said that submissive practitioners are the real dominants because they have the ultimate control over the situation with a safe word.

[ 20 ] Major figures [ edit ] Some feminists practice BDSM and regard it as part of their sexual identity.

[ 4 ] Patrick Califia [ edit ] Main article: Patrick Califia Patrick Califia perceives BDSM as a valid form of expression of female sexuality .

[ 1 ] Andrea Dworkin [ edit ] Main article: Andrea Dworkin Andrea Dworkin has written on the topic and regards BDSM as a form of misogynist violence.

[ 3 ] Susan Griffin [ edit ] Main article: Susan Griffin Like Dworkin, Susan Griffin is against BDSM.

[ 2 ] Gayle Rubin [ edit ] Main article: Gayle Rubin Gayle Rubin is an American cultural anthropologist best known as an activist and theorist of sex and gender politics. She has written on a range of subjects including feminism , sadomasochism , prostitution , pedophilia , pornography and lesbian literature , as well as anthropological studies and histories of sexual subcultures .

Rubin's 1984 essay "Thinking Sex" is widely regarded as a founding text of sexuality studies and queer theory .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] In 2009, the University of Pennsylvania hosted a "state of the field" conference in gender and sexuality studies entitled "Rethinking Sex" in recognition of the twenty-fifth anniversary of Rubin's essay.

[ 23 ] Rubin was a featured speaker at the conference, where she presented "Blood under the Bridge: Reflections on 'Thinking Sex'" to an audience of nearly eight hundred people.

[ 24 ] In 2011 GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies published a special issue, also titled "Rethinking Sex", featuring work emerging from this conference, and including Rubin's piece "Blood under the Bridge: Reflections on 'Thinking Sex'".

[ 25 ] In 1978 Rubin, together with Patrick Califia and others, founded the first lesbian BDSM group in the United States, Samois . Rubin became a prominent sex-positive feminist in the feminist sex wars of the late 1970s and 1980s.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Feminist views on sexuality Feminist sex wars Lesbian Sex Mafia List of universities with BDSM clubs Samois References [ edit ] ^ a b Friedman, Jaclyn (2008).

Yes Means Yes: Visions of Female Sexual Power and a World without Rape . Seattle: Seal Press.

ISBN 978-1-58005-257-3 .

^ a b Griffin, Susan (1982).

"Sadomasochism and the Erosion of Self:A Critical Reading of Story of O" in Against Sadomasochism: A Radical Feminist Analysis . East Palo Alto.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Dworkin, Andrea (1974).

Woman Hating . New York.

ISBN 9780525474234 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Sana Loue; Martha Sajatovic; Keith B. Armitage (2004).

Encyclopedia of Women's Health . p. 363.

^ a b c Douglas, Carol Anne (July 1990). "Realignment in Feminist Sexual Politics".

Love and Politics : Radical Feminist and Lesbian Theories . San Francisco, CA, USA: ISM PRESS. pp.

187– 8.

ISBN 9780910383172 .

^ McBride, Andrew.

"Lesbian History: The Sex Wars" . Archived from the original on 19 July 2012 . Retrieved 6 April 2012 .

^ Ardill, S; O'Sullivan, S (2005). "Upsetting an applecart: Difference, desire and lesbian sadomasochism".

Feminist Review .

80 : 98– 126.

doi : 10.1057/palgrave.fr.9400223 .

S2CID 189905875 .

^ Wilson, Elizabeth (1983-01-01). "The Context of 'Between Pleasure and Danger': The Barnard Conference on Sexuality".

Feminist Review (13): 35– 41.

doi : 10.2307/1394680 .

JSTOR 1394680 .

^ Hopkins, P.D. (1994). "Rethinking sadomasochism: Feminism, interpretation and simulation".

Hypatia .

9 (1): 116.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1994.tb00112.x .

S2CID 145545928 .

^ Hornsby, Teresa (1999). "Gender role reversal and the violated lesbian body: Toward a feminist hermeneutic of lesbian sadomasochism".

Journal of Lesbian Studies .

3 (3): 61– 72.

doi : 10.1300/j155v03n03_06 .

PMID 24786270 .

^ Deckha, Maneesha (2011). "Pain as culture: A postcolonial feminist approach to S/M and women's agency".

Sexualities .

14 (2): 129– 150.

doi : 10.1177/1363460711399032 .

S2CID 143491501 .

^ Deckha, Maneesha (2007). "Pain, pleasure, and consenting women: Exploring feminist responses to S/m and its legal regulation in Canada through Jelinek's The Piano Teacher ".

Harvard Journal of Law & Gender .

30 (2): 425– 459.

^ Deckha, Maneesha (2011). "Pain as a Culture: A Postcolonial Feminist Approach to S/M and Women's Agency".

Sexualities .

14 (129): 129– 150.

doi : 10.1177/1363460711399032 .

S2CID 143491501 .

^ "What is Female Submission? - Definition from Kinkly" .

Kinkly.com . Retrieved 2023-08-03 .

^ Deckha, M. (2007).

"Pain, pleasure, and consenting women: Exploring feminist responses to S/m and its legal regulation in Canada through Jelinek's the piano teacher" (PDF) .

Harvard Journal of Law & Gender . 2.

30 : 425– 459 . Retrieved 5 February 2012 .

^ Calhoun, C (1995). "gender closet: Lesbian disappearance under the sign 'women' ".

Feminist Studies . 1.

21 (7): 7– 34.

doi : 10.2307/3178313 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0021.103 .

JSTOR 3178313 .

^ Deckha, Maneesha (2011). "Pain as culture: A postcolonial feminist approach to S/M and women's agency".

Sexualities . 2.

14 (2): 129– 150.

doi : 10.1177/1363460711399032 .

S2CID 143491501 .

^ Hornsby, Teresa (1999). "Gender role reversal and the violated lesbian body: Toward a feminist hermeneutic of lesbian sadomasochism".

Journal of Lesbian Studies . 3.

3 (3): 61– 72.

doi : 10.1300/j155v03n03_06 .

PMID 24786270 .

^ Clarisse Thorn (27 May 2012).

The S&M Feminist . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2012.

ISBN 978-1477472040 .

(Essays on BDSM, gender and culture) ^ a b c Carpentier, Megan (17 October 2010).

"BDSM And Feminism: "Stop Telling Me What I'm Supposed To Like, D*mn It." " . Jezebel. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 24 May 2012 .

^ Binhammer, Katherine (2002). "Thinking Gender with Sexuality in 1790s' Feminist Thought".

Feminist Studies .

28 (3): 667– 690.

doi : 10.2307/3178798 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0028.317 .

ISSN 0046-3663 .

JSTOR 3178798 .

PMID 17269168 .

Rubin's article, often referred to as a founding text of lesbian and gay studies ^ Lochrie, Karma (2017-05-19). "Thinking Sex with the Early Moderns by Valerie Traub".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

42 (4): 1036– 1038.

doi : 10.1086/690960 .

ISSN 0097-9740 .

Gayle Rubin's foundational essay for queer theory, "Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the Politics of Sexuality" first published in 1984 ^ "Rethinking Sex: Gender and Sexuality Studies - A State of The Field Conference | Gender, Sexuality, and Women's Studies" .

www.sas.upenn.edu . Retrieved 2019-02-25 .

^ Love, Heather (2011-01-01).

"Introduction" .

GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies .

17 (1): 1– 14.

doi : 10.1215/10642684-2010-014 .

ISSN 1064-2684 . Retrieved 2019-02-25 .

^ "Volume 17 Issue 1 | GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies | Duke University Press" .

read.dukeupress.edu . Retrieved 2019-02-25 .

^ Jeffreys, Sheila (1993).

The Lesbian Heresy . North Melbourne, Vic., Australia: Spinifex. p. 130.

ISBN 978-1-875559-17-6 .

^ Weymouth, T. (24–25 September 1999).

"Society of Janus: 25 Years" (PDF) . Society of Janus. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2008.

^ Cameron, Drake (December 2002).

"Drake's Event Guide for Leather Women" .

The Exiles . Archived from the original on 8 February 2005.

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e BDSM Outline Glossary Bondage and discipline B&D or B/D Animal roleplay Bondage hood Bondage positions and methods Bondage suit Collar Equipment Erotic sexual denial Erotic tickling Forced orgasm Head bondage Hogtie bondage Human furniture In culture and media Interrogation scene Japanese bondage Law Metal bondage Mummification Organizations Positions Predicament bondage Rope bondage Self-bondage Sensation play Spreadeagle position Suspension bondage Total enclosure Dominance and submission D&S or D/S Ageplay Bladder desperation Body worship Boot worship Chastity Dominatrix Facesitting Fear play Female submission Feminization Male dominance Male submission Master/slave Medical fetishism Rape fantasy Forced seduction Service-oriented submission Sadomasochism S&M or S/M Breast torture Caning Cock and ball torture Erotic asphyxiation Erotic electrostimulation Erotic spanking Figging Impact play Knife play Play piercing Temperature play Urethral sounding Violet wand Wax play Erotic humiliation In fiction Related topics Aftercare Consent Edgeplay Edging Feminist views on BDSM Gorean subculture International Fetish Day Kink Leathermen Leather pride flag Limits Locktober Munch Pegging Play Play party Risk-aware consensual kink Safeword Sexual fetishism Sexual roleplay Top, bottom, switch Writers Laura Antoniou Pauline Réage Anne Rice Catherine Robbe-Grillet Leopold von Sacher-Masoch Ariel Sands Commentators and theorists Gloria Brame Patrick Califia Dossie Easton Janet Hardy Trevor Jacques Fakir Musafar Gayle Rubin Organizations Eulenspiegel Society FetLife Samois Society of Janus Universities with BDSM clubs Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_views_on_BDSM&oldid=1294937002 " Categories : Feminism and BDSM Feminism and sexuality Sex-positive feminism Sexual ethics BDSM Point of view Misogyny Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2022 Anglophone-centric Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2022 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2022 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 18:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist views on BDSM 3 languages Add topic

