Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of investigation 2 Description 3 Members 4 Places visible 5 Fauna Toggle Fauna subsection 5.1 Bivalves 5.1.1 Pteriomorphia 5.1.2 Heteroconchia 5.2 Vertebrates 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Moenkopi Formation 2 languages Deutsch עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geologic formation in the southwestern United States "Moenkopi" redirects here. For the Hopi community in the U.S. Southwest, see Moenkopi, Arizona .

Moenkopi Formation Stratigraphic range : Early Triassic–Middle Triassic PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Moenkopi at its reference section along the Little Colorado River west of Cameron, Arizona Type Geological formation Sub-units See "Members" section Underlies Chinle Formation Overlies Kaibab Limestone Lithology Primary Sandstone Other Shale Location Coordinates 35°55′05″N 111°29′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 35.918°N 111.489°W ﻿ / 35.918; -111.489 Region Northern Arizona Southeast California East-central Nevada Southern Utah Northwestern New Mexico Southwestern Colorado Country Southwestern United States Type section Named for Moenkopi Wash Named by Ward Year defined 1901 Moenkopi Formation (the United States) Show map of the United States Moenkopi Formation (Arizona) Show map of Arizona Rock layers of the Moenkopi Formation in Zion National Park The Moenkopi Formation is a geological formation that is spread across the U.S. states of New Mexico , northern Arizona , Nevada , southeastern California , eastern Utah and western Colorado . This unit is considered to be a group in Arizona. Part of the Colorado Plateau and Basin and Range , this red sandstone was laid down in the Lower Triassic [ 1 ] and possibly part of the Middle Triassic , around 240 million years ago.

[ 2 ] History of investigation [ edit ] Moenkopi Wash in Coconino County, Arizona (1914).

There is no designated type locality for this formation. It was named for a development at the mouth of Moencopie Wash in the Grand Canyon area by Ward in 1901.

[ 3 ] In 1917 a 'substitute' type locality was located by Gregory in the wall of the Little Colorado Canyon , about 5 miles below Tanner Crossing in Coconino County, Arizona .

[ 4 ] While in the Great Basin, Bassler and Reeside characterized and named the Rock Canyon Conglomerate, Virgin Limestone, and Shnabkaib Shale members in 1921.

[ 5 ] Salt Creek (later replaced by Wupatki and Moqui Members) and the Holbrook Member were found and named in the Black Mesa basin by Hager in 1922.

[ 6 ] The Sinbad Limestone Member was named in the Paradox Basin by Gilluly and Reeside in 1928. Williams and Gregory named the Timpoweap Member in the Plateau sedimentary province in 1947.

[ 7 ] The Wupatki Member was first used in the Plateau Sedimentary Province and its age was modified to Early and Middle(?) Triassic by McKee in 1951.

[ 8 ] Contacts were revised by Robeck in 1956 and Cooley in 1958. The Tenderfoot, Ali Baba, Sewemup, and Pariott Members were named in the Piceance and Uinta Basins by Shoemaker and Newman in 1959.

[ 9 ] The Hoskinnini Member was assigned in the Black Mesa and Paradox basins by Stewart in 1959.

[ 10 ] Contacts were revised again by Schell and Yochelson in 1966. Blakey named the Black Dragon, Torrey, and Moody Canyon members in the Paradox Basin and Plateau Sedimentary Province in 1974.

[ 11 ] Contacts were revised yet again by Welsh and others in 1979.

Kietzke modified the age to Early and Middle Triassic using biostratigraphic dating in 1988. The Anton Chico Member was assigned in the Palo Duro Basin and areal limits set by Lucas and Hunt in 1989.

[ 12 ] In 1991 areal limits were set again by Lucas and Hayden. An overview was completed by Lucas in 1991, Sprinkel in 1994, Hintze and Axen in 1995 and later, Huntoon and others.

[ 13 ] Description [ edit ] Chimney Rock at Capitol Reef National Park The Moenkopi consists of thinly bedded sandstone , mudstone , and shale , with some limestone in the Capitol Reef area. It has a characteristic deep red color and tends to form slopes and benches. The depositional environment varies from fluvial channel and floodplain deposits in the eastern exposures to tidal mudflats in the Cedar Mesa area to deltaic sandstones and shallow marine limestones at Capitol Reef. In eastern Nevada and northwestern Utah, it thickens dramatically, then transitions to the Woodside , Thaynes , and Mahogany formations .

[ 14 ] The general deposition setting was sluggish rivers traversing a flat, featureless coastal plain to the sea. The low relief meant that the shoreline moved great distances with changes of sea level or even with the tides. Thickness varies from a feather edge against the Uncompahgre highlands to the east to over 600 metres (2,000 ft) in southwestern Utah. The thickness varies greatly in the Paradox Basin , where the Moenkopi is thin to nonexistent on the crests of salt anticlines and over 400 meters (1,300 feet) thick in the corresponding synclines .

[ 14 ] [ 2 ] The Moenkopi rests unconformably on Paleozoic beds and the Chinle Formation in turn rests unconformably on the Moenkopi. Both unconformities are locally angular unconformities .

[ 15 ] The lower unconformity corresponds to the regional Tr-1 unconformity and the upper to the regional Tr-3 unconformity. The Tr-1 unconformity represents a hiatus of at least 20 million years while Tr-2 represents a hiatus of about 10 million years.

[ 16 ] Members [ edit ] Members differ considerably from east to west, in part because sandstone beds corresponding to marine transgressions are used to define members to the west but cannot be traced to the east.

[ 17 ] In different regions, by ascending stratigraphic order, the members are: Paradox Basin: [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Tenderfoot Member . This is everywhere in contact with the Cutler Formation on an angular unconformity. Up to 290 feet (88 meters) thick, it consists of basal conglomerate, gypsum , massive cliff-forming mudstone and silty sandstone.

Ali Baba Member . This is red conglomeratic sandstone and red siltstone and was laid down by energetic rivers. A distinctive feature is load structures. Sediment sources were apparently the crests of anticlines, and paleocurrent directions are north to northwest, along the corresponding synclines.

Sewemup Member . This is thinly bedded siltstone, shale, and sandstone, with enough gypsum content to give it a light brown color that contrasts with the darker brown Ali Baba Member.

Parriott Member . This is distinguished from the light brown Sewemup Member by its multihued brown, red, orange and purple strata. Exposures are geographically limited, appearing only in Richardson Amphitheater, Castle Valley , Sinbad Valley , and Big Bend meander of the Colorado River. This member may be separated from the Sewemup Member by a regional unconformity.

Canyonlands and Glen Canyon area: [ 18 ] Hoskinnini Member : Sandstone and siltstone. Found only in the southern part of the area.

Black Dragon Member . Consists of a basal conglomerate; thinly bedded red sandstone, siltstone, and shale deposited in a tidal flat environment; a sandstone sheet; and a second sequence of tidal flat deposits.

Sinbad Limestone Member . Named for the Sinbad region in the San Rafael Swell . Consists of yellowish limestone deposited by a brief marine transgression.

Torrey Member . Red beds signifying a return to subaerial deposition.

Moody Canyon Member . Thinly bedded slope forming siltstone and mudstone with minor evaporites.

San Juan Basin and Tucumcari: [ 12 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Anton Chico Member . Described previously as the red sandstone member of the Santa Rosa Formation, but placed in its own formation after it was recognized to be middle Triassic in age. Subsequently, named as a member of the Moenkopi when its beds were traced west and demonstrated that it was deposited in a single basin with Moenkopi beds in Arizona.

Other members listed in alphabetical order, with asterisks (*) indicating usage by the U.S. Geological Survey and other usages by state geological surveys: [ 22 ] Holbrook Sandstone Member (AZ*) Moqui Member (AZ*) Rock Canyon Conglomerate Member (AZ*, NV*, UT*) Shnabkaib Member (AZ*, NV*, UT*) Timpoweap Member (AZ, NV, UT*) Virgin Limestone Member (AZ*, NV*, UT*) Winslow Member (AZ) Wupatki Member (AZ*) Places visible [ edit ] The Jurassic through Permian stratigraphy of the Colorado Plateau area of southeastern Utah that makes up much of the famous prominent rock formations in protected areas such as Capitol Reef National Park and Canyonlands National Park .  From top to bottom, (Jurassic to Permian): (6)-Rounded tan domes of the Navajo Sandstone , (5)-(dark)-layered red Kayenta Formation , (4)-cliff-forming, vertically jointed, red Wingate Sandstone , (3)-slope-forming, purplish Chinle Formation , (2)-layered, lighter-red Moenkopi Formation, and (1)-white, layered Cutler Formation sandstone.  Picture from Glen Canyon National Recreation Area , Utah.

Found in these geologic locations: [ 22 ] Black Mesa Basin * Great Basin province* Green River Basin [ 2 ] * Las Vegas-Raton Basin Orogrande Basin Palo Duro Basin Paradox Basin * Piceance Basin * Plateau sedimentary province * San Juan Basin * Uinta Basin * Found within these parks (incomplete list): Grand Canyon National Park Capitol Reef National Park Zion National Park Monument Valley Navajo Nation Tribal Park Dinosaur National Monument Glen Canyon National Recreation Area Walnut Canyon National Monument Wupatki National Monument Fauna [ edit ] Bivalves [ edit ] Numerous fossils of bivalves were found in the Olenekian Virgin Limestone Member of the Moenkopi Formation, in south-western Utah. The discovery of 27 species from 18 genera of two subclasses in these sites in 2013 cast doubt on previous claims that the bivalve fauna only recovered in the Middle Triassic after the end-Permian mass extinction .

[ 23 ] The first subclass, Pteriomorphia , includes mainly genera that survived the mass extinction, while the second, Heteroconchia , is represented mainly by genera that evolved in the Early Triassic.

[ 23 ] Pteriomorphia [ edit ] Pteriomorphs reported from the Moenkopi Formation Genus Species Location Member Material Notes Images Bakevellia B.

cf.

exporrecta South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Numerous specimens.

B. costata South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Numerous left valves.

The absence of right valves may be caused by the "hydrodynamic separation of the differentially vaulted valves or to weaker calcification".

[ 23 ] Eumorphotis E. venetiana South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One left valve with shell over 18.3 mm long and 21.7 mm high.

[ 23 ] E. ericius South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Several specimens with shells.

The Anisian Pseudomonotis beneckei is a possibly related species.

[ 23 ] E. virginensis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Several fragmental specimens.

E.

cf.

multiformis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One incomplete left valve.

Leptochondria L. nuetzeli South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member "One articulated specimen and approximately 50 isolated left valves", all with external shell layer preserved.

[ 23 ] L.  curtocardinalis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Several specimens.

Modiolus M.

sp.

South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One right valve (USNM 543477) 6.5 mm long and 4.3 mm high.

Shell interior is unknown. USNM 543477 have similarities with "Modiolus" sp. from the late Griesbachian of Russia, and Promytilus homevalensis from the early Permian of Australia.

[ 23 ] Parallelodon P.?

aff.

beyrichii South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Two right valves.

Promyalina P. putiatinensis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Numerous medium-sized specimens, mostly with outer shell layer but eroded to varying degrees.

Pernopecten P.?

sp.

South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One left valve 27 mm long and 27.6 mm high.

[ 23 ] Heteroconchia [ edit ] Heteroconchs reported from the Moenkopi Formation Genus Species Location Member Material Notes Images Arcomya A.?

sp.

South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Two steinkerns.

Heminajas H.?

cf.

balatonis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Few specimens.

Possibly belong to Neoschizodus thaynesianus .

[ 23 ] Myoconcha M.

cf.

plana South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Several specimens.

Slightly differs from the holotype by greater divergence of the dorsal and ventral margins.

[ 23 ] Neoschizodus N. laevigatus South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One left valve.

N. praeorbicularis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One steinkern.

Permophorus P. triassicus South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Several specimens (steinkerns).

Pleuromya P. prima South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One steinkern.

Tre earliest specimen of the genus.

[ 23 ] Protopis P.?

aff.

waageni South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One left valve over 10 mm long and  10 mm high.

[ 23 ] Sementiconcha S. recuperator South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member 119 steinkerns.

Trigonodus T.

cf.

orientalis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Several specimens.

T.

cf.

sandbergeri South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Several specimens.

Unicaridum U.?

sp.

South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member One left valve.

Assigned to Unicaridum due to subelliptical shape and slightly concave central part of the umbo.

[ 23 ] Unionites U.? fassaensis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Three steinkerns.

U.? canalensis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Four steinkerns.

U.?

cf.

borealis South-western Utah Virgin Limestone Member Numerous specimens.

Specimens look similar to the Griesbachian U. borealis from East Greenland, but the type material is poorly preserved, which makes comparison with published specimens difficult.

[ 23 ] Vertebrates [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Moenkopi Formation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Eocyclotosaurus A diverse fossil vertebrate fauna has been described from the Moenkopi Formation , mainly from the Wupatki Member and Holbrook Member of northern Arizona. Described basal vertebrates include freshwater hybodont sharks , coelacanths , and lungfish . Temnospondyl amphibians are a common component of the fauna.

Temnospondyli include Eocyclotosaurus , Quasicyclotosaurus , Wellesaurus , Vigilius , and Cosgriffius . The rhynchosaur Ammorhynchus is known, but rare.

Anisodontosaurus is an enigmatic reptile only known from a few tooth-bearing jaws. The poposauroid archosaur Arizonasaurus is known from one relatively complete skeleton and a significant amount of other isolated material. Footprints and several fragmentary body fossils are known from dicynodonts . The footprints of Cheirotherium and Rhynchosauroides are common in the Wupatki Member .

See also [ edit ] Geology of the Grand Canyon Sandstone formations of the United States Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Fillmore 2011 , p. 144.

^ a b c Lucas 2017 .

^ Ward 1901 .

^ Gregory 1917 .

^ Bassler & Reeside 1921 .

^ Stewart et al. 1972 .

^ Williams & Gregory 1947 .

^ McKee 1951 .

^ Shoemaker & Newman 1959 .

^ Stewart 1959 .

^ Blakey 1974 .

^ a b Lucas & Hunt 1989 .

^ For the whole section, except where noted: GEOLEX database Bibliographic References ^ a b Fillmore 2011 , p. 143.

^ Lucas 2017 , p. 149.

^ Lucas 2017 , p. 155.

^ Fillmore 2011 , p. 142.

^ a b Fillmore 2011 , pp. 148–154.

^ Lucas 2017 , p. 151.

^ Lucas & Hunt 1987 .

^ Lucas 2021 , p. 231.

^ a b GEOLEX database: Moenkopi ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Michael Hautmann, Andrew B. Smith, Alistair J. McGowan, Hugo Bucher (2013).

"Bivalves from the Olenekian (Early Triassic) of southwestern Utah: Systematics and evolutionary significance" .

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

11 (3): 263-293.

doi : 10.1080/14772019.2011.63751 .

Archived from the original on February 8, 2024.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) References [ edit ] Bassler, Harvey; Reeside, J.B. Jr. (1921), "Oil prospects in Washington County, Utah" (PDF) , Contributions to economic geology, 1921; Part 2, Mineral fuels , U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin, vol. 726-C, pp.

C87 – C107 , retrieved 26 May 2020 Blakey, R.C. (1974). "Stratigraphic and depositional analysis of the Moenkopi Formation, southeastern Utah".

Utah Geological and Mineral Survey Bulletin .

104 .

Fillmore, Robert (2011).

Geological evolution of the Colorado Plateau of eastern Utah and western Colorado, including the San Juan River, Natural Bridges, Canyonlands, Arches, and the Book Cliffs . University of Utah Press.

ISBN 978-1-60781-004-9 .

Gregory, Herbert Ernest (1917).

Geology of the Navajo Country: A Reconnaissance of Parts of Arizona, New Mexico and Utah . U.S. Government Printing Office. pp.

23– 31.

ISBN 978-0341722533 . Retrieved 8 April 2021 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Lucas, Spencer G. (2017).

"Triassic-Jurassic stratigraphy in southwestern Colorado" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geological Society Field Conference Series .

68 : 149– 158 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

Lucas, Spencer G. (2021).

"Triassic stratigraphy of the southeastern Colorado Plateau, west-central New Mexico" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geological Society Field Conference Series .

72 : 229– 240 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 .

Lucas, Spencer G.; Hunt, Adrian P. (1987). "Stratigraphy of the Anton Chico and Santa Rosa Formations, Triassic of East-Central New Mexico".

Journal of the Arizona-Nevada Academy of Science .

22 (1): 21– 33.

JSTOR 40024381 .

* Lucas, S.G.; Hunt, A.P. (1989). "Revised Triassic stratigraphy in the Tucumcari basin, east-central New Mexico". In Lucas, S.G.; Hunt, A.P. (eds.).

Dawn of the age of dinosaurs in the American southwest . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science. pp.

150– 170.

McKee, E.D. (1951).

"Triassic deposits of the Arizona-New Mexico border area" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geological Society Field Conference Series .

2 : 85 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

Shoemaker, Eugene M.; Newman, William L. (1959). "Moenkopi Formation (Triassic? and Triassic) in Salt Anticline Region, Colorado and Utah".

AAPG Bulletin .

43 .

doi : 10.1306/0BDA5E70-16BD-11D7-8645000102C1865D .

Stewart, John H. (1959). "Stratigraphic Relations of Hoskinnini Member (Triassic?) of Moenkopi Formation on Colorado Plateau".

AAPG Bulletin .

43 .

doi : 10.1306/0BDA5E73-16BD-11D7-8645000102C1865D .

Stewart, John H.; Poole, F. G.; Wilson, R. F.; Cadigan, R. A. (1972).

"Stratigraphy and origin of the Triassic Moenkopi Formation and related strata in the Colorado Plateau region, with a section on sedimentary petrology" .

U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper . Professional Paper.

691 : 12.

doi : 10.3133/pp691 .

Ward, Lester F. (Dec 1901).

"Geology of the Little Colorado Valley" .

American Journal of Science .

12 (72). New Haven: 401.

doi : 10.2475/ajs.s4-12.72.401 .

Williams, Herbert E.; Gregory, Norman C. (1947). "Zion National Monument, Utah".

Geological Society of America Bulletin .

58 (3): 211.

doi : 10.1130/0016-7606(1947)58[211:ZNMU]2.0.CO;2 .

GEOLEX database entry for Moenkopi , USGS [Accessed 18 March 2006] (public domain text) Bibliographic References for Moenkopi [Accessed 18 March 2006] External links [ edit ] Media related to Moenkopi Formation at Wikimedia Commons v t e Chronostratigraphy of Colorado v t e Cenozoic chronostratigraphy of Colorado Ph Cz Q Pleistocene Alamosa Formation N Pliocene Zanclean Dry Union Formation Ogallala Formation Miocene Messinian Dry Union Formation Ogallala Formation Aquitanian Arikaree Formation Browns Park Formation Cedar Mountain Formation Flat Tops Volcanics Los Pintos Formation Martins Canyon Formation North Park Formation Santa Fe Formation Troublesome Formation Trump Formation Wagon Tongue Formation Grouse Mountain Basalt Pe Oligocene Chattian Arikaree Formation Brule Formation Central Colorado Volcanics Chadron Formation Conejos Formation Pinnacle Formation Pitch Formation Eocene Blanco Basin Formation Cuchara Formation D2 Sequence Dawson Arkose Echo Park Formation Farisita Formation Huerfano Formation Green River Formation Poison Canyon Formation Uinta Formation Wasatch Formation Paleocene Animas Formation Arapahoe Conglomerate Bridger Formation Denver Formation Fort Union Formation Middle Park Formation Nacimiento Formation Ojo Alamo Formation Raton Conglomerate San Jose Formation South Park Formation Washakie Formation Gravel Mountain Formation Independence Mountain Formation v t e Mesozoic chronostratigraphy of Colorado Ph Mz K Upper Benton Formation Carlile Shale Castle Gate Formation Cliff House Sandstone Codell Sandstone Dakota Group Fort Hays Limestone Fox Hills Formation Fruitland Formation Graneros Shale Greenhorn Shale Hygiene Formation Juana Lopez Kirtland Formation Kremmling Formation Lance Formation Laramie Formation Lewis Formation Lion Canyon Formation Mancos Shale Menefee Formation Mowry Shale Niobrara Formation Pando Porphyry Pictured Cliffs Formation Pierre Shale Point Lookout Formation Smoky Hill Chalk Trinidad Formation Vermejo Formation Williams Fork Formation Lower Burro Canyon Formation Horsetooth Formation J Upper Curtis Formation Morrison Formation Ralston Creek Formation Wanakah Formation Middle Carmel Formation Entrada Formation Garo Formation Page Formation Sundance Formation Lower Glen Canyon Formation Kayenta Formation Navajo Formation Wingate Sandstone Tr Upper Chinle Formation Middle Anisian Chugwater Formation Jelm Formation Moenkopi Formation Lower Olenekian Chugwater Formation Induan Chugwater Formation Lykins Formation Taloga Formation Moenkopi Formation v t e Paleozoic chronostratigraphy of Colorado Ph Pz P Lopingian Changhsingian Chugwater Formation Lykins Formation Taloga Formation Cisuralian Asselian Fountain Formation Madera Formation Blaine Formation Cedar Hills Formation Chase Formation Council Grove Formation Crestone Conglomerate Day Creek Formation Falcon Formation Forelle Formation Glendo Formation Glorieta Formation Hermosa Formation Ingleside Formation Kaibab Limestone Lansing Formation Lyons Formation Maroon Formation Minnekahta Formation Opeche Formation Owl Canyon Formation Phosphoria Formation Sangre de Cristo Formation Satanka Formation Shawnee Formation South Canyon Creek Formation Stone Corral Formation Sumner Formation Wabaunsee Formation Weber Formation Wellington Formation White Horse Group Wolfcamp Formation Yeso Formation C ⁋ Gzhelian Fountain Formation Madera Formation Atoka Formation Belden Formation Cherokee Formation Eagle Valley Evaporite Glen Eyrie Formation Gothic Formation Hermosa Formation Jacque Mountain Formation Kansas City Formation Kerber Formation Keyes Formation Marmaton Formation Maroon Formation Minturn Formation Molas Formation Morgan Round Valley Formation Morrow Formation Sharpsdale Formation M Tournaisian Williams Canyon Formation Beulah Formation Gilman Formation Headscrabble Formation Leadville Formation Molas Formation Osage Formation Spergen Formation St. Louis Formation Ste. Genevieve Formation Warsaw Formation D Upper Famennian Williams Canyon Formation Aneth Formation Dyer Formation Elbert Formation Kinderhook Formation Misener Formation Ouray Formation Parting Formation Pinyon Park Formation O Upper Fremont Limestone Viola Formation Middle Harding Sandstone Simpson Formation Lower Tremadocian Dotsero Formation Arbuckle Formation Manitou Formation Є Furongian Stage 10 Dotsero Formation Paibian Lodore Formation Sawatch Formation Series 3 Guzhangian Lodore Formation Sawatch Formation Reagan Formation Tintic Formation v t e Precambrian chronostratigraphy of Colorado pЄ ♇ Z Tonian Uinta Mountain Group Tava Formation X Siderian Owiyukuts Complex Uncompahgre Formation v t e Chronostratigraphy of Nevada Ph Cz Horse Spring Formation Mz K Willow Tank Formation J Aztec Sandstone Kayenta Formation Moenave Formation Tr Chinle Formation Favret Formation Fossil Hill Member Luning Formation Moenkopi Formation Prida Formation Pz P Coconino Sandstone Hermit Formation Kaibab Formation Pakoon Limestone Queantoweap Sandstone Toroweap Formation C ⁋ Callville Limestone M Monte Cristo Limestone Redwall Limestone D Muddy Peak Formation Sultan Formation Temple Butte Formation Є Bonanza King Formation Bright Angel Shale Dunderberg Shale Frenchman Mountain Dolostone Muav Limestone Nopah Formation Pioche Shale Prospect Mountain Sandstone Tapeats Sandstone pЄ ♇ Granite and schist Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moenkopi_Formation&oldid=1293299952 " Categories : Geologic formations of Arizona Geologic formations of California Geologic formations of Colorado Geologic formations of Nevada Triassic formations of New Mexico Geologic formations of Utah Triassic System of North America Early Triassic North America Middle Triassic North America Triassic Arizona Triassic California Triassic geology of Nevada Triassic geology of Utah Sandstone formations of the United States Natural history of the Grand Canyon Capitol Reef National Park Colorado Plateau Zion National Park Shale formations of the United States Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles needing additional references from May 2020 All articles needing additional references CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 23:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moenkopi Formation 2 languages Add topic

