Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research 2 Notable academic staff 3 Emeritus and alumni 4 References Toggle the table of contents Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge Purpose Research and teaching in Genetics Head of Department Steve Russell Parent organization University of Cambridge Website www .gen .cam .ac .uk The Department of Genetics is a department of the University of Cambridge that conducts research and teaching in genetics .

[ 1 ] Research [ edit ] As of 2017 [update] , the department has 83 researchers over 27 research groups, studying functional genomics , systems biology , developmental biology , cell biology , epigenetic inheritance, microbial genetics and evolution and population genetics .

[ 2 ] Notable academic staff [ edit ] Anne Ferguson-Smith FRS FMedSci , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Arthur Balfour Professor of Genetics , formerly Head of the Department Richard Durbin FRS , Honorary Professor of Computational genomics , Senior Group Leader at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute [ 5 ] Julie Ahringer FMedSci , Professor of Genetics and Genomics , Wellcome Trust Senior Research Fellow , and Director of the Gurdon Institute David Glover FRS FRSE , Wellcome Investigator in the Department of Genetics, formerly Balfour Professor of Genetics As of 2017 [update] , the department also has 50-65 graduate students and about 30 Part II Tripos undergraduate students.

[ 6 ] Emeritus and alumni [ edit ] Notable alumni of the department include: Reginald Punnett FRS , inventor of the Punnett Square Michael Ashburner FRS , gene ontologist and co-founder of the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) [ 7 ] Ronald Fisher , statistical geneticist, who has been described as “a genius who almost single-handedly created the foundations for modern statistical science”.

References [ edit ] ^ "Department of Genetics" . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Department of Genetics - Research Groups" . 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ Anon (2017).

"Professor Anne Ferguson-Smith FMedSci FRS" . London: royalsociety.org. Archived from the original on 5 May 2017.

^ Anon (2012).

"Professor Anne Ferguson-Smith FRS FMedSci" .

acmedsci.ac.uk . London: Academy of Medical Sciences . Archived from the original on 1 August 2016.

^ "Dr Richard Durbin – Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute" . Archived from the original on 28 February 2012.

^ "Department of Genetics - Department" . 13 May 2013 . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ Anon (2014).

"Ashburner, Prof. Michael" .

Who's Who (online Oxford University Press ed.). A & C Black.

doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.U5810 .

(Subscription or UK public library membership required.) v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Department_of_Genetics,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1283739770 " Categories : Departments in the Faculty of Biology, University of Cambridge Genetics education Genetics in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 3 April 2025, at 10:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

