Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aristotle's view 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Oedipus Rex 2.2 Conversion of Paul on the road to Damascus 2.3 The Three Apples 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Peripeteia 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 贛語 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reversal of circumstances,  turning point For a purported perpetual motion generator, see perepiteia .

For the Anagnorisis album, see Peripeteia (album) .

Peripeteia ( / ˌ p ɛr ə p ɪ ˈ t eɪ .

ə / , peripety, alternative Latin form: Peripetīa, ultimately from Greek : περιπέτεια ) is a reversal of circumstances, or turning point, within a work of literature.

Aristotle's view [ edit ] Aristotle , in his Poetics , defines peripeteia as "a change by which the action veers round to its opposite, subject always to our rule of probability or necessity." According to Aristotle , peripeteia, along with discovery, is the most effective when it comes to drama , particularly in a tragedy . He wrote that "The finest form of Discovery is one attended by Peripeteia, like that which goes with the Discovery in Oedipus ...".

[ 1 ] Aristotle says that peripeteia is the most powerful part of a plot in a tragedy along with discovery ( anagnorisis ). A peripety is the change of the kind described from one state of things within the play to its opposite, and that too in the way we are saying, in the probable or necessary sequence of events. There is often no element like Peripeteia; it can bring forth or result in terror, mercy, or in comedies it can bring a smile or it can bring forth tears (Rizo).

This is the best way to spark and maintain attention throughout the various form and genres of drama "Tragedy imitates good actions and, thereby, measures and depicts the well-being of its protagonist. But in his formal definition, as well as throughout the Poetics, Aristotle emphasizes that" ... Tragedy is an imitation not only of a complete action, but also of events inspiring fear or pity" (1452a 1); in fact, at one point Aristotle isolates the imitation of "actions that excite pity and fear" as "the distinctive mark of tragic imitation" (1452b 30).

Pity and fear are effected through reversal and recognition; and these "most powerful elements of emotional interest in Tragedy-Peripeteia or Reversal of the Situation, and recognition scenes-are parts of the plot (1450a 32). has the shift of the tragic protagonist's fortune from good to bad, which is essential to the plot of a tragedy. It is often an ironic twist. Good uses of Peripeteia are those that especially are parts of a complex plot, so that they are defined by their changes of fortune being accompanied by reversal, recognition, or both" (Smithson).

Peripeteia includes changes of character , but also more external changes.  A character who becomes rich and famous from poverty and obscurity has undergone peripeteia, even if his character remains the same.

When a character learns something he had been previously ignorant of, this is normally distinguished from peripeteia as anagnorisis or discovery, a distinction derived from Aristotle's work.

Aristotle considers anagnorisis, leading to peripeteia, the mark of a superior tragedy. Two such plays are Oedipus Rex , where the oracle's information that Oedipus has killed his father and married his mother brings about his mother's death and his own blindness and exile, and Iphigenia in Tauris , where Iphigenia realizes that the strangers she is to sacrifice are her brother and his friend, resulting in all three of them escaping Tauris. These plots he considered complex and superior to simple plots without anagnorisis or peripeteia, such as when Medea resolves to kill her children, knows they are her children, and does so. Aristotle identified Oedipus Rex as the principal work demonstrating peripety. (See Aristotle's Poetics .) Examples [ edit ] Oedipus Rex [ edit ] In Sophocles' Oedipus Rex , the peripeteia occurs towards the end of the play when the Messenger brings Oedipus news of his parentage.  In the play, Oedipus is fated to murder his father and marry his mother.  His parents, Laius and Jocasta, try to forestall the oracle by sending their son away to be killed, but he is actually raised by Polybus and his wife, Merope, the rulers of another kingdom.  The irony of the Messenger’s information is that it was supposed to comfort Oedipus and assure him that he was the son of Polybus. Unfortunately for Oedipus, the Messenger says, "Polybus was nothing to you, [Oedipus] that’s why, not in blood" (Sophocles 1113).

The Messenger received Oedipus from one of Laius’ servants and then gave him to Polybus.  The plot comes together when Oedipus realizes that he is the son and murderer of Laius as well as the son and husband of Jocasta.  Martin M. Winkler says that here, peripeteia and anagnorisis occur at the same time "for the greatest possible impact" because Oedipus has been "struck a blow from above, as if by fate or the gods. He is changing from the mighty and somewhat arrogant king of Thebes to a figure of woe" (Winkler 57).

Conversion of Paul on the road to Damascus [ edit ] Main article: Conversion of Paul The instantaneous conversion of Paul on the road to Damascus is a classic example of peripeteia , which Eusebius presented in his Life of Constantine as a pattern for the equally revelatory conversion of Constantine . Modern biographers of Constantine see his conversion less as a momentary phenomenon than as a step in a lifelong process.

[ 2 ] The Three Apples [ edit ] In " The Three Apples ", a medieval Arabian Nights , after the murderer reveals himself near the middle of the story, he explains his reasons behind the murder in a flashback , which begins with him going on a journey to find three rare apples for his wife, but after returning finds out she cannot eat them due to her lingering illness. Later at work, he sees a slave passing by with one of those apples claiming that he received it from his girlfriend, a married woman with three such apples her husband gave her. He returns home and demands his wife to show him all three apples, but she only shows him two. This convinces him of her infidelity and he murders her as a result. After he disposes of her body, he returns home, where his son confesses that he had stolen one of the apples and that a slave, to whom he had told about his father's journey, had fled with it. The murderer thus realizes his guilt and regrets what he has just done.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The second use of peripety occurs near the end. After finding out about the culprit behind the murder, the protagonist Ja'far ibn Yahya is ordered by Harun al-Rashid to find the tricky slave within three days, or else he will have Ja'far executed instead. After the deadline has passed, Ja'far prepares to be executed for his failure and bids his family farewell. As he hugs his youngest daughter, he feels a round object in her pocket, which is revealed to be the same apple that the culprit was holding. In the story's twist ending, the daughter reveals that she obtained it from their slave, Rayhan. Ja'far thus realizes that his own slave was the culprit all along. He then finds Rayhan and solves the case, preventing his own execution. That was a plot twist .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Deus ex machina Notes [ edit ] ^ Aristotle, Poetics , 1452a ^ e.g. Paul Stephenson, Constantine, Roman Emperor, Christian Victor 2010: the trope of peripaty is discussed in "Constantine's Conversion", pp168f.

^ Pinault, David (1992), Story-Telling Techniques in the Arabian Nights , Brill Publishers , pp.

86– 95, ISBN 90-04-09530-6 ^ Marzolph, Ulrich (2006), The Arabian Nights Reader , Wayne State University Press , pp.

240– 1, ISBN 0-8143-3259-5 ^ Pinault, David (1992), Story-Telling Techniques in the Arabian Nights , Brill Publishers , pp.

95– 6, ISBN 90-04-09530-6 ^ Marzolph, Ulrich (2006), The Arabian Nights Reader , Wayne State University Press , pp.

241– 2, ISBN 0-8143-3259-5 Further reading [ edit ] Aristotle, Poetics , trans. Ingram Bywater; Modern Library College Editions, New York, 1984.

Finlayson, James G., "Conflict and Reconciliation in Hegel's Theory of the Tragic", Journal of the History of Philosophy 37 (1999); pp. 493–520.

Lucas, F. L.

, "The Reverse of Aristotle" (an essay on peripeteia), Classical Review , Vol. XXXVII Nos 5,6; Aug.–Sept. 1923; pp. 98–104.

[1] Rizo, Juan Pablo Mártir, Poetica de Aristoteles traducida de Latin ; M. Newels Elias L. Rivers MLN, Vol. 82, No. 5, General Issue. (Dec., 1967), pp. 642–643 Silk, M. S., Tragedy and the Tragic: Greek Theatre and Beyond ; Oxford, 1998; pp. 377–380.

Smithson, Isaiah, Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol. 44, No. 1. (Jan. - Mar., 1983), pp. 3–17.

Sophocles, Oedipus the King , in The Three Theban Plays , trans.

Robert Fagles ; Comp.

Bernard Knox ; New York: Penguin, 1982.

Winkler, Martin M., Oedipus in the Cinema , Arethusa, 2008; pp. 67–94.

External links [ edit ] Britannica Online Encyclopedia F. L. Lucas, "The Reverse of Aristotle": a discussion of Peripeteia ( Classical Review , August–September 1922) Clifford Leech, Tragedy v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pgzqw
Cached time: 20250814215350
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.369 seconds
Real time usage: 0.510 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 638/1000000
Revision size: 9979/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 35983/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 544/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 24219/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.262/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14380207/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  441.605      1 -total
 26.23%  115.826      1 Template:Langx
 23.71%  104.686      1 Template:Reflist
 20.62%   91.070      4 Template:Citation
 19.05%   84.147      1 Template:Narrative
 18.48%   81.595      1 Template:Navbox
 17.57%   77.598      1 Template:Short_description
 10.89%   48.089      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.66%   29.410      1 Template:IPAc-en
  4.75%   20.989      2 Template:For Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:461415:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215350 and revision id 1294950261. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peripeteia&oldid=1294950261 " Categories : Ancient Greek theatre Narratology Plot (narrative) Poetics Concepts in ancient Greek aesthetics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peripeteia 21 languages Add topic

