Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of research 2 External classification 3 Languages and language families Toggle Languages and language families subsection 3.1 Dixon & Crowley (1981) 3.2 Bowern (2012) 3.3 Lingua franca 3.4 Bass Strait Pidgin 3.5 Palawa kani 4 Phonology 5 Grammar 6 Vocabulary 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Tasmanian languages 23 languages Afrikaans Asturianu Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Latina Македонски മലയാളം 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indigenous languages of Tasmania Tasmanian (geographic) Fanny Cochrane Smith , last speaker of the Flinders Islands Lingua franca, a Tasmanian Aboriginal language.

[ 1 ] Geographic distribution Originally, throughout Tasmania ; after the Black War , around the Bass Strait ; now, presumably, only, in the Flinders Island and other parts of northeastern Tasmania Ethnicity Aboriginal Tasmanians Extinct 1905, with the extinction of the Flinders Islands Lingua franca at the death of Fanny Cochrane Smith [ 1 ] Linguistic classification at least three language families: Northeastern Oyster Bay – Southeastern Northern – Western ?

Language codes Glottolog tasm1247 Approximate ethnic divisions in pre-European Tasmania The Tasmanian languages were the languages indigenous to the island of Tasmania , used by Aboriginal Tasmanians . The languages were last used for daily communication in the 1830s, although the terminal speaker , Fanny Cochrane Smith , survived until 1905.

History of research [ edit ] Tasmanian languages are attested by three dozen word lists, the most extensive being those of Joseph Milligan [ 2 ] and George Augustus Robinson . All these show a poor grasp of the sounds of Tasmanian, which appear to have been fairly typical of Australian languages in this parameter [ clarification needed ] .

Plomley (1976) presents all the lexical data available to him in 1976. Crowley and Dixon (1981) summarise what little is known of Tasmanian phonology and grammar. Bowern (2012) organises 35 different word lists and attempts to classify them into language families.

Fanny Cochrane Smith recorded a series of wax cylinder recordings of Aboriginal songs, the only existing audio recording of a Tasmanian language, though they are of extremely poor quality. In 1972, her granddaughters still remembered some words and a song.

Robert M. W. Dixon , who interviewed them as part of his research with Terry Crowley , concluded that "there is virtually no data on the grammar and no running text so that it is impossible to say very much of linguistic interest about the Tasmanian languages".

[ 3 ] However, from the scant sources that are available, Tasmanian people are seeking to recover their lost languages and traditions. The largest language revival project to date is the Palawa kani project.

[ 4 ] External classification [ edit ] Little is known of the languages and no relationship to other languages is demonstrable. It appears that there were several language families on Tasmania, which would be in keeping with the long period of human habitation on the island. In the 1970s Joseph Greenberg proposed an Indo-Pacific superfamily which includes Tasmanian along with Andamanese and Papuan (but not Australian ). However, this superfamily proposal is rejected by the vast majority of historical linguists .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Languages and language families [ edit ] Based on short wordlists, it appears that there were anywhere from five to sixteen languages on Tasmania, [ 7 ] related to one another in perhaps four language families .

[ 8 ] There are historical records as well that indicate the languages were not mutually intelligible and that a lingua franca was necessary for communication after resettlement on Flinders' Island. J.B. Walker, who visited the island in 1832 and 1834, reported: Robert Clark, the catechist, states that on his arrival at the Flinders' Settlement in 1834, eight or ten different languages or dialects were spoken amongst the 200 natives then at the establishment, and that the blacks were 'instructing each other to speak their respective tongues'.

— JB Walker (1898:179) [ 9 ] Reports from the subsequent settlement at Oyster Cove were similar: The Aboriginal dialects made it difficult for the members of one family to understand that of another; "now however they all seem to have merged into one" — Lennox (1984:60) [ 10 ] Schmidt (1952) [ 11 ] distinguished five languages in the word lists: Tasmanian languages Eastern Tasmanian languages North-East East East Central (Oyster Bay) South-East Western Tasmanian languages North Coast West Coast The Eastern languages seem to share a common vocabulary, and use the nominal particle na . The Western languages use leā instead of na .

Dixon & Crowley (1981) [ edit ] Tasmanian languages according to Dixon & Crowley (1981). Grey was uninhabited at time of contact.

Dixon and Crowley (1981) reviewed the data. They evaluate 13 local varieties, and find 6 to 8 languages, with no conclusion on two additional varieties (those of the west coast) due to lack of data. Listed here (clockwise from the northwest) with their Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS) codes, [ 12 ] they are: North-western (T3) and Robbins Island  (T11*) [northern NW region on the map displayed in the box above at right] North-western and Robbins Island are probably dialects of a single language; Circular Head may be a dialect as well.

Although Circular Head (T12*) [NE strip of NW region on map] shares only half its vocabulary with Northwestern & Robbins Island, it cannot be ruled out as a dialect of the NW language due to the poor state of the data.

Northern (T1) [N region on map] Probably a separate language, though it shares 50% of vocabulary with Piper River and cannot be ruled out as a dialect of the NE language.

Port Sorell (T13*) [N coast of N Midlands region on map] It is "unlikely" there is a close genetic connection with any other Tasmanian language.

Piper River (T14*), Cape Portland (T9*), and Ben Lomond (T7) [NE and Ben Lomond regions on map] These appear to form an interrelated group. Either the first two or all three could be dialects of a single language. May form a language with Northern, which is separated geographically by Port Sorell.

North Midlands (T4) [central N Midlands region on map] "Must" be a distinct language.

Oyster Bay (T2), Big River (T8*), and Little Swanport (T15*) [Oyster Bay and Big River on map] Oyster Bay and Big River share 85% of vocabulary and are very likely to be dialects. Little Swanport could be a dialect as well.

South-eastern (T5) [SE region on map] Appears to be a distinct language from Oyster Bay / Big River.

The two western varieties are South-western (T10*) and Macquarie Harbour (T6) [southern and northern ends of SW region on map] Bowern (2012) [ edit ] Tasmanian language families per Bowern (2012). Oyster Bay and SE are clearly related. Northern and Western may be as well.

One of the difficulties in interpreting Tasmanian data is the fact that some of the 35 word lists mix data from various locations, and even for the rest, in some cases the location is not recorded. Bowern (2012) used a clustering algorithm to identify language admixture, and further techniques to conclude that the 26 unmixed lists with more than 100 words record twelve Tasmanian varieties (at p < 0.15) that may be assumed to be distinct languages.

[ 13 ] Due to the poor attestation, these varieties have no names apart from the names of the wordlists they are recorded in. They fall into five clusters; Bayesian phylogenetic methods [ clarification needed ] demonstrate that two of these are clearly related, but that the others cannot be related to each other (that is, they are separate language families) based on existing evidence. Given the length of human habitation on Tasmania, it should not be expected for the languages to be demonstrably related to each other. The families, and the number of attested languages, are: [ 8 ] Tasmanian Western Tasmanian (2–3) [T3, T6, T10, T11, T12]: Northwestern and Southwestern Northern Tasmanian (2) [T1, T13]: Northern coast Northeastern Tasmanian (3) [T4, T7, T9, T14]: Northeastern, Ben Lomond, and North Midlands Eastern Tasmanian (5) Oyster Bay (2) [T2, T8, T15]: Oyster Bay and Big River valley Bruny (Southeastern Tasmanian) (3) [T5]: Bruny Island Bowern identifies several of the wordlists of unknown provenance: The Norman list is northeastern, for example, while the Lhotsky and Blackhouse lists attest to an additional language in the northeastern family; the Fisher list is western, as are the Plomley lists, though with admixture. Two of the lists reported to be from Oyster Bay contain substantial northeastern admixture, which Bowern believes to be responsible for classifications linking the languages of the east coast.

[ 8 ] Only 24 words, out of 3,412, are found in all five branches, and most of these are words for recently introduced items, such as guns and cattle, or cultural or mythological terms which could easily be borrowed. Thus there is no good evidence for a Tasmanian language family. There is, however, slight evidence that the northern and western families may be distantly related (the western varieties are especially poorly attested). The only words found in all regions that are not obvious candidates for borrowing and which do not have serious problems with attestation are *pene- 'laugh', *taway 'go', *liya 'water', *wii 'wood', and perhaps *tina 'belly'. However, there are other local words for 'laugh', 'water', and 'belly', and the reflexes of *taway are so similar as to be suspicious. *Wii is therefore the most promising; it is found as wiya, wina, wikina ( -na is a common ending) and wii , glossed as wood, tree, brush, or timber. Although there is no evidence that the Tasmanian languages were related to the languages of mainland Australia (and if they were, they would presumably be related to languages which had been lost to the wave of Pama–Nyungan expansion), the fact that there is no established Tasmanian family should be kept in mind when attempting to establish such connections.

[ 8 ] [ 14 ] Lingua franca [ edit ] Flinders Island lingua franca Fanny Cochrane Smith , last speaker of the Flinders Island lingua franca [ 1 ] Region Flinders Island , Tasmania Ethnicity Tasmanian Extinct 1905, with the death of Fanny Cochrane Smith [ 1 ] Language family koine , creole , pidgin , or a mixed language , based on the Eastern and Northeastern Tasmanian languages [ 1 ] Language codes ISO 639-3 – Not to be confused with Flinders Island language .

Recording the songs of Fanny Cochrane Smith by using a phonograph .

1903 recording It is unknown if the Tasmanian lingua franca was a koine , creole , pidgin , or mixed language .

[ 15 ] However, its vocabulary was evidently predominantly that of the eastern and the northeastern languages because of the dominance of those peoples on the settlements.

[ 1 ] Bass Strait Pidgin [ edit ] The unattested Bass Strait Pidgin of Flinders Island consisted primarily of English vocabulary, but is reported to have had a mixture of words from Tasmanian languages, introduced by the women whom the island's sealers had abducted from Tasmania.

[ 16 ] Palawa kani [ edit ] Palawa kani is an in-progress constructed language, built from a composite of surviving words from various Tasmanian Aboriginal languages.

[ 17 ] Phonology [ edit ] The phonology is uncertain, due to the poor nature of the transcriptions. Schmidt (1952) reconstructed the following for East-central and South-east Tasmanian, as well as parts from Blake; Dixon (1981): Labial Coronal Velar Glottal plain palatalized dental plain palatalized plain palatalized Stop p / b pʲ / bʲ t̪ / d̪ t / d tʲ / dʲ k / ɡ kʲ / ɡʲ ( ʔ ) Fricative x Nasal m mʲ ( n̪ ) n nʲ ŋ Sonorant central w r / ɹ rʲ j lateral l lʲ There may have also been a lamino-dental nasal [ n̪ ], as well as a glottal stop .

Vowels included five short / a e i o u /, and five long vowels / aː eː iː oː uː /, and nasal vowels such as " [ʌ̃] " in French pronunciations. Vowels in unstressed positions may be heard as a central sound [ə] .

[ 18 ] Stress appears to have been on the penultimate syllable.

Tasmanian languages differ from most of those on the mainland in having words that begin with l or r , as well as with consonant clusters such as br and gr . However, many of the languages of Victoria , across the Bass Strait, also allow initial l , and the language of Gippsland nearest Tasmania, Gunai , also had words beginning with trilled r and the clusters br and gr.

[ 19 ] Blench (2008) notes however that some supposed Tasmanian speakers may actually have been indigenous people from South (mainland) Australia.

[ 20 ] Grammar [ edit ] East-Central Tasmanian is used for illustration, unless otherwise indicated.

Nouns There is no evidence of plurality or gender. The nominal particle may have marked the end of a noun phrase.

Eastern Tas.

Western Tas.

woman lowa-na nowa-leā hand rī-na ri-leā kangaroo tara-na tara-leā Possession was indicated by the possessor (noun) dropping the nominal particle: wurrawa lowa-na 'the wife of the deceased' Postpositions Postpositions , or perhaps case endings, include le/li 'behind', ra 'without', to/ta (change in direction): There is also an adverbial suffix -re in lene-re 'backwards'.

lunamea ta 'to my house', nee-to [nito] 'to you' Adjectives Adjectives follow the noun, and some end in -ne ( pāwine 'small') or -ak ( mawbak 'black', tunak 'cold').

Pronouns Only singular personal pronouns are known: mī-na 'I', nī-na 'you', nara 's/he'. (In Northeast Tas, these are mi-na, ni-na, nara .) These form possessive suffixes: loa-mi 'my woman'. Pronouns might be incorporated in the verb: tiena-mia-pe 'give me!'.

Demonstrative pronouns are wa/we 'this' and ni/ne 'that': Riena narra wa 'this is my hand'.

Numerals marra(wa) 'one', pʲa(wa) 'two'.

Verbs The negative particle is noia noia meahteang meena neeto linah 'I won't give you any water' (not give I to-you water) In Southeast Tas., suffixes -gara/-gera and -gana/-gena appear on verbs. Their meaning is unknown: nunug(e)ra 'to wash', tiagarra 'to keep', nugara 'to drink' longana 'to sleep', poenghana 'to laugh', winganah 'to touch' Vocabulary [ edit ] Some basic words: [ 21 ] nanga 'father' poa 'mother' (Northeast) pögöli-na 'sun' wīta 'moon' romtö-na 'star' pö ön'e-na 'bird' wī-na 'tree' poime-na 'mountain' waltomo-na 'river' (Northeast) nani 'stone' The difficulty in analysing the records is apparent in the conflicting recorded forms for the words for "two" ("Fr" means a French transcription): [ 14 ] Tasmanian words for "two" Region Transcription Possible pronunciation South- eastern pooalih [puwali] bõw.lȳ [pawuli] boula (Fr) [pula] boulla (Fr) [pula] bura [pura] bourai (Fr) [pure] cal.a.ba.wa [kalapawa] North- eastern calabawa [kalapawa] kar.te.pew.er [katapiwa] kateboueve (Fr) [katapuwe(?)] narn.ne.meen.er [nanamina] nar.ner.pee [nanapi] par.le.the.meen.er [palatamina] pay'ãnĕrbĕrwãr [peyanapawa] North- western may [me] nue.won.ner [nyuwana] neu.on.ne [nyuwana] py.at.er.lare [payatale] pie.nare.re.pare [paynerape] by.ar.ty [payatay] Oyster Bay py.wer [paywa] pye.er.wer [payawa] pye.er.wer [payawa] pia-wah [payawa] Given the possibility that suffixes are responsible for some of the differences, there are still clearly several distinct words, though it is difficult to say how many or what their forms were.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f NJB Plomley, 1976b.

Friendly mission: the Tasmanian journals of George Augustus Robinson 1829–34 . Kingsgrove. pp. xiv–xv.

^ J. Milligan, 1859.

Vocabulary of the Aboriginal Tribes of Tasmania , vol. III of the Papers and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Van Dieman's Land . Hobart.

^ "Tasmanian language" .

The Canberra Times . 1 September 1976.

^ Bernard Comrie, Stephen Matthews, and Maria Polinsky. The Atlas of Languages. New York: Facts on File. Page 116.

^ Blench, Roger (2008), The Languages Of The Tasmanians And Their Relation To The Peopling Of Australia: Sensible and Wild Theories ^ George van Driem Languages of the Himalayas , vol. 1, pp 139–141 ^ Crowley, Field Linguistics, 2007:3 ^ a b c d Claire Bowern, September 2012, "The riddle of Tasmanian languages", Proc. R. Soc. B , 279, 4590–4595, doi: 10.1098/rspb.2012.1842 ^ JB Walker, 1898.

"Notes on the Aborigines of Tasmania", extracted from the Manuscript Journals by George Washington Walker, Papers and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Tasmania for 1897.

pp 145–175. Quoted in Wurm, Mühlhäusler, & Tryon, 1996.

^ Geoff Lennox, 1984.

Oyster Cove historic site. A resource document . Hobart.

^ W. Schmidt, 1952.

Die Tasmanischen Sprachen.

Utrecht and Antwerp.

^ Australian Indigenous Languages Database ^ The choice of p < 0.15 is rather arbitrary. A more exacting criterion of p < 0.10 results in twenty varieties; relaxing it to < 0.20, on the other hand, makes little difference, reducing the number to eleven (with two rather than three Bruny/SE varieties).

^ a b Bowern (2012), supplement ^ Wurm, Mühlhäusler, & Tryon, 1996 ^ Rob Amery & Peter Mühlhäusler (2011) 'Pidgin English in New South Wales', in Wurm, Mühlhäusler, & Tryon (eds.), Atlas of Languages of Intercultural Communication in the Pacific, Asia, and the Americas ^ "T16: Palawa kani" . 26 July 2019.

^ Taylor, John (2006).

The Palawa (Tasmanian Aboriginal) Languages: A Preliminary Discussion (PDF) . p. 139.

^ Barry Blake, 1991.

Australian aboriginal languages: a general introduction ^ Blench, Roger (2008). "The languages of the Tasmanians and their relation to the peopling of Australia: Sensible and wild theories".

Australian Archaeology .

67 (1).

^ "Tasmanian". In George Campbell, 1991.

Compendium of the World's Languages , vol. II.

Bibliography [ edit ] Schmidt, Wilhelm (1952).

Die Tasmanischen Sprachen: Quellen, Gruppierungen, Grammatik, Wörterbücher (The Tasmanian languages: Sources, Groupings, Grammar, Dictionaries), Spectrum Publishers, Utrecht-Anvers Crowley, T; Dixon, R. M. W. (1981). "Tasmanian". In Dixon, R. M. W.; Blake, B. J. (eds.).

Handbook of Australian languages . Vol 2. Canberra: Australian National University Press. pp.

394– 421.

ISBN 0708112129 .

Bowern, Claire ; Lau, Tyler; & Plomley, N. J. B. (2019).

Plomley (1976) Data on the Languages of Tasmania (Version 1) [Data set]. Zenodo.

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.2667301 Plomley, N. J. B. (1976).

A Word-list of the Tasmanian Aboriginal Languages . Launceston.

ISBN 0724601988 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Wurm, Stephen; Mühlhäusler, Peter; Tryon, Darrell T. (1996).

Atlas of languages of intercultural communication in the Pacific, Asia and the Americas . De Gruyter Mouton.

ISBN 3110134179 .

External links [ edit ] An overview of the Tasmanian languages AIATSIS: Aboriginal Australia Wallmap (for sale) v t e Australian Aboriginal and Tasmanian languages Pama–Nyungan subgroups Southeastern Victorian P–N Lower Murray Yotayotic Gippsland Kulin Bungandidj New South Wales P–N Yuin–Kuric Dhanggati ?

Anewan (Nganyaywana) ?

Central New South Wales Wiradhuric Barranbinja Muruwari North Coast Durubalic Bandjalangic Gumbaynggiric Waka–Kabic Northern Western Torres Strait Kalaw Lagaw Ya Paman Northern Paman Uradhi Wik Middle Paman Umpilaic Umbindhamuic Lamalamic Umbuygamu Mbarrumbathama Southwest Paman Kuuk Thayorre Southern Paman Mbabaram Flinders Island Maric Northern Warrongo Eastern Biri Southern Bidyara–Gungabula Margany–Gunya Bindal ?

Guwa–Yanda ?

Guwa Yanda Kingkel ?

Dharumbal ?

Bayali ?

Lower Burdekin ?

Dyirbalic Dyirbal Warrgamay Nyawaygi Lower Burdekin ?

Yimidhirr–Yalanji–Yidinic Guugu Yimidihirr Kuku Yalanji Yidiny Gulf Kalkatungic Kalkatungu Yalarnnga Mayi Central Arandic–Thura–Yura Arandic Arrernte Kaytetye Thura–Yura Wirangu Kaurna Adnyamathanha Karnic Northern (Palku) Pitta-Pitta Western Arabana–Wangkangurru Central Diyari Yandruwandha Eastern Wilson River (Wangkumara) Bulloo River (Galali) ?

Yarli Paakantyi Western Yolŋu Dhaŋu–Djaŋu Ritharrŋu Nhaŋu Dhuwal–Dhuwala Djambarrpuyŋu Gupapuyŋu Djinaŋ Djinba Ganhalpuyŋu Ngarna/Warluwarric Yanyuwa Southern Ngarru Thawa Desert Nyungic Marrngu Ngumpin–Yapa Ngumpin Yapa Warumungu ?

Wati South-West P–N Pilbara Ngayarda Kanyara–Mantharta Kartu–Nhanda Yinggarda ?

Mirning Nyunga Tangkic Lardil (register: Damin ) Kayardild Yukulta (Ganggalida,  Nyangga) Mingginda (Minkin) Garrwan Garawa (Garrwa, north) Waanyi (Wanji, south) Gunindiri (Kurnindirri, southwest) Macro-Gunwinyguan ?

Maningrida Burarra Gurr-goni Ndjébbana Nakkara Marran Marra Warndarang Yugul ?

Alawa ?

Mangarrayi ?

Gunwinyguan proper Western Jawoyn (Djauan) Waray Uwinymil Central Bininj Kunwok (Kunwinjku, Gunwinggu) Kunbarlang Dalabon (Ngalkbun) Eastern Rembarrnga Ngalakgan Ngandi Nunggubuyu (Wubuy) Anindilyakwa (Enindhilyagwa) Yangmanic – Wagiman ?

Wardaman Wagiman Other isolates Kungarakany (Koongurrukuñ) ?

Gaagudju Iwaidjan Central (Warrkbi) Iwaidja Garig–Ilgar Garig Ilgar Eastern (Goulburn Island) Maung Manangkari Southern Amurdag Marrku–Wurrugu ?

Wurrugu Marrgu Darwin Region ?

Gulumoerrgin (Larrakia) Limilngan–Wulna?

Limilngan Wulna Umbugarlic Umbugarla Ngurmbur Bugurnidja Daly River Sprachbund Wagaydyic (Anson Bay) Batjamalh (Wadjiginy) Pungu Pungu (Kandjerramalh) Giyug ?

Northern Daly Malak-Malak (Nguluk Wanggar) Tyerraty Western Daly Marri Ngarr Magati Ke Merranunggu Marrithiyel Marramaninjsji Eastern Daly Matngele (Werret/Dakayu) Kamu Southern Daly Murrinh-patha Ngan’gityemerri Mirndi Jingulu Yirram Nungali Jaminjung Ngurlun Ngarnka Wambaya Jarrakan Kija Miriwoong Gajirrawoong Bunuban Bunuba Gooniyandi Worrorran Wunambal (Northern) Ngarinyin (Eastern) Worrorra (Western) Nyulnyulan Western (Nyulnyulic) Nyulnyul Bardi Jawi Djabirr-Djabirr Nimanburru Eastern (Dyukun) Yawuru Dyugun Warrwa Nyigina Ngumbarl Others Language isolates Giimbiyu s Tiwi Papuan Meriam Tasmanian family-level groups Western Northwestern Tasmanian (Peerapper) Southwestern Tasmanian (Toogee) ?

Northern Northern Tasmanian (Tommeginne) Port Sorell Northeastern Pyemmairre (Northeastern) Tyerrernotepanner (North Midland) Lhotsky/Blackhouse Norman Eastern Oyster Bay (Paredarerme) Little Swanport Southeast Tasmanian (Nuenonne) Bruny Island New Indigenous languages and Aboriginal Englishes Creoles Australian Kriol Roper River Kriol ( Ngukurr ) Bamyili Kriol ( Barunga ) Kimberley Kriol ( Fitzroy Valley ) Daly River Kriol Westside Kriol ( Victoria River ) Barkly Kriol Mornington Island Creole Kowanyama Creole Northeastern creoles Torres Strait Creole (Yumplatok) Cape York Creole Lockhart River Creole Napranum Creole Pidgins Port Jackson Pidgin English Broome Pearling Lugger Pidgin South Australian Pidgin English Pidgin Ngarluma Mixed languages Light Warlpiri Gurindji Kriol Modern Tiwi Wumpurrarni English ( Tennant Creek ) Alyawarr English Others Neo-Nyungar Nunga English Yarrie Lingo Palm Talk Woorie Talk Cherbourg Talk Murdi Language Proto-languages Proto-Australian ?

Proto-Pama–Nyungan Macro-Pama–Nyungan ?

Arnhem Land ?

Italics indicate individual languages v t e Aboriginal anthropology in Tasmania Aboriginal Tasmanians Dolly Dalrymple Wauba Debar Daniel Geale William Lanne Luggenemenener Mannalargenna Michael Mansell Fanny Cochrane Smith Truganini Tasmanian tribes Toogee Aboriginal history Black War Cape Grim massacre Tasmanian languages Northern – Western Tommeginne Port Sorell Peerapper Toogee Northeastern Pyemmairre Tyerrernotepanner "Norman" "Lhotsky/Blackhouse" Eastern Little Swanport Paredarerme Nuenonne Bruny Island Constructed palawa kani See also: List of Indigenous Australian group names By state or territory New South Wales Northern Territory Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia v t e Primary language families Africa Afroasiatic Austronesian Khoe–Kwadi Kx'a Niger–Congo Nilo-Saharan (?) Tuu Dogon ?

Ijoid ?

Kadu ?

Katla ?

Kru ?

Lafofa ?

Mande ?

Rashad ?

Songhay ?

Talodi–Heiban ?

Ubangian ?

Isolates Bangime Gule Hadza Jalaa Sandawe Laal ?

Mimi of Decorse ?

Ongota ?

Shabo ?

Eurasia ( Europe and Asia ) Afroasiatic Ainu Austroasiatic Austronesian Chukotko-Kamchatkan Dravidian Eskaleut Great Andamanese Hmong–Mien Hurro-Urartian Indo-European Japonic Kartvelian Koreanic Kra–Dai Mongolic Nivkh Northeast Caucasian Northwest Caucasian Ongan Sino-Tibetan Tungusic Turkic Tyrsenian Uralic Yeniseian Yukaghir Arunachal ?

Digaro ?

Kho-Bwa ?

Mijiic ?

Miju ?

Siangic ?

Isolates Basque Burushaski Elamite Hattic Kusunda Nihali Rutulian Sumerian Vedda Bugun ?

Eteocretan ?

Eteocypriot ?

Hruso ?

Kenaboi ?

Minoan ?

Puroik ?

Shompen ?

Tambora ?

New Guinea and the Pacific Arai–Samaia Austronesian Berau Gulf Binanderean–Goilalan Border Bulaka River Central Solomons Chimbu–Wahgi Demta–Sentani Doso–Turumsa East Geelvink Bay East New Britain East Strickland Eleman Engan Fas Foja Range Gogodala–Suki Hatam–Mansim Kaure–Kosare Kiwaian Kutubuan Lakes Plain Lower Mamberamo Lower Sepik Madang Mairasi Mantion–Meax North Bougainville North Halmahera Pauwasi Ramu Senagi Senu River Sepik Skou South Bougainville Teberan–Pawaian Torricelli Trans-Fly Trans–New Guinea Turama–Kikorian Upper Yuat West Bird's Head Yam Yawan Yuat Northwest Papuan ?

Papuan Gulf ?

West Papuan ?

Isolates Abinomn Abun Burmeso Kol Kuot Maybrat Mpur Porome Anêm ?

Ata ?

Sulka ?

Taiap ?

Tambora ?

Yele ?

Australia Bunuban Eastern Daly Eastern Tasmanian Garawan Gunwinyguan Iwaidjan Jarrakan Maningrida Mirndi Northeastern Tasmanian Northern Tasmanian Nyulnyulan Pama–Nyungan Southern Daly Tangkic Wagaydyic (Northern Daly?) Western Daly Western Tasmanian Worrorran Arnhem/Macro-Gunwinyguan ?

Darwin Region ?

Marrku–Wurrugu ?

Yangmanic (incl.

Wagiman )?

Isolates Giimbiyu Malak-Malak (Northern Daly?) Tiwi Gaagudju ?

Kungarakany ?

North America Algic Caddoan Chimakuan Chinookan Chumashan Comecrudan Coosan Eskaleut Iroquoian Kalapuyan Maiduan Muskogean Na-Dene Palaihnihan Plateau Penutian Pomoan Salishan Shastan Siouan Tanoan Tsimshianic Utian Uto-Aztecan Wakashan Wintuan Yuki–Wappo Yuman–Cochimí Isolates Alsea Atakapa Cayuse Chimariko Chitimacha Coahuilteco Cotoname Esselen Haida Karuk Keres ?

Kutenai Natchez Salinan Seri Siuslaw Takelma Timucua Tonkawa Tunica Waikuri Washo Yana Yokuts ?

Yuchi Zuni Mesoamerica Arawakan Chibchan Jicaquean Lencan Mayan Misumalpan Mixe–Zoque Oto-Manguean Tequistlatecan Totonacan Uto-Aztecan Xincan Isolates Cuitlatec Huave Tarascan/Purépecha South America Alacalufan Andoque–Urequena Araucanian Arawakan Arawan Aymaran Barbacoan Boran Bororoan Cahuapanan Cañari–Puruhá Cariban Chapacuran Charruan Chibchan Chicham Choco Chonan Guaicuruan Guajiboan Harákmbut–Katukinan Hibito–Cholón Huarpean Jirajaran Kakwa - Nukak Kariri Lule–Vilela Macro-Jê Mascoian Matacoan Nadahup Nambikwaran Otomákoan Pano-Tacanan Peba–Yaguan Piaroa–Saliban Quechuan Ticuna–Yuri Timotean Tiniguan Tucanoan Tupian Uru–Chipaya Witotoan Xukuruan Yanomaman Zamucoan Zaparoan Catacaoan ?

Isolates Aikanã Arutani Betoi Camsá Candoshi-Shapra Canichana Cayubaba Chimane Chiquitano Chono Cofán Culle Esmeralda Guachí Guamo Guató Hodï/Joti Iatê Irantxe Itonama Kanoê Kunza Kwaza Leco Maku/Jukude Matanawi Mochica Movima Munichi Mura-Pirahã Omurano Otí Páez Payaguá Puinave Purian Puquina Sape Sechura Tallán Taruma Taushiro Tequiraca Trumai Urarina Waorani/Huaorani Warao Yaruro Yahgan Yuracaré Yurumangui Katembri ?

Sanavirón ?

Sign languages Arab Australian Aboriginal BANZSL Chinese Francosign Germanosign Hand Talk Indo-Pakistani Japanese Original Thai Swedish Paraguay–Uruguay ?

Providencia–Cayman ?

Sudanese ?

Tanzanian ?

Isolates See list of sign languages Village sign languages See also Constructed languages Creoles Language isolates Mixed languages Pidgins Spurious languages Unclassified languages Whistled languages Families with question marks (?) are disputed or controversial.

Families in italics have no living members.

Families with more than 30 languages are in bold .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐lmwtk
Cached time: 20250817200103
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.730 seconds
Real time usage: 0.905 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5392/1000000
Revision size: 23641/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 272703/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7450/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 71635/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.332/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8126886/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  641.519      1 -total
 24.39%  156.489     20 Template:Navbox
 17.73%  113.711      1 Template:Australian_Aboriginal_languages
 17.55%  112.566      1 Template:Reflist
 12.37%   79.332      2 Template:Infobox
 11.19%   71.763      1 Template:Short_description
 10.98%   70.422      1 Template:Cite_news
  9.44%   60.585      1 Template:Infobox_language_family
  6.83%   43.848      1 Template:Infobox_language
  6.41%   41.126      2 Template:What?

Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1687208:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817200103 and revision id 1285678003. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tasmanian_languages&oldid=1285678003 " Categories : Indigenous Australian languages in Tasmania Languages extinct in the 1900s Unclassified languages of Australia Unsolved problems in linguistics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from April 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from April 2014 Language articles with unsupported infobox fields Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2023 Language articles without language codes Language articles with unreferenced extinction date Language articles missing Glottolog code Pages with plain IPA CS1 maint: location missing publisher Families rejected by Glottolog This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 02:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tasmanian languages 23 languages Add topic

