Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methodology 2 Features 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents SVFlux Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for products and services .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "SVFlux" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) SVFLUX Developer(s) SoilVision Systems Ltd.

Operating system Microsoft Windows Available in English Type seepage / groundwater software License Proprietary SVFLUX is a finite element seepage analysis program developed by SoilVision Systems Ltd.. The software is designed to analyze both saturated and unsaturated flow through the ground through the solving of Richard's equation. The program is used in the fields of civil engineering and hydrology in order to analyze seepage and groundwater regional flow. The software is used for the calculation of flow rates, pore-water pressures, and pumping rates associated with regional groundwater flow. The software can be coupled with CHEMFLUX in order to calculate diffusion, advection, and decay rates or with SVHEAT in order to calculate thermal gradients and freeze/thaw fronts.

Methodology [ edit ] SVFLUX makes use of a general finite element solver to solve the Richards equation for both saturated and unsaturated flow. The finite element solver makes use of automatic mesh generation and automatic mesh refinement in order to aid in problem solution. The software has been used on large projects including the Questa Weathering Study which examined the flow regime through waste rock piles. Several forms of the flow governing equation are implemented in the software which provides greater flexibility in solving unique flow situations.

The user enters geometry, material properties, and analysis constraints through a CAD-type graphical user interface (GUI). The results may also be viewed in the context of a graphical user interface. The geometry is simply entered as regions which may be drawn, pasted in from Excel, or imported from AutoCAD DXF files. The factor of safety for a specific failure surface is computed as the forces driving failure along the surface divided by the shear resistance of the soils along the surface.

[ 1 ] A library of benchmark models are distributed with the software.

[ 2 ] Features [ edit ] The developers of SVFLUX have implemented all of the classic features traditionally found in seepage analysis software as well as an interesting list of new features.

The following is a list of some of the more distinct features of SVFLUX: Probabilistic analysis Unsaturated analysis with improved convergence Coupled climatic boundary conditions and calculation of actual evaporation (AE) Automatic mesh generation Automatic mesh refinement Support for parallel processing Large library of example models Simple and intuitive graphical user interface Classic features also supported by the software include: Right-click application of boundary conditions and properties Help system and tutorial manual Solution for saturated and unsaturated flow Regional groundwater analysis Plotting of flowlines and streamtraces Reporting of fluxes References [ edit ] ^ SoilVision Systems Ltd. (2009), SVFLUX Tutorial Manual (PDF) , SoilVision Systems Ltd.

^ SoilVision Systems Ltd. (2009), SVFLUX Verification Manual (PDF) External links [ edit ] SoilVision Systems Ltd.

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SVFlux&oldid=1066969472 " Category : Geotechnical engineering software Hidden categories: Articles with topics of unclear notability from October 2019 All articles with topics of unclear notability Products articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking reliable references from October 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 21 January 2022, at 01:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SVFlux Add languages Add topic

