Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and overview 2 Series Toggle Series subsection 2.1 Norton Anthologies 2.2 Norton Critical Editions 2.3 The States and the Nation 3 Notable authors 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents W. W. Norton & Company 11 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from W. W. Norton and Company ) American publishing company W. W. Norton & Company Status Active Founded 1923 ; 102 years ago ( 1923 ) Founders William Warder Norton Mary Dows Herter Norton Country of origin United States Headquarters location 500 Fifth Avenue , New York City , New York Distribution self-distributed (US) Penguin Random House (Canada trade) Nelson Canada (Canada textbooks) John Wiley & Sons (UK, Australia) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Key people Julia A. Reidhead (President) Publication types Books Imprints Countryman Liveright Norton Professional Norton Young Readers No.

of employees 500 Official website wwnorton .com 500 Fifth Avenue , the headquarters of W. W. Norton and Company W. W. Norton & Company is an American publishing company based in New York City . Established in 1923, it has been owned wholly by its employees since the early 1960s. The company is known for its Norton Anthologies (particularly The Norton Anthology of English Literature ) and its texts in the Norton Critical Editions series, both of which are frequently assigned in university literature courses.

[ 3 ] History and overview [ edit ] The roots of the company date to 1923, when William Warder Norton founded the firm with his wife Mary Dows Herter Norton , and became its first president. In the 1960s, Mary Norton offered most of her stock to its leading editors and managers.

[ 4 ] Storer D. Lunt took over in 1945 after Norton's death, and was succeeded by George Brockway (1957–1976), Donald S. Lamm (1976–1994), W. Drake McFeely (1994–2017), [ 5 ] and Julia A. Reidhead (2017–present). Reidhead was vice president and publishing director of Norton's College division and a former editor of the Norton Anthologies.

[ 6 ] Imprints of W. W. Norton include Norton Professional Books (professional works in mental health, well-being, architecture and design, and education), Countryman Press (lifestyle and instructional books, including healthy-living, cookbooks, and hiking guides), Liveright (20th century classics and new works), and Norton Young Readers (books for preschoolers to young adults).

In 2023, the company celebrated its 100th anniversary.

[ 7 ] Series [ edit ] Norton Anthologies [ edit ] Norton Anthologies collect canonical works from various literatures; perhaps the best known anthology in the series is the Norton Anthology of English Literature , which, as of 2018 [update] , is in its 10th edition. Norton Anthologies offer general headnotes on each author, a general introduction to each period of literature, and annotations for every anthologized text.

Norton Critical Editions [ edit ] Like Oxford World's Classics and Penguin Classics , Norton Critical Editions provide reprints of classic literature and in some cases, classic non-fiction works. However, unlike most critical editions, all Norton Critical Editions are sourcebooks that provide a selection of contextual documents and critical essays along with an edited text. Annotations to the text are provided as footnotes, rather than as endnotes.

The States and the Nation [ edit ] The States and the Nation series was published in celebration of the United States Bicentennial . It comprised 51 volumes, one for each state and the District of Columbia. The series was administered by the American Association for State and Local History via a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities .

[ 8 ] Notable authors [ edit ] Dean Acheson A. R. Ammons Diane Ackerman J. G. Ballard Andrea Barrett Vincent Bugliosi Pete Buttigieg Kate Brown Jared Diamond Rita Dove John Dower Andre Dubus III Stephen Dunn Erik Erikson Eric Foner Nadine Gordimer Annette Gordon-Reed Stephen Greenblatt Pekka Hämäläinen Seamus Heaney Sam Harris Carl Jung Sebastian Junger Eric Kandel Mervyn King Nicole Krauss Paul Krugman Maxine Kumin Stanley Kunitz Joseph P. Lash Michael Lewis David Daokui Li William S. McFeely Larry McMurtry John Matteson John Mearsheimer Edmund Morgan Patrick O'Brian Chuck Palahniuk Edmund Phelps Robert Pinsky Gustave Reese Adrienne Rich Mary Roach Russell Shorto Jonathan D. Spence Joseph Stiglitz William Taubman Alan Taylor Neil deGrasse Tyson Harold E. Varmus Isser Woloch Sean Wilentz E. O. Wilson Fareed Zakaria Hal Varian See also [ edit ] Oxford World's Classics Verso Book's Radical Thinkers Albatross Publishing House Boni & Liveright References [ edit ] ^ "International Representatives" . Retrieved July 25, 2020 .

^ "Contact" .

W. W. Norton & Company Ltd . Archived from the original on May 24, 2021 . Retrieved July 25, 2020 .

^ McLemee, Scott (May 4, 2001).

"Making the Cut" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved July 25, 2020 .

^ "Who We Are" .

W. W. Norton & Company, Inc . Retrieved July 25, 2020 .

^ "Gale Directory of Company Histories: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc" .

Answers.com . Retrieved March 20, 2013 .

^ "Meet Julia Reidhead, Norton's New President" . February 13, 2017 . Retrieved July 25, 2020 .

^ Vadukul, Alex (June 12, 2023).

"Norton, a Defiant Indie Book Publisher, Celebrates 100 Years" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 26, 2023 .

^ The States and the Nation .

librarything.com . Retrieved June 29, 2021.

External links [ edit ] Official website W.W. Norton & Company records, 1923-1967 at the Rare Book & Manuscript Library Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Poland Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=W._W._Norton_%26_Company&oldid=1300928630 " Categories : American companies established in 1923 1923 establishments in New York (state) Book publishing companies based in New York City Employee-owned companies of the United States Publishing companies established in 1923 W. W. Norton & Company books Educational publishing companies of the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 05:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents W. W. Norton & Company 11 languages Add topic

