Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pruning terms Toggle Pruning terms subsection 1.1 Branch wood 1.2 Trunk wood 1.3 Branch collar 1.4 Branch bark ridge 2 Types of pruning Toggle Types of pruning subsection 2.1 Deadwooding 2.2 Preventive structural pruning 2.3 Subordination pruning 2.4 Crown thinning 2.5 Crown raising 2.6 Vista pruning 2.7 Crown reduction 2.8 Pollarding 2.9 Deadheading 3 Time period 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pruning 33 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Selective removal of parts of a plant This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pruning" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) For other uses, see Pruning (disambiguation) .

Two workers pruning street trees in London during World War I Pruning is the selective removal of certain parts of a plant, such as branches , buds , or roots .
It is practiced in horticulture (especially fruit tree pruning ), arboriculture , and silviculture .

The practice entails the targeted removal of diseased , damaged, dead, non-productive, structurally unsound, or otherwise unwanted plant material from crop and landscape plants . In general, the smaller the branch that is cut, the easier it is for a woody plant to compartmentalize the wound and thus limit the potential for pathogen intrusion and decay . It is therefore preferable to make any necessary formative structural pruning cuts to young plants, rather than removing large, poorly placed branches from mature plants.

Woody plants may undergo a process referred to as self-pruning , where they will drop twigs or branches which are no longer producing more energy than they require. It is theorized that this process can also occur in response to lack of water, in order to reduce the surface area where water can be lost.

[ 1 ] This natural shedding of branches is called cladoptosis .

Specialized pruning practices may be applied to certain plants, such as roses , fruit trees , and grapevines . Different pruning techniques may be used on herbaceous plants than those used on perennial woody plants.

Reasons to prune plants include deadwood removal, shaping (by controlling or redirecting growth), improving or sustaining health, reducing risk from falling branches, preparing nursery specimens for transplanting , and both harvesting and increasing the yield or quality of flowers and fruits.

Pruning terms [ edit ] Branch wood [ edit ] Branch wood is an individual stem that grows off of another stem.

Trunk wood [ edit ] Trunk wood is the main stem of a tree which individual stems grow out of.

Branch collar [ edit ] This refers to the area below the union of where branch wood attaches with the trunk/stem wood. This can often appear raised.

Branch bark ridge [ edit ] This refers to the junction between branch wood and trunk/stem wood. It usually looks raised.

[ 2 ] Types of pruning [ edit ] An arborist pruning a tree near the Statue of Liberty Pruning in an urban setting is crucial due to the tree being in drastically different conditions than where it naturally grows.

[ 3 ] Arborists , orchardists , and gardeners use various garden tools and tree cutting tools designed for the purpose, such as secateurs , loppers , handsaws , or chainsaws .

[ 4 ] Additionally in forestry, pole pruners  ( averruncators in British English) and pole saws are commonly used, and these are often attached to poles that reach up to 5–6 m (16–20 ft). This is a more efficient and safer way of pruning than with ladders. These bush saws on polls have also been motorized as chainsaws which is even more efficient. Older technology used Billhooks , Kaiser blades , and pruning knives. Although still used in some coppicing , they are not used so much in commercial forestry due to the difficulty of cutting flush with the stem. Flush cuts happen when a pruner cuts into the cambium layer of the main trunk, which can happen when a pruner is not precise with pruning cuts, and removes a portion of the branch collar, which can put the tree at risk of entry cords from forest pathogens .

Although there are several different types of pruning, they can be simplified into two categories. One of which is cutting the branch back to a specific and intermediate point, called a "reduction cut", and the other of which is completely removing a branch back to the union where the branch connects which the main trunk, called "removal cut".

[ 5 ] Dense growth results after shearing A "reduction cut" is when one removes a portion of a growing stem down to a set of desirable buds or side-branching stems. This is commonly performed in well trained plants for a variety of reasons, for example to stimulate growth of flowers, fruit or branches, as a preventive measure to wind and snow damage on long stems and branches, and finally to encourage growth of the stems in a desirable direction.

Thinning : A more drastic form of pruning, a thinning out cut, is the removal of an entire shoot, limb, or branch at its point of origin.

[ 5 ] This is usually employed to revitalize a plant by removing over-mature, weak, problematic, and excessive growths. When performed correctly, thinning encourages the formation of new growth that will more readily bear fruit and flowers. This is a common technique in pruning roses and for amplifying and "opening-up" the branching of neglected trees, or for renewing shrubs with multiple branches.

Topping : Topping is a very severe form of pruning which involves removing all branches and growths down to a few large branches or to the trunk of the tree. When performed correctly it is used on very young trees, and can be used to begin training younger trees for pollarding or for trellising to form an espalier .

Raising removes the lower branches from a tree in order to provide clearance for buildings, vehicles, pedestrians, and vistas.

[ 6 ] Reduction reduces the size of a tree, often for clearance for utility lines. Reducing the height or spread of a tree is best accomplished by pruning back the leaders and branch terminals to lateral branches that are large enough to assume the terminal roles (at least one-third the diameter of the cut stem). Compared to topping , reduction helps maintain the form and structural integrity of the tree.

[ 7 ] In orchards, fruit trees are often lopped to encourage regrowth and to maintain a smaller tree for ease of picking fruit. The pruning regime in orchards is more planned, and the productivity of each tree is an important factor.

Deadwooding [ edit ] Branches die off for a number of reasons including sunlight deficiency, pest and disease damage, and root structure damage. A dead branch will at some point decay back to the parent stem and fall off. This is normally a slow process but can be hastened by high winds or extreme temperatures. The main reason deadwooding is performed is safety. Situations that usually demand removal of deadwood include trees that overhang public roads, houses, public areas, power lines, telephone cables and gardens. Trees located in wooded areas are usually assessed as lower risk but assessments consider the number of visitors. Trees adjacent to footpaths and access roads are often considered for deadwood removal.

[ 8 ] Another reason for deadwooding is amenity value, i.e. a tree with a large amount of deadwood throughout the crown will look more aesthetically pleasing with the deadwood removed. The physical practice of deadwooding can be carried out most of the year though should be avoided when the tree is coming into leaf. The deadwooding process speeds up the tree's natural abscission process. It also reduces unwanted weight and wind resistance and can help overall balance.

Preventive structural pruning [ edit ] Preventative and structural pruning can be done to mitigate several issues young trees may have in the future. The structural pruning can reduce tree stress, increase the lifespan of trees, and promotes resistance to damage due to natural weather events. Attributes of trees with good structure include excurrent growth by having a single dominant leader, branch unions without included bark, and a balanced canopy. Structural pruning does this by developing or maintaining a dominant leader, identify the lowest branches in the canopy, prevent branches below the permanent canopy from growing too large, keeping all branches less than one half the trunk diameter, space main branches along one dominant trunk,  and suppress growth on branches with included bark.

[ 9 ] Subordination pruning [ edit ] Subordination pruning is done on limbs that will exceed 50% percent of the stem diameter. A reduction cut may be performed while still allowing about 50% of the branch. This is done to help maintain form and deter the formation of co-dominant leaders. Temporary branches may be too large for a removal cut so subordination pruning should be done to slowly reduce a limb by 50% each year to allow the tree to properly heal from the cut. As a tree becomes larger the slower it grows. Reducing the larger limbs for eventual removal will allow for the tree to promote new growth rather than using energy in encouraging unwanted limbs to continue to grow. Removing a large branch increases the likelihood of the cut to not heal properly which also may attract insects, diseases and fungus.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Crown thinning [ edit ] Crown thinning is the removal of live healthy branches which increases light penetration, air circulation and reduces wind resistance which reduces risks from damage and the possibility of pest infestation.

[ 11 ] Crown raising [ edit ] Crown raising involves the removal of the lower branches to a given height. The height is achieved by the removal of whole branches or removing the parts of branches which extend below the desired height. The branches are normally not lifted to more than one third of the tree's total height.

Crown lifting is done for access; these being pedestrian, vehicle or space for buildings and street furniture. Lifting the crown will allow traffic and pedestrians to pass underneath safely. This pruning technique is usually used in the urban environment as it is for public safety and aesthetics rather than tree form and timber value.

Crown lifting introduces light to the lower part of the trunk; this, in some species can encourage epicormic growth from dormant buds. To reduce this sometimes smaller branches are left on the lower part of the trunk. Excessive removal of the lower branches can displace the canopy weight, this will make the tree top heavy, therefore adding stress to the tree. When a branch is removed from the trunk, it creates a large wound. This wound is susceptible to disease and decay, and could lead to reduced trunk stability. Therefore, much time and consideration must be taken when choosing the height the crown is to be lifted to.

This would be an inappropriate operation if the tree species’ form was of a shrubby nature. This would therefore remove most of the foliage and would also largely unbalance the tree. This procedure should not be carried out if the tree is in decline, poor health or dead, dying or dangerous (DDD) as the operation will remove some of the photosynthetic area the tree uses. This will increase the decline rate of the tree and could lead to death.

If the tree is of great importance to an area or town, (i.e. veteran or ancient) then an alternative solution to crown lifting would be to move the target or object so it is not in range. For example, diverting a footpath around a tree's drip line so the crown lift is not needed. Another solution would be to prop up or cable-brace the low hanging branch. This is a non-invasive solution which in some situations may be more economical and environmentally friendly.

[ 12 ] Vista pruning [ edit ] Selectively pruning a window of view in a tree.

Crown reduction [ edit ] Reducing the height and or spread of a tree by selectively cutting back to smaller branches and in fruit trees for increasing of light interception and enhancing fruit quality.

Pollarding [ edit ] Main article: Pollarding A regular form of pruning where certain deciduous species are pruned back to pollard heads every year in the dormant period. This practice is usually commenced on juvenile trees so they can adapt to the harshness of the practice. This practice can be used for tree shaping but is also used in specific species which young branches can be sold for floral arrangements.

Deadheading [ edit ] Deadheading is the act of removing spent flowers or flowerheads for aesthetics, to prolong bloom for up to several weeks or promote rebloom, or to prevent seeding .

Time period [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pruning of trees in Chandigarh, India In general, pruning deadwood and small branches can be done at any time of year. Depending on the species, many temperate plants can be pruned either during dormancy in winter, or, for species where winter frost can harm a recently pruned plant, after flowering is completed. In the temperate areas of the northern hemisphere autumn pruning should be avoided, as the spores of disease and decay fungi are abundant at this time of year.

Some woody plants tend to bleed profusely from cuts, such as mesquite and maple . Some callus over slowly, such as magnolia . In this case, they are better pruned during active growth when they can more readily heal. Woody plants that flower early in the season, on spurs that form on wood that has matured the year before, such as apples, should be pruned right after flowering as later pruning will sacrifice flowers the following season.

Forsythia , azaleas and lilacs all fall into this category.

See also [ edit ] Arborist Agricultural waste Branch collar Chainsaw safety clothing Cladoptosis or natural regular branch shedding Coppicing Dead hedge (which can be made from pruned branches to attract insects for hibernation and pollination) Fruit tree forms Fruit tree pruning Ice pruning Pollarding Professional Landcare Network (PLANET) Pruning remains Ramification (botany) Salt pruning Self or natural pruning: Plant senescence#Plant self-pruning and Fire adaptations#Self-pruning branches Thinning Topiary Tree fork Tree topping References [ edit ] ^ BCMA, Jeremiah_Sandler (2021-02-01).

"On Removing Deadwood, Part 1" .

Tree Care Industry Magazine . Retrieved 2024-05-30 .

^ McKenzie, Rita; Holt, Harvey.

"Trees Need a Proper Start – Prune Them Right" (PDF) . Urban Forestry Specialists, Forestry and Natural Resources.

Purdue University .

^ Fraedrich, Bruce.

“Structural Pruning of Young Trees.” Bartlett Tree Research Laboratories Technical Report.

^ Encyclopedia of gardening (3rd U.S., rev. and updated ed.). London: DK Pub. 2012. pp.

554– 556.

ISBN 9780756698287 .

^ a b "Tree Fruit Production Guide" .

tfpg.cas.psu.edu . Retrieved 20 December 2017 .

^ "Raising - Pruning - Landscape plants - Edward F. Gilman - UF/IFAS" .

hort.ifas.ufl.edu . Retrieved 2024-05-28 .

^ "Reducing - Pruning - Landscape plants - Edward F. Gilman - UF/IFAS" .

hort.ifas.ufl.edu . Retrieved 2024-05-28 .

^ "Removal of dead wood - Nelson's Tree Services" . Archived from the original on 15 December 2017 . Retrieved 20 December 2017 .

^ a b Gilman, Edward F.; Bisson, Amanda (2008-01-24).

"Chapter 12 — Developing a Preventative Pruning Program: Young Trees" .

EDIS .

2008 (1).

doi : 10.32473/edis-ep315-2007 .

ISSN 2576-0009 .

^ Gilman, Edward F. (2012).

An illustrated guide to pruning (3rd ed.). Clifton Park, NY: Delmar.

ISBN 978-1-111-30730-1 .

^ "Crown Reduction - Nelson's Tree Services" . Retrieved 20 December 2017 .

^ Smiley, E, and Bruce Fraedrich.

“Pruning Standard to Maintain Landscape Trees.” Bartlett Tree Research Laboratories Technical Report.

Bibliography [ edit ] Sunset Editors, (1995) Western Garden Book , Sunset Books Inc, ISBN 978-0-376-03851-7 James, N. D. G, The arboriculturalist's companion, second edition 1990, Blackwell Publishers Ltd, Great Britain.

Shigo, A, 1991, Modern arboriculture, third printing, Durham, New Hampshire, USA, Shirwin Dodge Printers.

Shigo, A, 1989, A New Tree Biology. Shigo & trees Associates.

J.M. Dunn, C.J. Atkinson, N.A. Hipps, 2002, Effects of two different canopy manipulations on leaf water use and photosynthesis as determined by gas exchange and stable isotope discrimination, East Malling, University of Cambridge.

Shigo. A. L, 1998, Modern Arboriculture, third printing (2003), USA, Sherwin Dodge Printers British standards 3998:1989, Recommendations for Tree Work.

Lonsdale. D, 1999, Principles of tree hazard assessment and management, 6th impression 2008, forestry commission, Great Britain.

External links [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about Arboriculture/Pruning "Pruning" .

The New Student's Reference Work . 1914.

v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lsw2b
Cached time: 20250812021004
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.514 seconds
Real time usage: 0.676 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2205/1000000
Revision size: 18779/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 117095/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9794/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72594/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.311/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8539768/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  533.138      1 -total
 23.24%  123.903      1 Template:Reflist
 20.89%  111.364      2 Template:Navbox
 17.84%   95.130      1 Template:Horticulture_and_Gardening
 16.33%   87.084      6 Template:Cite_web
 15.54%   82.848      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.70%   62.393      1 Template:Short_description
  9.73%   51.883      3 Template:Ambox
  9.07%   48.379      1 Template:Refimprove
  6.78%   36.155      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:471376:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021004 and revision id 1289201216. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pruning&oldid=1289201216 " Categories : Cutting Horticultural techniques Horticulture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles needing additional references from December 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 02:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pruning 33 languages Add topic

