Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Claims 2 Responses 3 Size scale context 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nanobe 15 languages العربية Bosanski Català Dansk Español فارسی Français Italiano Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rock and sediment microstructure Structures found in the ALH84001 meteorite are similar to the structures found in nanobes Not to be confused with Nanobacteria or Ultramicrobacteria .

A nanobe ( / ˈ n æ n oʊ b , ˈ n eɪ n oʊ b / ) [ 1 ] is a tiny filamental structure first found in some rocks and sediments .  Some scientists hypothesize that nanobes are the smallest form of life , ⁠ 1 / 10 ⁠ the size of the smallest known bacteria .

[ 2 ] No conclusive evidence exists that these structures are, or are not, living organisms, so their classification is controversial.

The 1996 discovery of nanobes was published in 1998 [ 3 ] by Uwins et al.

, [ 4 ] from the University of Queensland , Australia . They were found growing from rock samples (both full-diameter and sidewall cores) of Jurassic and Triassic sandstones, originally retrieved from an unspecified number of oil exploration wells off Australia's west coast. Depths of retrieval were between 3,400 metres (2.1 mi) and 5,100 metres (3.2 mi) below the sea bed. While Uwins et al.

[ 3 ] present assertions against it, they do not exclude the possibility that the nanobes are from a surface contaminant, not from the rock units cited.

The smallest are just 20 nanometers in diameter. Some researchers believe that these structures are crystal growths, but the staining of these structures with dyes that bind to DNA might indicate that they are living organisms.

[ 5 ] They are similar to the structures found in ALH84001 , a Mars meteorite found in the Antarctic . A 2022 study concluded that ALH84001 did not contain Martian life; the discovered organic molecules were found to be associated with abiotic processes (ie, "serpentinization and carbonation reactions that occurred during the aqueous alteration of basalt rock by hydrothermal fluids") produced on the very early Mars four billion years ago instead.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Nanobes are similar in size to nanobacteria , which are also structures that had been proposed to be extremely small living organisms. However, these two should not be confused: Nanobacteria were thought to be cellular organisms, while nanobes are hypothesized (by some) to be a previously unknown form of life or protocells .

[ citation needed ] Claims [ edit ] It is a living organism (contains DNA or some analogue, and reproduces).

Has a morphology similar to Actinomycetes and fungi .

Nanobes are about 20 nm in diameter, which may be too small to contain the basic elements for an organism to exist (DNA, ribosomes , etc.), suggesting that if they grow and reproduce they would need to do so in an unconventional way.

The Martian meteorite ALH84001 , discovered in 1984 in the Antarctic , contained similar tubular structures which some astrobiologists suggested could be evidence of life at an earlier time on Mars .

[ 8 ] Responses [ edit ] A review in Microbes and Environments [ 9 ] of the various ultra-small forms of proposed life states that the main criticism of nanobes is that they appear too small to contain the biochemical machinery needed to sustain life. The review also states that there is no evidence that nanobes are organisms in themselves and not fragments of larger organisms.

Tony Taylor was one of the authors of the original nanobe paper.

[ 3 ] He argues that the conspicuous lack of phosphorus in the X-ray spectroscopy data and the failure to find DNA using various DNA amplification techniques demonstrates that nanobes do not have any DNA or RNA. He also argues that they may have a completely different mechanism for heredity, which would account for many of their unusual chemical and physical properties.

Size scale context [ edit ] Sizes of micro-organisms and infectious agents Agent Description Size ( nm ) Pithovirus largest known virus 1,500 nm Pandoravirus one of the largest known viruses 1,000 nm Nanoarchaeum smallest known archaeum 400 nm Mycoplasma smallest known bacterium 300 nm Nanobacteria former proposed class of lifeforms smaller than bacteria < 200 nm Parvovirus smallest known viruses 18–28 nm Nanobes hypothetical lifeforms smaller than viruses ≈20 nm Prion smallest known infectious agent ( protein ) ≈10 nm See also [ edit ] Smallest organisms Protocell References [ edit ] ^ "nanobe" .

Lexico U.S. English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 31 July 2019.

^ Nanjundiah, V. (2000).

"The smallest form of life yet?" (PDF) .

Journal of Biosciences .

25 (1): 9– 10.

doi : 10.1007/BF02985175 .

PMID 10824192 .

S2CID 29030837 .

^ a b c Uwins, Philippa J.R.; et al. (1998).

"Novel nano-organisms from Australian sandstones" (PDF) .

American Mineralogist .

83 ( 11– 12): 1541– 1550, Part 2.

Bibcode : 1998AmMin..83.1541U .

doi : 10.2138/am-1998-11-1242 .

^ "Nanobes: About Philippa Uwins and the discovery team" .

microscopy-uk.org.uk .

^ "Nanobacteria and nanobes – Are they alive?" .

Carlton.edu . Science Education Resource Center. Northfield, MN: Carlton College .

^ Dunn, Marcia (13 January 2022).

"Study nixes Mars life in meteorite found in Antarctica" .

apnews.com .

Associated Press . Retrieved 13 January 2022 .

^ Steele, A.; et al. (13 January 2022). "Organic synthesis associated with serpentinization and carbonation on early Mars".

Science .

375 (6577): 172– 177.

Bibcode : 2022Sci...375..172S .

doi : 10.1126/science.abg7905 .

PMID 35025630 .

S2CID 245933224 .

^ McSween, H. Y. (1997). "Evidence for life in a martian meteorite?".

GSA Today .

7 (7): 1– 7.

PMID 11541665 .

^ Velimirov, B. (2001).

"Nanobacteria, Ultramicrobacteria and Starvation Forms: A Search for the Smallest Metabolizing Bacterium" .

Microbes and Environments .

16 (2): 67– 77.

doi : 10.1264/jsme2.2001.67 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 .

External links [ edit ] Color photo of a nanobe colony .

microscopy-uk.org.uk (photo).

"Definition of nanobe" .

microscopy-uk.org.uk .

"Introduction to nanobes" .

microscopy-uk.org.uk .

"Nanobe images and links" .

microscopy-uk.org.uk .

"Interview of Philippa Uwins" (transcript). 7.30 Report.

Australian Broadcasting Corporation .

Workshop . Size Limits of Very Small Microorganisms. U.S.

National Academies of Sciences . Archived from the original on 18 March 2009 . Retrieved 17 October 2008 .

Hogan, Jenny (22 May 2004).

"Nanobes: A new form of life?" .

Astrobiology Magazine .

Broad, William J. (18 January 2000).

"Scientists find smallest form of life, if it lives" .

The New York Times .

"How small can life be?" .

nai.nasa.gov . NAI news.

National Aeronautics and Space Administration . Archived from the original on 14 June 2009.

via "NAI news" . Astrobiology.

v t e Self-replicating organic structures Cellular life Bacteria Archaea Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae Protista Incertae sedis Parakaryon Biological dark matter Virus dsDNA virus Giant virus ssDNA virus dsRNA virus (+)ssRNA virus (−)ssRNA virus ssRNA-RT virus dsDNA-RT virus Subviral agents Viroid Pospiviroidae Avsunviroidae Helper-virus dependent Satellite ssRNA satellite virus dsDNA satellite virus ( Virophage ) ssDNA satellite virus ssDNA satellite dsRNA satellite ssRNA satellite ( Virusoid ) Satellite-like nucleic acids RNA DNA Other Defective interfering particle RNA DNA Prion Mammalian prion Fungal prion Nucleic acid self-replication Mobile genetic elements Mobilome Horizontal gene transfer Genomic island Transposable element Class I or retrotransposon Class II or DNA transposon Plasmid Fertility Resistance Col Degradative Virulence / Ti Cryptic Cosmid Fosmid Phagemid Group I intron Group II intron Retrozyme Other aspects DNA replication RNA replication Chromosome Linear Circular Extrachromosomal DNA Secondary chromosome Genome Gene Gene duplication Non-coding DNA Origin of replication Replicon Endogenous viral element Provirus Prophage Endogenous retrovirus Transpoviron Repeated sequences in DNA Tandem repeat Interspersed repeat Endosymbiosis Mitochondrion Mitosome Hydrogenosome Plastid Chloroplast Chromoplast Gerontoplast Leucoplast Apicoplast Kappa organism Organs Bacteriome Trophosome Nitroplast Abiogenesis Last universal common ancestor Earliest known life forms ?

RNA life Ribozyme † Protocell Coacervate Proteinoid Sulphobe Research Model lipid bilayer Jeewanu See also Organism Cell Cell division Artificial cell Non-cellular life Synthetic virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus ?

Nanobacterium ?

Nanobe Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Virome v t e Life , non-cellular life , and comparable structures Cellular life " Prokaryota " Archaea Bacteria Mitochondrion Plastid LUCA Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae " Protista " Incertae sedis Parakaryon Microbes with highly unusual DNA (?) Non-cellular life Virus Viroid Satellite Realms Adnaviria Duplodnaviria Monodnaviria Riboviria Ribozyviria Varidnaviria Unassigned Classes Naldaviricetes Families Alphasatellitidae Ampullaviridae Anelloviridae Avsunviroidae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Finnlakeviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Pospiviroidae Spiraviridae Thaspiviridae Tolecusatellitidae Genera Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus Other Nanobe (?) Obelisk Comparable structures Bio-like structure Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Cosmid Defective interfering particle Endogenous viral element Fosmid Integrative and conjugative element Jeewanu " Nanobacterium " Phagemid Plasmid Prion Fungal prion Proteinoid microsphere Retroelements not elsewhere classified Retron Diversity-generating retroelement Telomerase reverse transcriptase Reverse transcriptase-related cellular gene Ribozyme Spiegelman's Monster Tandem repeat Transposable element Retroposon Transpoviron Xenobot Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nanobe&oldid=1261416842 " Categories : Microbiology Hypothetical life forms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014 This page was last edited on 6 December 2024, at 00:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nanobe 15 languages Add topic

