Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Career 3 Playing style 4 Quest for tone: 15 years of research 5 Surbahar 6 Performances 7 References Toggle the table of contents Budhaditya Mukherjee 3 languages বাংলা ਪੰਜਾਬੀ தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian musician Budhaditya Mukherjee बधादित्य मुरवर्जी Born 1955 (age 69–70) Durg , India Origin India Genres Indian classical music Occupations Sitarist , Surbahar player Instruments Surbahar , Sitar Years active 1961–present Website www .budhaditya .com Awards: Padma Bhushan (2019) [ 1 ] Musical artist Pandit Budhaditya Mukherjee [ 2 ] ( Hindi : बधादित्य मुरवर्जी ) is an Indian classical sitar and surbahar maestro of the Imdadkhani gharana (school), [ 3 ] recognizable by his intricate vocalic playing complemented by spectacular high speed playing. He holds a unique distinction of being the ever first artist (not just musician) in history to perform in the House of Commons, London. Famously proclaimed the "sitar artist of the century" by veena great Balachander , he has performed in thousands of concerts since the 1970s in India, America, Australia, the UAE, and almost all of Europe.

[ 4 ] Early years [ edit ] He was born in a musical family in Bhilai , India , in 1955, where his father was a senior official of the Bhilai Steel Plant . His father Acharya Pandit Bimalendu Mukherjee was trained in a plethora of instruments including the sitar , sarod , surbahar , rudra veena , sarangi , and vocal music. The senior Mukherjee often hosted veteran musicians at his home. In a video, Budhaditya recollects having sat on the lap of the legendary singer Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan .

When Budhaditya was five years old, Bimalendu Mukherjee started teaching him on a small sitar and trained him for several decades thereafter.

In 1970, he won two national-level music competitions, and soon after was famously endorsed in glowing terms first by legendary film maker Satyajit Ray and then South Indian veena great Balachander , who proclaimed him "sitar artist of the century." [ 5 ] In 1975, Budhaditya became a grade-A artist with All India Radio (he was promoted to top grade in 1986). During the 70s he became the first ever sitarist to play the tappa, a form of vocal music rolling with repeated high speed taans, and as of 2018, is probably the only sitarist to have effectively presented the tappa. He graduated as a First Class Metallurgical Engineer from National Institute of Technology, Raipur , while already a performing artist. During college, he is said to have written an exam right after arriving from the airport after performing. His son, Bijoyaditya, was born in 1984, and started training with Bimalendu and Budhaditya at the age of 5.

Career [ edit ] Mukherjee has toured the world extensively, giving concerts in over 25 countries, and from 1983 and 1995, respectively, taught from time to time at the Istituto Interculturale di Studi Musicali Comparati in Venice (alongside tabla player Sankha Chatterjee ) and the Rotterdam Conservatory. He has also recorded widely, and at the age of 47, his discography spanned exactly 47 CDs, LPs and cassettes.  In 1995, he started recording on the surbahar (bass sitar), first as a two-part series ( Brilliance of Sound ) for Beethoven Records in Kolkata (ragas Yaman and Marwa), then raga Komal re Asavari for RPG / His Master's Voice on Tribute to My Father, My Guru (STCS 850362). In 2003, he was the first Indian classical musician to have an enhanced CD published: Thumriyan (RCD-2224), on Bengali label Rhyme Records in Kansas, containing ragas Piloo and Bhairavi.

Playing style [ edit ] Pandit Budhaditya belongs to the Imdadkhani gharana , the name coined by himself, to credit Ustad Imdad Khan , who created the unique style and had named it after Etawah , where he lived.

His alap consists of deep and fine meends (gliding across notes) for which he pulls the string up to five and a half notes on a given fret. This technique is part of executing the gayaki or vocal style of playing, Budhaditya is particularly known for his high speed and clarity, which he says is a product of good control over the instrument, and should be played only for complementing the music. However, he has mentioned that in his early years, when he was still in search of a good sitar, he had to play high speed to make a career as a musician.

[ 6 ] Budhaditya's typical concerts have been full length renditions of the ragas starting from developing through alap, jor, and then improvising over a composition with tabla accompaniment, before playing a high speed composition and jhala, and finishing with a shorter rendition in a different raga. He often develops the raga in the khayal gayaki ang, or the way a vocalist would do in the khayal style of singing.

Pt. Budhaditya Mukherjee's rendition of Ustad Imdad Khan Saheb's Razakhani gat in Raag Bihag: [ 7 ] Quest for tone: 15 years of research [ edit ] Pandit Mukherjee said that he changed 9 sitars in his initial 20 years of performing, while looking for the tone he wanted. By the mid 90s, he realized it was time for him to research the sitar making process to bring out the tone he had in his mind. There started his research along with a sitar maker, during which they damaged several sitars and built 2 sitars on opposing principles alongside a third one with favorable principles learned from the other two. After the 15 years of research, he can now produce the exact tone of his choice by modifying any sitar. Also, as seen in many videos beginning about the year 2000, his modifications include the permanent installation of Suzuki-style fine tuners for the chikari (drone) strings on his sitar.

Surbahar [ edit ] Very few sitar players play the surbahar, a bass version. Panditji has recorded relatively very few albums on the surbahar and there a few more recordings available online, all of which show deep alaps, and a solid command on the instrument.

In a concert video, he has demonstrated tough taans (fast phrases) on the surbahar, involving pulling the string to over 5 notes at a time.

Performances [ edit ] Pandit Budhaditya Mukherjee has performed all over the world for more than five decades. Most recently, he performed twice at the Aga Khan Museum in Toronto, Canada in 2016 and 2019 for the Raag-Mala Music Society of Toronto.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ List of Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) ^ "4 Nov 2018 - Pandit Budhaditya Mukherjee | BIMHUIS, Amsterdam" .

^ Lata, Swarn (2013).

The Journey of the Sitar in Indian Classical Music : Origin, History, and Playing Styles .

ISBN 978-1475947076 .

^ "I have never begged anyone for concerts: Pandit Budhaditya Mukherjee | Kolkata News - Times of India" .

The Times of India .

^ "Forums" .

chandrakantha.com . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ "Pt. Budhaditya Mukherjee, Suddha Kalyan alap (clip 1)" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2021 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "Pt. Budhaditya Mukherjee-Bihag Razakhani Drut Gat" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2021.

^ "Aga Khan Museum" .

Aga Khan Museum . Retrieved 3 November 2020 .

^ "Sublime Sitar with Pandit Budhaditya Mukherjee (October 19, 2019)" .

Aga Khan Museum . Retrieved 3 November 2020 .

v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Poland Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Budhaditya_Mukherjee&oldid=1298490958 " Categories : Surbahar players 1955 births Living people Indian sitar players Hindustani instrumentalists Indian male classical musicians Bengali musicians Etawah gharana Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in arts Indian classical musicians of Bengal National Institute of Technology, Raipur alumni Recipients of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2019 Use Indian English from January 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Hindi-language text This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 21:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Budhaditya Mukherjee 3 languages Add topic

