Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophical summary of the argument Toggle Philosophical summary of the argument subsection 1.1 Inductive form 1.2 Deductive form 1.3 Platonic form 2 Criticism 3 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Argument from consciousness 3 languages العربية پښتو Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Argument for the existence of God The argument from consciousness is an argument for the existence of God that claims characteristics of human consciousness (such as qualia ) cannot be explained by the physical mechanisms of the human body and brain, therefore asserting that there must be non-physical aspects to human consciousness. This is held as indirect evidence of God, given that notions about souls and the afterlife in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam would be consistent with such a claim.

The best-known defender of the argument from consciousness is J. P. Moreland .

[ citation needed ] Philosophical summary of the argument [ edit ] The argument may be stated in inductive or deductive form [ 1 ] An alternative, closely related, version of the argument uses Platonism as its premise in a deductive argument.

[ 2 ] Inductive form [ edit ] Richard Swinburne put forward an inductive form of the argument in his book The Existence of God .

[ 3 ] He uses the argument from personal identity [ clarification needed ] for mind-body dualism to show that we have a non-physical mental element to our minds. He suggests that the most probable way in which the non-physical and the physical are linked in causal-interaction is by design, which implies a designer. Swinburne suggests that this designer is God. He says that whilst this argument, owing to its inductive form, is inconclusive, it does provide strong evidence for a God.

Deductive form [ edit ] Mental states are genuine nonphysical mental entities that exist.

Specific mental and physical event types are regularly correlated.

There is an explanation for these correlations.

Personal explanation is different from natural scientific explanation.

The explanation for these correlations is either a personal or natural scientific explanation.

The explanation is not a natural scientific one.

Therefore, the explanation is a personal one.

If the explanation is personal, then it is theistic.

Therefore, the explanation is theistic.

[ 4 ] Theists such as Robert Adams [ 5 ] have advanced a slightly different version of Swinburne's argument which focuses on mental/physical correlations and not merely the existence of mental states. These are similar to Swinburne's argument but take a deductive form rather than an inductive one.

William Lane Craig put the argument from consciousness as follows: [ 6 ] If God did not exist, intentional states of consciousness would not exist.

But intentional states of consciousness do exist.

Therefore, God exists.

Peter Kreeft has put forward a deductive form of the argument from consciousness [ 7 ] based upon the intelligibility of the universe despite the limitations of our minds. He phrases it deductively as follows: "We experience the universe as intelligible. This intelligibility means that the universe is graspable by intelligence." "Either this intelligible universe and the finite minds so well suited to grasp it are the products of intelligence, or both intelligibility and intelligence are the products of blind chance." "Not blind chance." "Therefore this intelligible universe and the finite minds so well suited to grasp it are the products of intelligence." He compares his argument to C. S. Lewis ' argument from reason .

Platonic form [ edit ] The Christian philosopher Augustine of Hippo formed a formulation of the argument from consciousness, sometimes termed the Argument from truth which is closely aligned to consciousness whilst using neither inductive nor deductive methodology. The argument was influenced by Platonism .

Our limited minds can discover eternal truths about being.

Truth properly resides in the mind.

But the human mind is not eternal.

Therefore, there must exist an eternal mind in which these truths reside.

The Catholic philosopher Peter Kreeft , whilst he feels that it could be an effective argument, feels that we have too little knowledge of the workings of consciousness for this to be truly convincing as of yet.

[ 2 ] Another Catholic philosopher, Edward Feser has promoted the Augustinian argument, including it in his book Five Proofs of the Existence of God .

[ 8 ] He concludes that Augustine's argument is valid, having given many different reasons why Platonism, its primary premise, is true.

Criticism [ edit ] The first premise,  assertion that non-physical mental states exist, implies a dualist view of mind . Therefore, one line of attack is to argue the case for physicalism about the human mind.

[ 9 ] Moreland takes the arguments for the first premise and refers to classic defenses of dualism. However, the first premise is rejected by many philosophers of mind.

Frank Jackson , known for the knowledge argument in support of dualism about the mind, comments on the debate between physicalist and dualist conceptions of mind: Much of the contemporary debate in the philosophy of mind is concerned with the clash between certain strongly held intuitions and what science tells us about the mind and its relation to the world. What science tells us about the mind points strongly towards some version or other of physicalism. The intuitions, in one way or another, suggest that there is something seriously incomplete about any purely physical story about the mind ... Most contemporary philosophers given a choice between going with science and going with intuitions, go with science. Although I once dissented from the majority, I have capitulated and now see the interesting issue as being where the arguments from the intuitions against physicalism—the arguments that seem so compelling—go wrong.

[ 10 ] If one is willing to accept the first premise that reductive forms of physicalism are false, then the argument takes off. Thus, one could think of Moreland as making an argument that tries to move a person from "rejecting physicalism" to "accepting theism." The crucial step in this move is the fifth premise, which asserts that naturalism can not account for non-physical mental states. A critique of this premise is offered by Andrew Melnyk: Naturalism can easily explain how the universe came to contain physically irreducible conscious occurrences. It can do so by supposing that, among the fundamental laws governing the universe, there are some according to which, whenever such-and-such complex nonconscious occurrences occur, so-and-so conscious occurrences occur; perhaps such a law says that, whenever a human brain attains a certain kind and degree of complexity, a pain is experienced. Given such laws, the capacity for consciousness that some creatures enjoy, like the capacity for breathing, can be explained as having arisen through natural selection. Through mutation, some creature was born with a brain of the requisite kind and degree of complexity to generate conscious experiences; and then, because these experiences increased the creature's fitness, such creatures were selected for.

[ 11 ] However Moreland charges that such attempts to accommodate consciousness within an atheistic worldview are ad hoc and contrived and fail to take into account many features of conscious experience.

[ 12 ] Moreland spends much of the book defending this premise against philosophers, such as Michael Martin , who accept pluralist naturalism. He also critiques contemporary philosophers of mind such as John Searle , Timothy O' Connor , Colin McGinn , David Skriba , Philip Clayton and Jaegwon Kim , who attempt to account for consciousness.

Finally, one can also question premise eight: why does a personal explanation have to lead to monotheistic (as opposed to deistic or polytheistic ) accounts of intention?

[ 13 ] However, Moreland maintains that questioning these minor premises is of little consolation to the naturalist as they essentially constitute intramural theist debates, and that for most westerners theism is the only viable candidate to accommodate personal explanations. Similarly Occam's razor can be applied so only one personal agent is required.

Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Both these are following J. P Moreland "The Argument from Consciousness" in The Rationality of Theism ed Paul Copan and Paul Moser, London: Routledge (2003) ISBN 0-415-26332-8 and J. P Moreland "Consciousness and The Existence of God" ^ a b "Twenty Arguments God's Existence by Peter Kreeft (& Ronald K. Tacelli)" .

^ see Richard Swinburne The Existence of God Oxford:Clarendon (1979) Ch 9; The Evolution of the Soul 183-9 etc.

^ Quoted from The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology, The Argument from Consciousness, by J.P. Moreland, p. 296 ^ See Robert Adams "Flavors, Colors and God" reprinted in Contemporary Perspectives on Religious Epistemology OUP (1992) pp225-40 ^ "Does God Exist? | Reasonable Faith" .

^ "Twenty Arguments God's Existence by Peter Kreeft (& Ronald K. Tacelli)" .

^ "An alternative view of Edward Feser's discussion of the Augustinian Proof for the existence of God, in his book" .

^ Melnyk, Andrew (2007).

"A Case for Physicalism about the Human Mind" ^ Jackson, Frank Cameron (2003) "Mind and Illusion" Archived July 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , in Minds and Persons , Cambridge University Press ^ Melnyk, Andrew (2007).

"Naturalism, Free Choices, and Conscious Experiences" ^ Moreland,J.P. (2007).

"Argument from consciousness" ^ Steven J. Conifer (2001).

"The Argument from Consciousness Refuted" .

v t e Arguments for and against the existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Creator of God Evil Evil God Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hell Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's Razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐glnd6
Cached time: 20250812162320
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.270 seconds
Real time usage: 0.375 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 980/1000000
Revision size: 10979/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 25875/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3539/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28683/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.174/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4593060/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  344.090      1 -total
 22.04%   75.824      1 Template:God_arguments
 21.47%   73.870      1 Template:Navbox
 19.84%   68.256      1 Template:Citation_needed
 19.18%   66.006      1 Template:Short_description
 18.42%   63.398      1 Template:Fix
 16.26%   55.946      1 Template:ISBN
 15.85%   54.548      4 Template:Category_handler
 10.55%   36.309      4 Template:Cite_web
  9.78%   33.653      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10096467:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812162320 and revision id 1277601336. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Argument_from_consciousness&oldid=1277601336 " Categories : Arguments for the existence of God Christian apologetics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2022 This page was last edited on 25 February 2025, at 16:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Argument from consciousness 3 languages Add topic

