Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents University of Chicago Library 5 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°47′32″N 87°36′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.7922°N 87.6000°W ﻿ / 41.7922; -87.6000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia University library in Chicago, U.S.

University of Chicago Library The interior of the Harper Memorial Library . Today, Harper Memorial functions as a study space and reading room; it no longer provides collection access.

Location Hyde Park, Chicago , United States Type Academic library Established 1891 Branches 6 Collection Size 11,560,575 [ 1 ] Access and use Circulation 440,000 Members 33,000 Other information Director Torsten Reimer Website lib .uchicago .edu References: Andrew Abbott: The University Library The University of Chicago Library is the library system of the University of Chicago , located on the university's campus in Chicago , Illinois, United States. It is the seventh largest academic library and the fourth largest private library in the United States, with over 11.9 million volumes as of 2019.

[ 2 ] The library also holds 65,330 linear feet of archives and manuscripts and 245 terabytes of born-digital archives, digitized collections, and research data.

[ 2 ] The library has borrowing privileges with several other archives, museums, and libraries in the Chicago area, including the Art Institute of Chicago Library, the Chicago History Museum, Fermilab, the Field Museum of Natural History, and the Newberry Library.

[ 3 ] The library was founded by president of the University of Chicago, William Rainey Harper , who set the course for Special Collections as a “working collection” in 1891. The library's collections are located in six sites: the Joseph Regenstein Library , the John Crerar Library , the D'Angelo Law Library , the Joe and Rika Mansueto Library , the Eckhart Library for mathematics and computer science, and the Social Work Library.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] University of Chicago References [ edit ] ^ Roebuck, Gary; Morris, Shaneka; Kyrillidou, Martha (September 29, 2015).

"ARL Statistics 2013-2014" .

^ a b "About the Library - The University of Chicago Library" .

www.lib.uchicago.edu . Retrieved March 14, 2019 .

^ "Libraries and Museums" .

College Admissions . Retrieved March 14, 2019 .

^ "Campus Libraries" .

Further reading [ edit ] Archer, Horace Richard. "Some Aspects of the Acquisition Program at the University of Chicago Library, 1892-1928" (PhD dissertation,  The University of Chicago; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  1954. T-02599).

Dorf, A. "The University of Chicago Libraries : A Historical Note" Library Quarterly 4 (April 1934 ):185-197.

Freisinger, Judith. "A Program for Library Services at Billings Library, The University of Chicago (Illinois)" (PhD dissertation, The University of Chicago; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  1977. TM26375).

Thackery, David Thomas.  "The Far Eastern Library of the University of Chicago, 1936--1978 (Illinois)" (Thesis, The University of Chicago; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  1983. TM28713).

External links [ edit ] The University of Chicago Library The University of Chicago Library Archived December 2, 2010, at the Wayback Machine at the Digital Library Federation Guide to the University of Chicago Library Office of the Director, Ernest Dewitt Burton and J. C. M. Hanson, Records 1910-1928 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center Guide to the University of Chicago Library Office of the Director, M. Llewellyn Raney, Ralph A. Beals and Allen T. Hazen, Records 1894-1959 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center Guide to the University of Chicago Library Office of the Director, Zella Allen Dixson, Records 1892-1910 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center v t e University of Chicago Located in : Chicago, Illinois Schools College Business Social Work Divinity Continuing Education Public Policy Law Medicine Molecular Engineering Librarianship (closed) Research Argonne National Laboratory Becker Friedman Institute Center for Middle Eastern Studies Center for Research in Security Prices Chicago Project on Security and Threats Chicago school of economics Comer Children's Hospital Committee on Social Thought Comprehensive Cancer Center Enrico Fermi Institute Fermilab James Franck Institute Institute for the Study of Ancient Cultures, West Asia & North Africa Institute of Politics Laboratory Schools Marine Biological Laboratory Medical Center National Opinion Research Center Obama Presidential Center Paulson Institute Sonia Shankman Orthogenic School Stieglitz Lecture Toyota Technological Institute University of Chicago Press Journals Campus Bartlett Hall George Herbert Jones Laboratory Hong Kong campus Hutchinson Commons Ida Noyes Hall Lorado Taft Midway Studios Midway Plaisance Quadrangle Club Residence halls Burton–Judson Courts Snell–Hitchcock Rockefeller Chapel Seminary Co-op Library Joe and Rika Mansueto Library John Crerar Library Regenstein Library Museums Renaissance Society Smart Museum of Art Robie House History Cannon v. University of Chicago Chicago Pile-1 Nuclear Energy University of Chicago sit-ins Kenwood Astrophysical Observatory Metallurgical Laboratory Old University of Chicago Yerkes Observatory Chicago Principles Athletics Teams Men's basketball Women's basketball Football Venues Bartlett Hall Gerald Ratner Athletics Center Henry Crown Fieldhouse Men's Gymnasium (1891) Stagg Field Traditions Lascivious Costume Ball Latke–Hamantash Debate Scavenger Hunt University Athletic Association Students Band The Chicago Maroon Chicago Review Contemporary Chamber Players Doc Films Off-Off Campus Poetry Club Student Government Voices in Your Head WHPK People President Law school dean Alumni Business Law Faculty Business Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Catalonia People ISIL Other Yale LUX 41°47′32″N 87°36′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.7922°N 87.6000°W ﻿ / 41.7922; -87.6000 This article related to a building or structure in Chicago is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_Chicago_Library&oldid=1305010893 " Categories : University of Chicago Library University and college academic libraries in the United States Libraries in Chicago University of Chicago buildings Chicago building and structure stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Coordinates on Wikidata All stub articles Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 14:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents University of Chicago Library 5 languages Add topic

