Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and background Toggle Definition and background subsection 1.1 Islamic feminists 1.2 Islamic feminism and the Quran 1.3 Early Muslims and modern Islamic feminists 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Nineteenth century 2.2 Twentieth century 2.3 Twenty-first century 2.4 Muslim women in politics 3 Muslim feminist groups and initiatives Toggle Muslim feminist groups and initiatives subsection 3.1 Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan 3.2 Sisters in Islam 3.3 Musawah 3.4 Sister-hood 3.5 Women Living Under Muslim Laws (WLUML) 3.6 Muslim Women's Quest for Equality 3.7 Ni Putes Ni Soumises 4 International conferences on Islamic feminism 5 Areas of campaign Toggle Areas of campaign subsection 5.1 Personal law 5.2 Equality in the mosque 5.3 Equality in leading prayer 5.4 Internet & social media impact 5.5 Dress code 6 Criticism 7 Notable people 8 World Hijab Day 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 In particular countries 9.2 General 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Islamic feminism 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bikol Central Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latviešu Македонски Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Português Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feminist discourse and practice articulated within an Islamic paradigm Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series on Islam Beliefs Oneness of God Angels Holy books Prophets Judgement Day Predestination Practices Profession of faith Prayer Almsgiving Fasting Pilgrimage Texts Foundations Quran Sunnah ( Hadith , Sirah ) Tafsir (exegesis) Ijtihad Aqidah (creed) Qisas al-Anbiya ( Stories of the Prophets ) Mathnawi (poems) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) History Timeline Jahiliyyah Muhammad Ahl al-Bayt Sahabah Rashidun Caliphate Imamate Spread of Islam Succession to Muhammad Abbasid Caliphate Al-Andalus Golden Age Seljuk Empire Ilkhanate Timurid Renaissance Gunpowder empires Ottoman Empire Saudi Arabia Culture and society Academics Animals Art Association football Calendar Cats Censorship Children Circumcision Democracy Demographics Diaspora Denominations Sunni Shia Ibadi Economics Education Ethics Exorcism Feminism Festivals Finance Liberalism Madrasa Moral teachings Mosque Music Mysticism Philosophy Poetry Politics Proselytizing Science Sexuality LGBTQ Slavery Concubinage Social welfare Women Related topics Arabic language Apostasy Criticism Muhammad Quran Hadith Other religions Islamism Violence terrorism war Islamophobia Jihad Jihadism Salafi jihadism Deobandi jihadism Military laws Peace Pacifism Glossary Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Islamism Fundamentals Islam History Culture Economics Politics Secularism Ideologies Salafi movement Salafi jihadism International propagation By region Deobandi movement Deobandi jihadism Qutbism Khomeinism Shia Islamism Islamic fundamentalism Islamic nationalism Concepts Apostasy in Islam Takfir Islamic governance Caliphate Islamic democracy Islamic feminism Islamic liberalism Islamic socialism Islamic extremism Islamic state Islamic republic Spread of Islam ( of knowledge ) Jihad Islamic terrorism Jihadism Pan-Islamism Political Islam aspects Post-Islamism Sharia Shura Two-nation theory Ummah Influences Anti-communism Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Decolonization Islamic Golden Age Islamic revival Movements Scholastic Barelvi Dawat-e-Islami Deobandi Nurcu Salafism Madkhalism Ahl-i Hadith Sahwa movement Wahhabism International propagation by country/region Political Salafist Front Salafist Call Movement of Society for Peace Hamas Party of Democratic Action Jamaat-e-Islami Millî Görüş Muslim Brotherhood List of Islamic political parties Militant Militant Islamism based in MENA region South Asia Southeast Asia Sub-Saharan Africa Key texts The Caliphate or the Grand Imamate ( Rashīd Rīďha 1922 ) Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam ( Iqbal 1930s ) Principles of State and Government ( Asad 1961 ) Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ("Milestones") ( Qutb 1965 ) Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ("Velayat-e faqih") ( Khomeini 1970 ) Heads of state Ahmed al-Sharaa Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Ruhollah Khomeini Mohamed Morsi Muammar Gaddafi Alija Izetbegović Ismail Haniyeh Zia ul-Haq Ali Khamenei Omar al-Bashir Mohammed Omar House of Saud House of Thani Hibatullah Akhundzada Sadiq al-Mahdi Key ideologues Abu Hamza al-Masri Rabee al-Madkhali Muhammad Abduh Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī Qazi Hussain Ahmad Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani Muhammad Asad Hassan al-Banna Rached Ghannouchi Safwat Hegazi Muhammad Iqbal Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Necip Fazıl Kısakürek Abul A'la Maududi Abul Hasan Nadwi Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani Yusuf al-Qaradawi Sayyid Qutb Tariq Ramadan Ata Abu Rashta Rashid Rida Navvab Safavi Ali Shariati Haji Shariatullah Hassan Al-Turabi Ahmed Yassin Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Criticism Liberal and reform movements within Islam in Europe in North America Khaled Abu al-Fadl Farag Foda Abdelwahab Meddeb Maryam Namazie Maajid Nawaaz Sam Harris Olivier Roy Bassam Tibi Muhammad Sa'id al-Ashmawi Gilles Kepel Shiraz Maher Magnus Ranstorp Related topics Islam and modernity Modernism Islam and other religions Islamophobia Islam portal Politics portal v t e Islamic feminism is a form of feminism concerned with the role of women in Islam . It aims for the full equality of all Muslims , regardless of gender, in public and private life. Islamic feminists advocate for women's rights , gender equality , and social justice grounded in an Islamic framework. Although rooted in Islam , the movement's pioneers have also utilized secular , Western, or otherwise non-Muslim feminist discourses, and have recognized the role of Islamic feminism as part of an integrated global feminist movement.

Advocates of the movement seek to highlight the teachings of equality in the religion, and encourage a questioning of patriarchal interpretations of Islam by reinterpreting the Quran and Hadith .

Prominent thinkers include Begum Rokeya , Amina Wadud , Leila Ahmed , Fatema Mernissi , Azizah al-Hibri , Riffat Hassan , Asma Lamrabet , and Asma Barlas .

Definition and background [ edit ] Islamic feminists [ edit ] Main article: Hermeneutics of feminism in Islam Since the mid-nineteenth century, Muslim women and men have been critical of restrictions placed on women regarding education , seclusion , veiling , polygyny , slavery , and concubinage . Modern Muslims have questioned these practices and advocated for reform.

[ 1 ] There is an ongoing debate about the status of women in Islam. Conservative Islamic feminists use the Quran, the Hadith, and prominent women in Muslim history as evidence for the discussion on women's rights. Feminists argue that early Islam represented more egalitarian ideals, while conservatives argue that gender asymmetries are "divinely ordained".

[ 2 ] Islamic feminists are Muslims who interpret the Quran and Hadith in an egalitarian manner and advocate for women's rights and equality in the public and personal sphere. Islamic feminists critique patriarchal, sexist, and misogynistic understandings of Islam.

[ 3 ] Islamic feminists understand the Qur'an as advocating gender equality.

[ 4 ] Islamic feminism is anchored within the discourse of Islam with the Quran as its central text.

[ 5 ] The historian Margot Badran states that Islamic feminism "derives its understanding and mandate from the Qur’an, seeks rights and justice for women, and for men, in the totality of their existence." [ 6 ] [ 4 ] Islamists are advocates of political Islam , the notion that the Quran and hadith mandate an Islamic government. Some Islamists advocate women's rights in the public sphere but do not challenge gender inequality in the personal, private sphere .

[ 7 ] Su'ad al-Fatih al-Badawi , a Sudanese academic and Islamist politician, has argued that feminism is incompatible with taqwa (the Islamic conception of piety), and thus Islam and feminism are mutually exclusive.

[ 8 ] Badran argues that Islam and feminism are not mutually exclusive.

[ 9 ] Islamic feminists have differed in their understandings and definitions of Islamic feminism. Islamic scholar Asma Barlas shares Badran's views, discussing the difference between secular feminists and Islamic feminism and in countries where Muslims make up 98% of the population, it is not possible to avoid engaging “its basic beliefs.” [ 10 ] The major distinction between the two facets of the gender based hypothesis is the fact that Islamic feminism engages with the theology and draws from the qur’anic verses of equality. This postulate is often misinterpreted and confused with the term fundamentalism by the west; which it is also battling at the same time . Fundamentalism can be explained as active contemporary movements organised in order to shield a perceived assault on the religious foundation of the social order.

[ 11 ] It is fuelled with the basic assumption stating that modernism and secularism is to blame for society’s moral degeneration. It stands as, “a protest against the assault on patriarchal structural principles”.

[ 12 ] Elizabeth Segran states that just talking about human rights mentioned in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) does not create immediate resonance with ordinary Muslim women; since Islam is the source of their values, integrating human rights frameworks with Islam makes sense.

[ 13 ] South African Muslim scholar Fatima Seedat agrees with both Barlas and Badran about the importance of feminism in the Islamic world. However, she debates the term “Islamic Feminism” is unnecessary since feminism is a “social practice, not merely of personal identity.” [ 14 ] Seedat believes the convergence of both Islamic and feminism creates more conflict and opens more doors for “Islamists” to interpret or misinterpret the Qur'an to suit their political needs. She believes it is important to speak about and illustrate how feminism has existed in the lines of the Qur'an. By separating the two and giving their own space, it will be more inclusive to everyone (men, women, Muslims and non-Muslims). In the same article, “Feminism, and Islamic Feminism: Between Inadequacy and Inevitability,” Seedat explains that the existence of such a term separates Muslims and isolates them from the rest of the world and the universal feminist movement. She states in her essay the importance of sharing with the rest of the world what Islam has to offer feminism, and to show the true image of Islam by not referring to themselves as Islamic feminists.

Some Muslim women writers and activists have eschewed identifying themselves as Islamic feminists out of a belief Western feminism is exclusionary to Muslim women and women of color more generally.

[ 15 ] Azizah al-Hibri , a Lebanese-American Muslim scholar, has identified herself as a "womanist".

[ 16 ] Islamic feminism and the Quran [ edit ] Islamic feminists understand the Quran as advocating gender equality.

[ 4 ] In the view of feminist legal scholar Azizah al-Hibri, the Quran teaches all human beings are creations of God from one soul, who were divided into nations and tribes to know each other, and the most honored individuals are those who are the most pious. Therefore, al-Hibri writes that the Quran recognizes differences between human beings while asserting their natural equality and no man is recognized as superior by their gender alone.

[ 17 ] According to Aysha Hidayatullah, many feminist interpreters of the Quran use the historical context of a verse's revelation in order to determine whether a verse's command was specific to the situation of its revelation or intended as general instruction. For many feminist exegetes, reading the former as the latter risks universalising the historical situation of seventh century Arabia, including the sexism present in that society, as such verses do not directly state the Quran's universal principles but rather apply them to specific situations at the time of revelation. Amina Wadud uses historical contextualisation to critique interpretations of verse 4:34 that take it to assert men's superiority, arguing for a reading that insists on mutuality between men and women. For Wadud, the verse does not assert men's superiority, nor does it universally assign men the role of provider. As cited by Hidayatullah, Wadud understands the verse as prescribing men's responsibility to ensure "that the woman is not burdened with additional responsibilities [in the context of childbearing]." However, the male role of "qiwamah" or economic provider does not always reflect modern social reality. Yet, the verse depicts as ideal an "equitable and mutually dependent relationship" which demonstrates a Quranic insistence on "mutual responsibility between males and females". Such mutual responsibility is not limited to a specific time or place, and can be applied in modern societies.

[ 18 ] Early Muslims and modern Islamic feminists [ edit ] Modern Muslim feminists and progressive Muslims have taken early figures in Islamic history as role models including Khadijah , [ 19 ] Aisha , Hafsa , Umm Salama , Fatima , and Zaynab bint Ali .

Zainab Alwani cites Aisha as an empowered and intelligent woman who repeatedly confronted the misogyny of other sahaba .

[ 20 ] Moroccan feminist Asma Lamrabet has also argued Aisha was an empowered female intellectual against what Lamrabet sees as a misogynistic intellectual history.

[ 21 ] Lamrabet has also praised Umm Salama as a feminist figure.

[ 22 ] Iranian revolutionary thinker Ali Shariati wrote Fatemeh is Fatemeh , a biography of Muhammad's daughter Fatima, that holds her as a role model for women.

[ 23 ] Ednan Aslan suggests Fatima is an example of female empowerment in early Islam, as she was not afraid to oppose Abu Bakr and demand her inheritance.

[ 24 ] Some Muslim feminists have asserted Muhammad himself was a feminist.

[ 25 ] History [ edit ] In the past 150 years or so, many scholarly interpretations have developed from within the Islamic tradition itself that seek to redress social wrongs perpetrated against Muslim women .

[ 26 ] For example, new Islamic jurisprudence is emerging that seeks to forbid practices like female genital mutilation , equalize family law, support women as clergy and in administrative positions in mosques, and supports equal opportunities for Muslim women to become judges in civil as well as religious institutions.

[ 26 ] Modern feminist Islamic scholars perceive their work as restoration of rights provided by God and Muhammad but denied by society.

[ 26 ] Nineteenth century [ edit ] Begum Rokeya was one of the earliest Islamic feminist thinkers.

The modern movement of Islamic feminism began in the nineteenth century.

Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain , also known as Begum Rokeya (1880 - 1932) was a writer, educator and the earliest intellectual of Islamic feminism from Bengal . She struggled women's education and advocated for gender-based equality amongst Bengali Muslims , a community that was socio-economically and culturally deeply maginalised in colonial Bengal . Through her writings and activism, she sharply criticized the entrenched patriarchy of South Asian society and condemned the practice of purdah , the veiling and segregation of women.

[ 27 ] In works such as Sultana’s Dream (1905), the earliest utopian Islamic feminist science fiction and Abarodhbasini (1931), she imagined alternatives to male-dominated social orders and exposed the injustices faced by women in seclusion.

[ 28 ] In 1911, she established the first ever girls' school , Sakhawat Memorial Girls’ School in Calcutta to provide formal education for Muslim girls, often persuading conservative families to enroll their daughters by agreeing to preserve cultural customs within the classroom.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] She was very influencial amongst Bengalis and her legacy is celebrated in modern-day Bangladesh .

[ 29 ] Aisha Taymur (1840 - 1902) was a prominent writer and early activist for women's rights in Egypt. Taymur's writings criticized male domination over women and celebrated women's intellect and courage.

[ 31 ] Another early Muslim feminist activist and writer was Zaynab Fawwaz (1860 - 1914). Fawwaz argued for women's social and intellectual quality with men and wrote a book of biographies of famous women.

[ 32 ] Egyptian jurist Qasim Amin , the author of the 1899 pioneering book Women's Liberation ( Tahrir al-Mar'a ), is often described as the father of the Egyptian feminist movement . In his work, Amin criticized some of the practices prevalent in his society at the time, such as polygyny , the veil , and purdah , i.e.

sex segregation in Islam . He condemned them as un-Islamic and contradictory to the true spirit of Islam. His work had an enormous influence on women's political movements throughout the Islamic and Arab world , and is read and cited today.

[ citation needed ] Despite Qasim Amin's effects on modern-day Islamic feminist movements, present-day scholar Leila Ahmed considers his works both androcentric and colonialist .

[ 33 ] Muhammad 'Abdu , an Egyptian nationalist [ 34 ] and proponent of Islamic modernism , could easily have written the chapters of his work that show honest considerations of the negative effects of the veil on women.

[ 35 ] Amin even posed many male-centered misconceptions about women, such as their inability to experience love, that women needlessly talk about their husbands outside their presence, and that Muslim marriage is based on ignorance and sensuality, of which women were the chief source.

[ 36 ] Lesser known, however, are the women who preceded Amin in their feminist critique of their societies. The women's press in Egypt started voicing such concerns since its very first issues in 1892. Egyptian, Turkish, Iranian, Syrian and Lebanese women and men had been reading European feminist magazines even a decade earlier, and discussed their relevance to the Middle East in the general press.

[ 37 ] Twentieth century [ edit ] Aisha Abd al-Rahman , writing under her pen name Bint al-Shati ("Daughter of the Riverbank"), was one of the first to undertake Quranic exegesis , and though she did not consider herself to be a feminist, her works reflect feminist themes. She began producing her popular books in 1959, the same year that Naguib Mahfouz published his allegorical and feminist version of the life of Muhammad.

[ 38 ] She wrote biographies of early women in Islam , including the mother , wives and daughters of Muhammad, as well as literary criticism .

[ 39 ] Queen Soraya of Afghanistan headed reform so that women could get an education and the right to vote. The Syrian-born queen of Afghanistan believed that women should be equal to men. A women's magazine and a women's organization to protect girls and women from abuse and domestic violence were also founded by Queen Soraya, argued by some to be the Muslim world's first feminist. She also arranged for young Afghan men and women to take higher education abroad. The liberal reforms were not received kindly by the ultra-conservative Islamists who orchestrated a widespread rebellion in 1928. In order to spare the country and people from the horrors of a long civil war, King Amanullah, and Queen Soraya abdicated and went into exile with their family in 1929 to Rome.

Moroccan writer and sociologist, Fatema Mernissi was a prominent Muslim feminist thinker. Her book Beyond the Veil explores the oppression of women in Islamic societies and sexual ideology and gender identity through the perspective of Moroccan society and culture.

[ 40 ] Mernissi argued in her book The Veil and the Male Elite that the suppression of women's rights in Islamic societies is the result of political motivation and its consequent manipulative interpretation of hadith, which runs counter to the egalitarian Islamic community of men and women envisioned by Muhammad.

[ 41 ] Mernissi argued that the ideal Muslim woman being "silent and obedient" has nothing to do with the message of Islam. In her view, conservative Muslim men manipulated the Quran to preserve their patriarchal system in order to prevent women from sexual liberation; thus enforcing justification of strict veiling and limiting their rights.

[ 40 ] A later 20th-century Islamic feminist is Amina Wadud . Wadud was born into an African-American family and converted to Islam. In 1992, Wadud published Quran and Woman , a work that critiqued patriarchal interpretations of the Quran.

[ 42 ] Some strains of modern Islamic feminism have opted to expunge hadith from their ideology altogether in favor of a movement focusing only on Qur'anic principles.

Riffat Hassan has advocated one such movement, articulating a theology wherein what are deemed to be universal rights for humanity outlined in the Qur'an are prioritized over contextual laws and regulations.

[ 43 ] She has additionally claimed that the Qur'an, taken alone as scripture, does not present females either as a creation preceded by the male or as the instigator of the " Fall of Man ".

[ 44 ] This theological movement has been met with criticism from other Muslim feminists such as Kecia Ali, who has criticized its selective nature for ignoring elements within the Muslim tradition that could prove helpful in establishing more egalitarian norms in Islamic society.

[ 45 ] Twenty-first century [ edit ] Islamic feminist scholarship and activism has continued into the 21st century.

In 2015, a group of Muslim activists, politicians, and writers issued a Declaration of Reform which, among other things, supports women's rights and states in part, "We support equal rights for women, including equal rights to inheritance, witness, work, mobility, personal law, education, and employment. Men and women have equal rights in mosques, boards, leadership and all spheres of society. We reject sexism and misogyny ." [ 46 ] The Declaration also announced the founding of the Muslim Reform Movement organization to work against the beliefs of Middle Eastern terror groups.

[ 47 ] Asra Nomani and others placed the Declaration on the door of the Islamic Center of Washington .

[ 47 ] Feminism in the Middle East is over a century old, and having been impacted directly by the war on terror in Afghanistan, continues to grow and fight for women's rights and equality in all conversations of power and everyday life.

[ 48 ] Muslim feminist writers today include Aysha Hidayatollah , Kecia Ali , Asma Lamrabet , Olfa Yousef , and Mohja Kahf .

Muslim women in politics [ edit ] Muslim majority countries have produced several female heads of state, prime ministers, and state secretaries such as Lala Shovkat of Azerbaijan , Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan , Mame Madior Boye of Senegal , Tansu Çiller of Turkey , Kaqusha Jashari of Kosovo , and Megawati Sukarnoputri of Indonesia . In Bangladesh , Khaleda Zia was elected the country's first female prime minister in 1991, and served as prime minister until 2009, when she was replaced by Sheikh Hasina , who made Bangladesh the country with the longest continuous female premiership (2009-2024), marked by an era of authoritarianism .

[ 49 ] Muslim feminist groups and initiatives [ edit ] Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan [ edit ] Main articles: Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan and Meena Keshwar Kamal Meena Keshwar Kamal (1956 - 1987), founder of RAWA The Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan (RAWA) is a women's organization based in Quetta , Pakistan, that promotes women's rights and secular democracy . The organization aims to involve women of Afghanistan in both political and social activities aimed at acquiring their human rights and continuing the struggle against the government of Afghanistan based on democratic and secular - not fundamentalist - principles, in which women can participate fully.

[ 50 ] The organization was founded in 1977 by a group of intellectuals led by Meena (she did not use a last name). They founded the organization to promote equality and education for women; it continues to "give voice to the deprived and silenced women of Afghanistan". Before 1978, RAWA focused mainly on women's rights and democracy, but after the coup of 1978, directed by Moscow, and the 1979 Soviet Occupation of Afghanistan, "Rawa became directly involved in the war of resistance, advocating democracy and secularism from the outset".

[ 51 ] In 1979 RAWA campaigned against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan , and organized meetings in schools to mobilize support against it, and in 1981, launched a bilingual feminist magazine , Payam-e-Zan (Women's Message).

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] RAWA also founded Watan Schools to aid refugee children and their mothers , offering both hospitalization and the teaching of practical skills.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Sisters in Islam [ edit ] Zainah Anwar Sisters in Islam (SIS) is a Malaysian civil society organization committed to promoting the rights of women within the frameworks of Islam and universal human rights. SIS work focuses on challenging laws and policies made in the name of Islam that discriminate against women. As such it tackles issues covered under Malaysia's Islamic family and syariah laws, such as polygamy, [ 55 ] child marriage, [ 56 ] moral policing, [ 57 ] Islamic legal theory and jurisprudence, the hijab and modesty, [ 58 ] violence against women and hudud .

[ 59 ] Their mission is to promote the principles of gender equality, justice, freedom, and dignity of Islam and empower women to be advocates for change.

[ 60 ] They seek to promote a framework of women's rights in Islam which take into consideration women's experiences and realities; they want to eliminate the injustice and discrimination that women may face by changing mindsets that may hold women to be inferior to men; and they want to increase the public knowledge and reform laws and policies within the framework of justice and equality in Islam.

[ 60 ] Prominent members are Zainah Anwar [ 61 ] and co-founder amina wadud .

[ 62 ] Musawah [ edit ] In 2009, twelve women from the Arab world formed the global movement Musawah , whose name means "equality" in Arabic. Musawah advocates for feminist interpretations of Islamic texts and calls on nations to abide by international human rights standards such as those promulgated in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women . Musawah's approach is modeled after that of Sisters in Islam. Secular feminists have criticized Musawah, arguing that Islam is shaky ground on which to build a feminist movement, given that interpretation of Islamic sources is subjective.

[ 13 ] Sister-hood [ edit ] Sister-hood is an international platform for the voices of women of Muslim heritage founded in 2007 by Norwegian film-maker and human rights activist Deeyah Khan through her media and arts production company Fuuse .

[ 63 ] Sister-hood was relaunched in 2016 as a global online magazine and live events platform promoting the voices of women of Muslim heritage.
Sister-hood magazine ambassadors include Farida Shaheed from Pakistan, Egyptian Mona Eltahawy , Palestinian Rula Jebreal , Leyla Hussein of Somali heritage and Algerian Marieme Helie Lucas .

Women Living Under Muslim Laws (WLUML) [ edit ] Women Living Under Muslim Laws is an international solidarity network established in 1984 that advocates for both Muslim and non-Muslim women who live in states governed by Islamic law. The group does research on Islamic law and women and advocacy work.

[ 64 ] Muslim Women's Quest for Equality [ edit ] Muslim Women's Quest for Equality is an Indian activist group that petitioned the Supreme Court of India against the practices of talaq-e-bidat (triple talaq), nikah halala and polygyny under the Muslim personal laws as being illegal and unconstitutional [ 65 ] [ 66 ] in September 2016.

Ni Putes Ni Soumises [ edit ] Ni Putes Ni Soumises , whose name translates to Neither Whores nor Submissives, is a French feminist organization founded by Samira Bellil and other young women of African backgrounds, to address the sexual and physical violence that women in Muslim majority neighborhoods in France faced.

[ 67 ] International conferences on Islamic feminism [ edit ] Few international conferences on Islamic feminism have taken place. One international congress on Islamic feminism was held in Barcelona, Spain in 2008.

[ 68 ] Musawah ('equality'; in Arabic : مساواة ) is a global movement for equality and justice in the Muslim family, led by feminists since 2009, "seeking to reclaim Islam and the Koran for themselves".

[ 69 ] Musawah movement operates on the principle that patriarchy within Muslim countries is a result of the way male interpreters have read Islamic texts, [ 69 ] and that feminists can progressively interpret the Quran to achieve the goal of international human rights standards .

[ 69 ] The first female Muslim 'ulema congress was held in Indonesia in 2017.

[ 70 ] The women ulema congress issued a fatwa to lift the minimum age for girls to marry to 18.

[ 70 ] Malaysian feminist Zainah Anwar informed the congress that women have an equal right to define Islam and that women need to fight against male domination in Quranic interpretations.

[ 70 ] During the congress, Nur Rofiah , a professor in Quranic studies, stated that, Islam asks every human being to elevate the status of humankind, and polygamy does not, and that polygamy is not the teaching of Islam [ 70 ] Areas of campaign [ edit ] Personal law [ edit ] See also: Islamic marital jurisprudence Manal al-Sharif speaking at the Oslo Freedom Forum in 2012 about the #Women2Drive campaign she co-founded.

One of such controversial interpretations involve passages in the Quran that discuss the idea of a man's religious obligation to support women.

[ 71 ] Some scholars, such as anthropologist Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban in her work on Arab-Muslim women activists' engagement in secular religious movements, argue that this assertion of a religious obligation "has traditionally been used as a rationale for the social practice of male authority." [ 71 ] In some countries the legislative and administrative application of male authority is used to justify denying women access to the public sphere through the "denial of permission to travel or work outside the home, or even drive a car." [ 71 ] On Sept. 26, 2017 Saudi Arabia announced it would end its longstanding policy banning women from driving in June 2018.

[ 72 ] Various female activists had protested the ban, among them Saudi women's rights activists Manal al-Sharif , [ 73 ] by posting videos of them driving on social media platforms. One of the women's rights activists from Saudi Arabia, Loujain al-Hathloul had been imprisoned for more than 3 years and was sentenced on 28 December 2020 to a total of 5 years and 8 months in prison for allegedly conspiring against the kingdom in alignment with foreign nations following her protest against the ban on driving for women in Saudi. Two years and ten months of her prison sentence was reduced leaving only 3 months of time left to serve. However, the charges against her were false and the authorities denied arresting her for protesting against driving ban on women in Saudi Arabia. The prosecutors who were charged with torturing her during detention; sexually and otherwise, were cleared of charges by the government stating lack of evidence.

[ 74 ] Islamic feminists have objected to the MPL legislation in many of these countries, arguing that these pieces of legislation discriminate against women. Some Islamic feminists have taken the attitude that a reformed MPL which is based on the Quran and sunnah , which includes substantial input from Muslim women, and which does not discriminate against women is possible.

[ 75 ] Such Islamic feminists have been working on developing women-friendly forms of MPL. (See, for example, the Canadian Council of Muslim Women for argument based on the Qur'an and not on what they call medieval male consensus.) Other Islamic feminists, particularly some in Muslim minority contexts which are democratic states, argue that MPL should not be reformed but should be rejected and that Muslim women should seek redress, instead, from the civil laws of those states.

Islamic feminists have been active in advocating for women's rights in the Islamic world. In 2012, Jordanian women protested against laws that allowed the dropping of charges if a rapist marries his victim, Tunisian women marched for equality for women in a new constitution, Saudi women protested against the ban against car driving, and Sudanese women created a silent wall of protest demanding freedom for arrested women.

[ 13 ] Equality in the mosque [ edit ] See also: Islamic Bill of Rights for Women in the Mosque Woman sitting at the threshold of the main building of Hazratbal shrine in Srinagar as the sign on the gate reads " Ladies Are Not Allowed " A survey by the Council on American Islamic Relations showed that two out of three mosques in 2000 required women to pray in a separate area, up from one out of two in 1994.

[ 76 ] Islamic feminists have begun to protest this, advocating for women to be allowed to pray beside men without a partition, as they do in Mecca.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] In 2003, Asra Nomani challenged the rules at her mosque in Morgantown, West Virginia, that required women to enter through a back door and pray in a secluded balcony.

[ 76 ] She argued that Muhammad didn't put women behind partitions, and that barriers preventing women from praying equally with men are just sexist man-made rules.

[ 76 ] The men at her mosque put her on trial to be banished.

[ 76 ] In 2004, some American mosques had constitutions prohibiting women from voting in board elections.

[ 79 ] In 2005, following public agitation on the issue, Muslim organizations that included the CAIR and the Islamic Society of North America issued a report on making mosques "women-friendly", to assert women's rights in mosques, and to include women's right to pray in the main hall without a partition.

[ 76 ] In 2010, American Muslim Fatima Thompson and a few others organized and participated in a "pray-in" at the Islamic Center of Washington in D.C.

[ 76 ] Police were summoned and threatened to arrest the women when they refused to leave the main prayer hall. The women continued their protest against being corralled in what they referred to as the " penalty box " (a prayer space reserved for only women). Thompson called the penalty box "an overheated, dark back room." [ 76 ] A second protest also staged by the same group on the eve of International Women's Day in 2010 resulted in calls to the police and threats of arrest again.

[ 76 ] However, the women were not arrested on either occasion.

[ 76 ] In May 2010, five women prayed with men at the Dar al-Hijrah mosque, one of the Washington region's largest Islamic centers.

[ 77 ] After the prayers, a member of the mosque called Fairfax police who asked the women to leave.

[ 77 ] However, later in 2010, it was decided that D.C. police would no longer intervene in such protests.

[ 80 ] In 2015 a group of Muslim activists, politicians, and writers issued a Declaration of Reform which states in part, "Men and women have equal rights in mosques, boards, leadership and all spheres of society. We reject sexism and misogyny." [ 46 ] That same year Asra Nomani and others placed the Declaration on the door of the Islamic Center of Washington.

[ 47 ] Equality in leading prayer [ edit ] Main article: Women as imams In 'A Survey and Analysis of Legal Arguments on Woman-Led Prayer in Islam named "I am one of the People"' Ahmed Elewa states that not because of external expectation but in due course with enlightened awareness Muslim communities should adopt women lead mixed gender prayers. In the same research paper Silvers emphasizes on example of Umm Salama who insisted that women are 'one of the people' and suggests women to assert their inclusion with equal rights. Elewa and Silvers research calls contemporary prohibitions of women lead prayer frustrating.

[ 26 ] According to currently existing traditional schools of Islam, a woman cannot lead a mixed gender congregation in salat (prayer). Traditionalists like Muzammil Siddiqi states that women are not supposed to lead prayer because "It is not permissible to introduce any new style or liturgy in Salat." In other words, there must be no deviation from the tradition of men teaching.

[ 81 ] Some schools make exceptions for Tarawih (optional Ramadan prayers) or for a congregation consisting only of close relatives. Certain medieval scholars—including Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari (838–923), Abu Thawr (764–854), Isma'il Ibn Yahya al-Muzani (791–878), and Ibn Arabi (1165–1240) considered the practice permissible at least for optional ( nafl ) prayers; however, their views are not accepted by any major surviving group. Islamic feminists have begun to protest this.

On March 18, 2005, Amina Wadud led a mixed-gender congregational Friday prayer in New York City. It sparked a controversy within the Muslim community because the imam was a woman, Wadud, who also delivered the khutbah.

[ 82 ] Moreover, the congregation she addressed was not separated by gender. This event that departed from the established ritual practice became an embodied performance of gender justice in the eyes of its organizers and participants. The event was widely publicized in the global media and caused an equally global debate among Muslims.

[ 82 ] However, many Muslims, including women, remain in disagreement with the idea of a woman as imam. Muzammil Siddiqi, chairman of the Fiqh Council of North America, argued that prayer leadership should remain restricted to men.

[ 82 ] He based his argument on the longstanding practice and thus community consensus and emphasized the danger of women distracting men during prayers.

The events that occurred in regards to equality in the mosque and women leading prayers, show the enmity Muslim feminists may receive when voicing opposition toward sexism and establishing efforts to combat it. Those who criticize Muslim feminists state that those who question the faith's views on gender segregation, or who attempt to make changes, are overstepping their boundaries and are acting offensively. On the other hand, people have stated that Islam does not advocate gender segregation. Britain's influential Sunni imam, Ahtsham Ali, has stated, "gender segregation has no basis in Islamic law" nor is it justified in the Quran.

[ 83 ] Elewa and Silvers deduce that with lack of any explicit evidence to contrary one ought to assume, women lead prayer adds nothing new to God established worship but just a default state of command expects men and women both to lead the prayer.

[ 26 ] Internet & social media impact [ edit ] Internet & social media debates opened up easy access to religious texts for Muslim women which helps them understand scriptural backing for the gender equality rights they which they fight for.

[ 84 ] Dress code [ edit ] Main article: Islamic feminist views on dress codes See also: Haya (Islam) , Islam and clothing , Awrah , Purdah , and Hijab by country Another issue that concerns Muslim women is dress code . Islam requires both men and women to dress modestly, but there is a difference in opinion about what type of dress is required. according to Leila Ahmed , during Muhammad's lifetime, the veil was observed only by his wives; its spread to the wider Muslim community was a later development.

[ 85 ] Islamic feminist Asma Barlas says that the Quran only requires women to dress modestly, but it doesn't require them to veil.

[ 86 ] Despite the controversy over hijab in sections of Western society, the veil is not controversial in mainstream Islamic feminist discourse, except in those situations where it is the result of social pressure or coercion. There is in fact strong support from many Muslim feminists in favor of the veil, though they generally believe that it should be voluntarily chosen.

Many Muslim men and women now view the veil as a symbol of Islamic freedom.

[ 87 ] While there are some Islamic scholars who interpret Islamic scripture as not mandating hijab, [ 88 ] many Islamic feminists still observe hijab as an act of religious piety or sometimes as a way of symbolically rejecting Western culture by making a display of their Muslim identity. Such sentiment was expressed, among others, by Muslim U.S.

Congresswoman Ilhan Omar who stated in an interview with Vogue , "To me, the hijab means power, liberation, beauty, and resistance." [ 89 ] The annual event World Hijab Day , observed on February 1 (the anniversary of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini 's return from exile to Iran), is also celebrated by many Islamic feminists. Meanwhile, publicist Nadiya Takolia stated that she had actually adopted hijab after becoming a feminist, saying the hijab "is not about protection from men's lusts," but about "telling the world that my femininity is not available for public consumption...and I don't want to be part of a system that reduces and demeans women." [ 90 ] On the other side, there is a section of Islamic feminists, such as Fadela Amara and Hedi Mhenni , who do oppose hijab and even support legal bans on the garment for various reasons. Amara explained her support for France's ban of the garment in public buildings : "The veil is the visible symbol of the subjugation of women, and therefore has no place in the mixed, secular spaces of France's public school system ." [ 91 ] When some feminists began defending the headscarf on the grounds of "tradition", Amara said: "It's not tradition, it's archaic! French feminists are totally contradictory. When Algerian women fought against wearing the headscarf in Algeria , French feminists supported them. But when it's some young girl in a French suburb school, they don't. They define liberty and equality according to what colour your skin is. It's nothing more than neocolonialism ." [ 91 ] Mhenni also expressed support for Tunisia's ban on the veil : "If today we accept the headscarf, tomorrow we'll accept that women's rights to work and vote and receive an education be banned and they'll be seen as just a tool for reproduction and housework." [ 92 ] Sihem Habchi , director of Ni Putes Ni Soumises , expressed support for France's ban on the burqa in public places , stating that the ban was a matter of 'democratic principle' and protecting French women from the 'obscurantist, fascist, right-wing movement' that she claims the burqa represents.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Masih Alinejad began the movement My Stealthy Freedom in protest of forced hijab policies in Iran. The movement began as a Facebook page where women uploaded pictures of themselves defying Iran's mandatory hijab laws.

[ 95 ] Mahmoud Arghavan, however, noted that Islamic feminists have criticized My Stealthy Freedom as supporting Islamophobia , though Alinejad has countered this criticism.

[ 96 ] Criticism [ edit ] "Islamic feminism" as a concept has been heavily scrutinized and criticized by both Muslim and non-Muslim feminists.

[ 97 ] Iranian feminist Mahnaz Afkhami , for example, stated the following about secular Muslim feminists like herself: Our difference with Islamic feminists is that we don't try to fit feminism in the Qur'an. We say that women have certain inalienable rights. The epistemology of Islam is contrary to women's right ... I call myself a Muslim and a feminist. I am not an Islamic feminist – that’s a contradiction in terms.

[ 97 ] Hakimeh Entesari, an Iranian academic, also said, "The thoughts and writings of these people [Islamic feminists] suffer from a fundamental problem, and that is the absolute detachment of this movement from the cultural and indigenous realities of Islamic societies and countries..." She also believes that the use of the term "Islamic feminism" is wrong and it should be "Muslim feminists".

[ 98 ] Maria Massi Dakake , an American Muslim academic, criticized Asma Barlas ' assertion the Quran is inherently anti-patriarchal and sought to undo patriarchal social structures. Dakake writes, "She [Asma Barlas] makes a number of important and substantial points about the limitations to traditional "patriarchal" rights of fathers and husbands in the Quran. However, the conclusion that the Qur'an is "anti-patriarchal" as such is hard to reconcile with the Quran's fairly explicit endorsement of male leadership - even if not absolute authority - over the marital unit in 4:34." [ 99 ] Ibtissam Bouachrine , a professor at Smith College , has critiqued the writings of Fatema Mernissi . According to Bouachrine, Mernissi, in her book, The Veil and the Male Elite , critiques male interpretations of Quran 33:53 , but not of Quran 24:31, "which evokes the veil in the context of the feminine body in public space." She also criticizes how Mernissi focuses on the hadith over the Quran because it is easier to criticize the hadith than the Quran which is seen as the word of God, but the hadith are the words of human beings. Bouachrine also critiques how Mernissi presents Muhammad as a "revolutionary heretic who sides with women against the Arabian male elite and their patriarchal values" but does not critique Muhammad's marriage to nine-year-old Aisha . Bouachrine also states that Mernissi does not mention that Zaynab was the former wife of Muhammad's adopted son .

[ 100 ] Bouachrine also critiques Amina Wadud 's interpretation of 4:34 in Quran and Woman . According to Bouachrine, although 4:34 seems to call for men to physically discipline their wives, "Wadud argues that the Qur’an would not encourage violence against women and therefore the obedience required of women is to God not to the husband." Wadud also proposes that daraba means to set an example instead of to use physical force. According to Bouachrine, these reinterpretations do not help women in the Muslim world suffering from domestic violence.

[ 100 ] On a slightly different note, Ahmadian, head of Isfahan Institute of Theology stated: Some have created a fake title which is called "Islamic Feminism" in order to solve the conflict between Islam and feminism, that is considered to be a paradoxical combination and its principles are not consistent with the principles of Islam religion. Based on Islamic teachings, there are differences between the roles and positions of men/women, and this distinction doesn't lower the dignity of women in any way.

[ 101 ] While Seyed Hussein Ishaghi, Ph.D. in Islamic Theology, had the following to say: It is more appropriate to call Islamic feminism a woman-oriented interpretation of Islam religion... A group in the interaction of Islamic and Western culture faced an identity crisis; and on the other hand, in this confrontation, a group with its heart attached to Western culture denied religious teachings. That group promoted materialistic viewpoints by considering the mentioned beliefs as class or superstitious." [ 102 ] Notable people [ edit ] Main article: List of Muslim feminists World Hijab Day [ edit ] Main article: World Hijab Day World Hijab Day is an annual event founded by Bangladeshi-American Nazma Khan in 2013, [ 103 ] taking place on 1 February each year in 140 countries worldwide.

[ 104 ] Its stated purpose is to encourage women of all religions and backgrounds to wear and experience the hijab for a day and to educate and spread awareness on why hijab is worn.

[ 105 ] See also [ edit ] Islam portal Feminism portal In particular countries [ edit ] Akhbari Feminism in Egypt Feminism in India Golden Needle Sewing School International Conference on Population and Development Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan Women in Lebanon Women's rights in Iran Women's rights in Saudi Arabia Women's rights in Kuwait Women's rights movement in Iran General [ edit ] Hermeneutics of feminism in Islam List of Muslim feminists Abortion and Islam LGBT in Islam Female figures in the Qur'an Feminationalism Gender segregation and Islam History of feminism Postcolonial feminism Purplewashing Rada (fiqh) Rights and obligations of spouses in Islam Role of women in religion Sex segregation in Iran Taliban treatment of women Women in Islam World Hijab Day Glossary of Islam Gender roles in Islam Islamic clothing References [ edit ] ^ "Women and Islam - Oxford Islamic Studies Online" .

www.oxfordislamicstudies.com . Archived from the original on June 22, 2010 . Retrieved 2022-06-03 .

^ Mojab, Shahrzad (2001-11-01). "Theorizing the Politics of 'Islamic Feminism' ".

Feminist Review .

69 (1): 124– 146.

doi : 10.1080/01417780110070157 .

ISSN 0141-7789 .

S2CID 143067473 .

^ "Margot Badran: What does Islamic feminism have to offer? Where does it come from? Where is it going? | Opinion | The Guardian" .

TheGuardian.com . 2017-12-01. Archived from the original on 2017-12-01 . Retrieved 2022-06-03 .

^ a b c Fawcett, Rachelle.

"The reality and future of Islamic feminism" .

www.aljazeera.com . Retrieved 2022-06-03 .

^ "Exploring Islamic Feminism" Archived 2005-04-16 at the Wayback Machine by Margot Badran, Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding, Georgetown University, November 30, 2000 ^ Badran, Margot. Feminism in Islam : Secular and Religious Convergences. Oxford : Oneworld, 2009., 2009.

^ "ISLAMIC FEMINISM AND THE POLITICS OF NAMING" .

iran-bulletin.org .

Archived from the original on 2015-09-24 . Retrieved 9 December 2015 .

^ Hale, Sondra (2013).

"Sudanese Women in National Service, Militias & the Home" . In Doumato, Eleanor; Posusney, Marsha (eds.).

Women and Globalization in the Arab Middle East: Gender, Economy, and Society . Lynne Rienner. p. 208.

ISBN 978-1588261342 .

^ "Independent Lens . SHADYA . Muslim Feminism" .

www.pbs.org . Archived from the original on 2018-06-22 . Retrieved 2018-10-27 .

^ "Margot Badran: What does Islamic feminism have to offer? Where does it come from? Where is it going?" .

the Guardian . November 9, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017.

^ Gerami, Shahin; Lehnerer, Melodye (2001).

"Women's Agency and Household Diplomacy: Negotiating Fundamentalism" .

Gender and Society .

15 (4): 556– 573.

doi : 10.1177/089124301015004004 .

ISSN 0891-2432 .

JSTOR 3081922 .

^ Riesebrodt, Martin (1993-09-09).

Pious Passion: The Emergence of Modern Fundamentalism in the United States and Iran . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-91142-0 .

^ a b c Segran, Elizabeth (2013-12-04).

"The Rise of the Islamic Feminists" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 2017-05-20 . Retrieved 2017-05-20 – via www.thenation.com.

^ Seedat, Fatima (2016). "Beyond the Text: Between Islam and Feminism".

Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion .

32 (2): 138.

doi : 10.2979/jfemistudreli.32.2.23 .

S2CID 151549625 .

^ Hidayatollah, Aysha (2014).

Feminist Edges of the Qur'an . Oxford University Press. p. 12.

^ Floyd-Thomas, Stacey M. (August 2006).

Deeper Shades of Purple: Womanism in Religion and Society . NYU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-2753-9 .

^ Al-Hibri, Azizah. "An Introduction to Muslim Women's Rights" in Windows of Faith: Muslim Women Scholar-Activists in North America, edited by Gisela Webb. Syracuse University Press. pp. 52–53.

ISBN 0815628528 .

^ Hidayatullah, Aysha (2014).

Feminist Edges of the Qur'an . New York: Oxford UP. pp.

65– 86.

ISBN 978-0-19-935956-1 .

^ "The Original Feminist Jihadist - Ms. Magazine" .

msmagazine.com . 16 March 2010 . Retrieved 2022-06-03 .

^ Alwani, Zainab. "Muslim Women as Religious Scholars: A Historical Survey," in Muslima Theology: The Voices of Muslim Women Theologians , edited by Ednan Aslan, Marcia Hermansen, and Elif Medini, Peter Lang, Frankfurt, 2013, pp. 45-58.

^ "Aisha, épouse du prophète où l'islam au féminin" .

www.asma-lamrabet.com . Retrieved 2022-06-11 .

^ "When the Qur'an responds to women claims…" .

www.asma-lamrabet.com . Retrieved 2022-06-11 .

^ "Dr. Ali Shariati: Fatima is Fatima" .

www.iranchamber.com . Retrieved 2022-06-10 .

^ Aslan, Ednan. "Early Community Politics and the Marginalization of Women in Islamic Intellectual History ," in Muslima Theology: The Voices of Muslim Women Theologians , edited by Ednan Aslan, Marcia Hermansen, and Elif Medini, Peter Lang, Frankfurt, 2013, pp. 36-37.

^ "Muhammad Was A Feminist" .

HuffPost . 2016-10-28 . Retrieved 2022-06-03 .

^ a b c d e Elewa, Ahmed; Silvers, Laury (2010).

"I am one of the People: A Survey and Analysis of Legal Arguments on Woman-Led Prayer in Islam" .

Journal of Law and Religion .

26 (1): 141– 171.

doi : 10.1017/S074808140000093X .

ISSN 0748-0814 .

S2CID 232349598 .

^ Nasir, Amna (5 July 2017).

"Begum Rokeya: The Writer Who Introduced Us To Feminist Sci-Fi | #IndianWomenInHistory" .

Feminism in India .

^ Hussain, Azfar (5 December 2020).

"Remembering and Rereading Rokeya: Patriarchy, Politics, and Praxis" .

Daily Star .

^ a b Anam, Tahmima (2011-05-27).

"My hero Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-06-28 .

^ "Women emancipation: Begum Rokeya's revolutionary influence | Independent" .

theindependentbd.com . Retrieved 2025-06-28 .

^ " 'A'isha Taymur – Accessing Muslim Lives" . Retrieved 2022-06-02 .

^ Booth, Marilyn (1995).

"Exemplary Lives, Feminist Aspirations: Zaynab Fawwāz and the Arabic Biographical Tradition" .

Journal of Arabic Literature .

26 (1/2): 120– 146.

doi : 10.1163/157006495X00120 .

ISSN 0085-2376 .

JSTOR 4183369 .

^ Leila Ahmed. Women and Gender in Islam. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1992. pp.155-163, 171, 179.

^ Leila Ahmed. Women and Gender in Islam. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1992. pp.136-137.

^ Leila Ahmed. Women and Gender in Islam. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1992. pp.159,161.

^ Leila Ahmed. Women and Gender in Islam. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1992. pp.157-159.

^ see "Great Ancestors: Women Asserting Rights in Muslim Contexts", by Farida Shaheed with Aisha L.F. Shaheed (London/Lahore: WLUML/Shirkat Gah, 2005) [1] [ permanent dead link ] ^ Roded, Ruth (May 2006), "Bint al-Shati's Wives of the Prophet: Feminist or Feminine?", British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies , 33 (1): 51– 66, doi : 10.1080/13530190600603915 , S2CID 159905564 ^ Arab Women Novelists: The Formative Years and Beyond by Joseph T. Zeidan, State University of New York Press, 1995 ^ a b Rassam, Amal.

"Mernissi, Fatima" .

Oxford Islamic Studies . Archived from the original on January 8, 2019 . Retrieved October 24, 2019 .

^ Mernissi, Fatima (1992).

The Veil and the Male Elite: A Feminist Interpretation of Islam . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0201-63221-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Without Women, You Cannot Understand the Qur'an" .

Fondazione Internazionale Oasis . 13 January 2021 . Retrieved 2022-06-03 .

^ Hassan, Riffat. "Women's Rights inIslam: Normative Teaching versus Practice," in Islam and Human Rights: Advancing a U.S.- Muslim Dialogue , edited by Shireen T. Hunter with Huma Malik, The CSIS Press, Washington D.C., 2005, pp. 43-66.

^ Hassan, Riffat. "Woman and Man's "fall": A Qur'anic Theological Perspective," in Muslima Theology: The Voices of Muslim Women Theologians , edited by Ednan Aslan, Marcia Hermansen, and Elif Medini, Peter Lang, Frankfurt, 2013, pp. 101-113.

^ Ali, Kecia (2006).

Sexual Ethics & Islam . London: Oneworld. pp.

154– 155.

ISBN 978-1-85168-456-4 .

^ a b "National Secular Society" . 2015-12-08.

Archived from the original on 2015-12-12 . Retrieved 9 December 2015 .

^ a b c "Muslim Reform Movement decries radical Islam, calls for equality" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on 2015-12-09 . Retrieved 9 December 2015 .

^ Badran, Margot (2011-01-26).

"Between Secular and Islamic Feminism/s: Reflections on the Middle East and Beyond" .

Journal of Middle East Women's Studies .

1 (1): 6– 28.

ISSN 1558-9579 .

Archived from the original on 2016-10-11 . Retrieved 2016-10-10 .

^ "Prime Minister of Bangladesh - PM Office Email Address." MediaBangladeshnet about Bangladesh Print Electronic Internet More . N.p., 15 Nov. 2015. Web. 1 Oct. 2016.

^ "RAWA testimony to the Congressional Human Rights Caucus Briefing" . U.S. Congressional Human Rights Caucus. December 18, 2001. Archived from the original on June 28, 2007.

^ a b Mehta, Sunita.

Women for Afghan Women: Shattering Myths and Claiming the Future . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002. Print.

^ Melody Ermachild Chavis (30 September 2011).

Meena: Heroine Of Afghanistan . Transworld. pp. 1–.

ISBN 978-1-4464-8846-1 .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2016 . Retrieved 30 March 2016 .

^ a b Gioseffi, Daniela (2003).

Women on War: An International Anthology of Women's Writings from Antiquity to the Present . Feminist Press at CUNY. p.

283 .

ISBN 978-1-55861-409-3 . Retrieved 2016-03-30 .

^ "Brave Women in a War-Torn World: RAWA and Afghanistan" . Archived from the original on 2020-04-07 . Retrieved 2016-03-30 .

^ "Polygamy not a God-given right to Muslims" . 21 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 2017-04-13 . Retrieved 2017-04-22 .

^ "Syariah court fails to protect and safeguard Muslim girls — Sisters in Islam" . Archived from the original on 2014-07-14.

^ "Archives" .

Archived from the original on 2014-07-14 . Retrieved 2017-04-22 .

^ "Sisters In Islam: News / Comments / Dress and Modesty in Islam" .

Archived from the original on 2013-08-23 . Retrieved 2017-04-22 .

^ "Sisters In Islam: Sisters in Islam remains firmly opposed to the implementation of Hudud law for Malaysia" .

Archived from the original on 2017-09-20 . Retrieved 2017-04-22 .

^ a b "Sisters In Islam: Mission Statement and Objectives" .

www.sistersinislam.org.my .

Archived from the original on 2015-11-17 . Retrieved 2015-11-16 .

^ Power, Carla (17 February 2009).

"Muslim Women Demand End to Oppressive Laws" .

Time . Archived from the original on 2013-08-26 . Retrieved 2017-04-22 – via www.time.com.

^ New Straits Times - The day I met Amina Wadud Archived 2017-09-11 at the Wayback Machine By Siti Nurbaiyah Nadzmi ^ Victoria Craw (6 June 2016).

"Emmy-award winning filmmaker Deeyah Khan launches online magazine Sister-hood aimed at giving Muslim women a voice" . www.news.com.au.

Archived from the original on 2016-06-06 . Retrieved 6 June 2016 .

^ Shaheed, Farida (1994).

"Controlled or Autonomous: Identity and the Experience of the Network, Women Living under Muslim Laws" .

Signs .

19 (4): 997– 1019.

doi : 10.1086/494948 .

ISSN 0097-9740 .

JSTOR 3175010 .

S2CID 144483762 .

^ "Muslim women's group demands complete ban on Shariah courts | india-news" . Hindustan Times. 2016-09-06.

Archived from the original on 2016-09-06 . Retrieved 2016-09-07 .

^ Rajagopal, Krishnadas (2016-08-26).

"SC admits Muslim woman's plea to declare triple talaq illegal" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 2016-08-26 . Retrieved 2016-09-07 .

^ George, Rose (2004-09-13).

"Obituary: Samira Bellil" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 2022-06-06 .

^ "Fighting for Muslim women's rights" . 2008-10-27 . Retrieved 2020-05-31 .

^ a b c Segran, Elizabeth (4 December 2013).

"The Rise of the Islamic Feminists" . The Nation thenation.com. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019 . Retrieved 7 June 2016 .

^ a b c d "EDITORIAL: Women ulema for the world" .

The Jakarta Post . Retrieved 2020-05-31 .

^ a b c Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn (1993). "Toward a Theory of Arab-Muslim Women as Activists in Secular and Religious Movements".

Arab Studies Quarterly .

15 (2): 87– 106.

JSTOR 41858975 .

^ Hubbard, Ben (2017-09-26).

"Saudi Arabia Agrees to Let Women Drive" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 2018-02-28 . Retrieved 2018-03-01 .

^ al-Sharif, Manal (14 June 2013), A Saudi woman who dared to drive , archived from the original on 2016-05-20 , retrieved 2018-03-01 ^ "Saudi rights activist Loujain al-Hathloul sentenced to almost six years in jail" .

The Guardian . 28 December 2020 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ Chaudry, Muhammad Sharif (1991).

Women's Rights In Islam . Delhi: Adam & Distributors.

^ a b c d e f g h i Asra Q. Nomani (2010-02-27).

"Let These Women Pray!" . The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 2011-05-18 . Retrieved 2012-08-13 .

^ a b c Wan, William; Laris, Michael (May 22, 2010).

"Mosque pray-ins against segregation of sexes are springing up" .

Washingtonpost.com .

Archived from the original on 2012-11-11 . Retrieved 2012-08-13 .

^ Marsh, Julia (2010-02-22).

"Protesters Break Prayer Rules at Leading Mosque" . Women's eNews.

Archived from the original on 2012-08-17 . Retrieved 2012-08-13 .

^ "Muslim Women Seeking a Place in the Mosque" .

The New York Times . 22 July 2004.

Archived from the original on 2017-07-01 . Retrieved 2017-02-19 .

^ Myers, Bill (21 June 2010).

"Police won't intervene to remove women from mosques" .

Washington Examiner .

Archived from the original on 2016-08-27 . Retrieved August 1, 2010 .

^ "Woman Imam Leading Men and Women in Salat - IslamiCity" .

www.islamicity.org . 20 March 2005.

Archived from the original on 2018-10-27 . Retrieved 2018-10-27 .

^ a b c Hammer, Juliane (2012).

American Muslim Women, Religious Authority, and Activism . Austin: University of Texas Press.

^ "British imam: Quran does not rule on segregation" .

english.alarabiya.net . 2 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 2014-08-08 . Retrieved 2015-05-03 .

^ "Clubhouse redefines debates on Islam in Kerala" .

The New Indian Express . 3 July 2021 . Retrieved 2021-07-04 .

^ Leila Ahmed (1993).

Women and Gender in Islam: Historical Roots of a Modern Debate . BYale University Press. p. 55.

ISBN 9780300055832 .

^ Asma Barlas (2002).

"Believing Women" in Islam: Unreading Patriarchal Interpretations of the Qur'an . University of Texas Press. p. 55.

ISBN 9781477315927 .

^ Moeveni, Azadeh (June 13, 2011).

"Is the Veil Now a Symbol of Islamic Freedom?" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 2014-05-03 . Retrieved 2014-05-02 .

^ "5 Muslim Scholars On The Permissibility Of Not Wearing The Headscarf" .

HuffPost . 2017-01-10 . Retrieved 2023-04-16 .

^ Gouveia, Alexandria (March 28, 2019).

"Ilhan Omar: "To Me, the Hijab Means Power, Liberation, Beauty, and Resistance" " .

Vogue . Retrieved January 21, 2023 .

^ Takolia, Nadiya (28 May 2012).

"The hijab has liberated me from society's expectations of women" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

^ a b George, Rose (July 17, 2006).

"Ghetto warrior" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 2013-08-30 . Retrieved May 5, 2010 .

^ "IslamOnline.net- News" . Archived from the original on June 1, 2010 . Retrieved August 31, 2009 .

^ Malik, Zubeida (March 15, 2010).

"France's burka dilemma" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 2010-08-09 . Retrieved 2010-07-15 .

^ "Ni Putes Ni Soumises Organizes a Protest Against the Burqa - VINGT Paris News" . Archived from the original on 2010-05-22 . Retrieved 2010-07-15 .

^ "In Iran, Exposing Hair In Public Is A 'Stealthy Freedom' " .

New Hampshire Public Radio . 2015-11-17 . Retrieved 2022-06-02 .

^ Arghavan, Mahmoud (2018-04-27).

The Dilemma of Postcolonial and/or Orientalist Feminism in Iranian Diasporic Advocacy of Womenʼs Rights in the Homeland . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-35990-1 .

^ a b Khan, Khadija (May 2, 2018).

"Islamic Feminism is a Myth" . Areo.

^ How and why (about) Islamic feminism Retrieved 26 April 2022 ^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein; Dagli, Caner; Massi Dakake, Maria; Rustom, Muhammad; Lumbard, Joseph, eds. (2015).

The Study Quran . HarperCollins. p. 1794.

^ a b Bouachrine, Ibtissam (2014).

Women and Islam: Myths, Apologies, and the Limits of feminist Critique . Lexington Books.

^ Criticism of the fake title "Islamic Feminism" in the book "Feminism and Family" Retrieved 16 August 2022 ^ The nature and goals of Islamic feminism Retrieved 17 August 2022 ^ "World Hijab Day - Better Awareness. Greater Understanding. Peaceful World" .

Archived from the original on 2016-10-06 . Retrieved 13 September 2016 .

^ Participating Countries.

"Worldwide Support" . World Hijab Day.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2016 . Retrieved 6 March 2016 .

^ "World Hijab Day" . worldhijabday.com . Retrieved 6 March 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Listen to this article ( 11 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 31 March 2008 ( 2008-03-31 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) Ahmed, Leila (1992).

Women and gender in Islam: historical roots of a modern debate . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300049428 .

Ali, Kecia (2014), "Feminist thought in Islam", in Fitzpatrick, Coeli; Hani Walker, Adam (eds.), Muhammad in history, thought, and culture: an encyclopedia of the Prophet of God , Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, LLC, pp.

195– 197, ISBN 9781610691789 .

Anwar, Zainah (May 17, 2003).

"Islamisation and its Impact on Democratic Governance and Women's Rights in Islam: A Feminist Perspective" .

islam-democracy.org . Center for the Study of Islam and Democracy. Archived from the original on March 8, 2005.

Badran, Margot (2001).

Feminists, Islam, and Nation: Gender and the Making of Modern Egypt . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400821433 .

Badran, Margot. "Islamic feminism: what's in a name? Islamic feminism is on the whole more radical than Muslims' secular feminisms".

Al-Ahram Weekly Online .

17–23 January 2002, Issue No.569.

Noushad, Mohammed (January 16, 2004).

"Islamic feminism means justice to women" .

The Milli Gazette .

Interview with Prof Margot Badran.

Baffoun, Alya (1982). "Women and social change in the Muslim Arab world".

Women's Studies International Forum .

5 (2): 227– 242.

doi : 10.1016/0277-5395(82)90030-9 .

Baffoun, Alya (1994), "Feminism and Muslim fundamentalism: the Tunisian and Algerian cases", in Moghadam, Valentine M. (ed.), Identity politics and women: cultural reassertions and feminisms in international perspective , Boulder: Westview Press, ISBN 9780813386928 Djait, Badra (August 2006).

"More to life than window dressing" . Archived from the original on January 11, 2013.

In this special feature, a successful Belgian-Algerian Muslim woman recounts what it was like growing up immersed in two cultures with divergent views of women.

Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock (1998).

In search of Islamic feminism: one woman's global journey . New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 9780385488587 .

Women and Islam in Oxford Islamic Studies Online "Women's Islamic Initiative in Spirituality and Equity" . Archived from the original on 2009-01-21 . Retrieved 2009-02-12 .

Canadian Council of Muslim Women Several examples of closely argued essays for female equality, based on the Qur'an.

Farooq, Mohammad Omar.

"Women Scholars of Islam: They Must Bloom Again" . Archived from the original on 2006-06-15.

Foreign Affairs Committee of the National Council of Resistance of Iran.

Women, Islam, and Equality , an ebook Jameelah, Maryam (July 13, 2005).

"The feminist movement and the Muslim woman" .

islam101.com . Islam 101.

Jeenah, Na'eem (2001). "Towards an Islamic feminist hermeneutic".

Journal for Islamic Studies .

21 : 36– 70.

doi : 10.4314/jis.v21i1.39954 .

Jeenah, Na'eem (January–February 2006). "The national liberation struggle and Islamic feminisms in South Africa".

Women's Studies International Forum .

29 (1): 27– 41.

doi : 10.1016/j.wsif.2005.10.004 .

S2CID 143801194 .

Khader, Serene J. (December 2016). "Do Muslim women need freedom? Traditionalist feminisms and transnational politics".

Politics & Gender .

12 (4): 727– 753.

doi : 10.1017/S1743923X16000441 .

S2CID 148442266 .

Lamya' al Faruqi, Lois .

"Islamic Traditions and the Feminist Movement: Confrontation or Cooperation?" .

Muñoz, Gema Martín (2012).

"Feminism in the Arab World: The Silent Revolution" .

Qantara.de .

Nomani, Asra (November 6, 2005).

"A Gender Jihad For Islam's Future" .

Washington Post .

Perry, Eleanor H. (June 1, 1993).

Opening the Gates: A Century of Arab Feminist Writing .

Article for Domes Safarian, Alexander (2007). "On the history of Turkish feminism".

Iran & the Caucasus .

11 (1): 141– 152.

doi : 10.1163/157338407X224978 .

JSTOR 25597322 .

"A Declaration of the Rights of Women in Islamic Societies" , SecularIslam.com , undated Seker, Nimet (2012).

"Islamic Feminism and Reformist Islam: Against the Politicisation of the Koran" .

Qantara.de .

Shaikh, Shamima.

"Articles by the South African Islamic feminist" . Archived from the original on 2006-02-07.

Articles by a South African Islamic feminist Simons, Marlise (December 4, 2005).

"Muslim women take charge of their faith" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on August 5, 2011.

Svensson, Jonas (2001).

Women's Human Rights and Islam. A Study of Three Attempts at Accommodation . Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell.

[2] Webb, Gisela (2000).

Windows of faith: Muslim women scholar-activists in North America . Syracuse, New York: Syracuse University Press.

ISBN 9780815628521 .

Mir-Hosseini, Ziba.

Journeys Toward Gender Equality in Islam . United Kingdom, Oneworld Publications, 2022.

ISBN 9780861543281 Shamim, Amna. Ed.

Towards Islamic Feminism . Jaipur, Aadi Publications, 2016.

ISBN 9789382630807 v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e Islamism Outline Islamism Qutbism Khomeinism Salafism Salafi jihadism Shia Islamism Concepts Emirate Islamic governance Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists Islamic democracy Islamic feminism Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic republic Islamistan Islamization of knowledge Pan-Islamism Post-Islamism Sharia Shura Turkish model Two-nation theory Ummah Movements Socio-political Deobandi Hizb ut-Tahrir in Britain in Central Asia Islamic Defenders Front Jamaat-e-Islami Millî Görüş Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt in Syria Ansar–Khatmiyya rivalry Ansar Khatmiyya Political parties Freedom and Justice Party Green Algeria Alliance Ennahda Felicity Party Free Cause Party Hadas Hezbollah Islamic Salvation Front Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan Jamiat-e Islami Justice and Construction Party Justice and Development Party (Morocco) Justice and Development Party (Turkey) National Congress National Iraqi Alliance New Welfare Party Malaysian Islamic Party Prosperous Justice Party Al Wefaq Welfare Party Fatah Alliance State of Law Coalition Islamic Action Front United Arab List Related Ansar Allah Taliban Islamic modernism Political leaders Muhammad Abduh Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī Qazi Hussain Ahmad Hibatullah Akhundzada Muhammad Asad Hassan al-Banna Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Necmettin Erbakan Muammar Gaddafi Rached Ghannouchi Safwat Hegazi Muhammad Iqbal Alija Izetbegović Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Abul A'la Maududi Abul Hasan Ali Hasani Nadwi Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani Mullah Omar Yusuf al-Qaradawi Sayyid Qutb Tariq Ramadan Ata Abu Rashta Rashid Rida Navvab Safavi Ali Shariati Haji Shariatullah Hassan al-Turabi Malcolm X Ahmed Yassin Zia-ul-Haq Rizieq Shihab Salafi movement Movements Scholastic Ahl-i Hadith Madkhalism Sahwa movement Wahhabism Political Al Asalah Authenticity Party Al-Islah Al-Nour Party Islamist Bloc People Party Young Kashgar Party Major figures Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Al-Albani Ibn Baz Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Safar al-Hawali Rabee al-Madkhali Muhammad Al-Munajjid Zakir Naik Salman al-Ouda Ali al-Tamimi Al-Uthaymin Related International propagation of Salafism Islamic religious police Petro-Islam Salafi–Sufi relations Militant Islamism / Jihadism Ideology Qutbism Salafi jihadism Movements Militant Islamism based in MENA region Egyptian Islamic Jihad Fatah al-Islam Hamas Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant South Asia Taliban Lashkar-e-Taiba Southeast Asia Abu Sayyaf Sub-Saharan Africa Boko Haram al-Shabaab al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula in Iraq in North Africa Major figures Hibatullah Akhundzada Anwar al-Awlaki Abdullah Yusuf Azzam Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Osama bin Laden Akhtar Mansour Mullah Omar Juhayman al-Otaybi Omar Abdel-Rahman Ayman al-Zawahiri Related Islam and violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Jihad Mujahideen Slavery Talibanization Other topics Texts Reconstruction (Iqbal, 1930s) Forty Hadith (Khomeini, 1940) Principles (Asad, 1961) Milestones (Qutb, 1964) Islamic Government (Khomeini, 1970) Islamic Declaration (Izetbegović, 1969-1970) The Green Book (Gaddafi, 1975) Historical events Zia-ul-Haq's Islamization Iranian revolution Grand Mosque seizure Soviet invasion of Afghanistan Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam Popular Arab and Islamic Congress Algerian Civil War Faith Campaign September 11 attacks War on terror Arab Spring Arab Winter Influences Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Contemporary Islamic philosophy Islamic response to modernity Islamic revival by region Balkans Gaza Strip Sudan United Kingdom Related topics Criticism Political aspects of Islam Political Islam Islam in South Asia North Africa v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Religion in politics General concepts Anti-clericalism Anti-clericalism and Freemasonry Caesaropapism Civil religion Clericalism Clerical fascism Confessionalism Constitutional references to God Divine law Divine rule Engaged Spirituality Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Freedom of religion Humanism Identity politics Organized secularism Political religion Religious anarchism Religious anti-Masonry Religious anti-Zionism Religious communism Religious humanism Religious law Religious nationalism Religious pacifism Religion and peacebuilding Religious police Religious rejection of politics Religious segregation Religious separatism Religious socialism Religious views on same-sex marriage Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Secular religion Separation of church and state Spiritual left State atheism State religion Theocracy Theonomy Christianity and politics Blaine Amendment Christian anarchism Christian anti-communism Christian anti-Masonry Papal ban Christian anti-Zionism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian democracy Christian egalitarianism Christian environmentalism Evangelical environmentalism Christian fascism German Christians (movement) National Catholicism Positive Christianity Protestant Reich Church Christian feminism Mormon feminism Christian humanism Christian law Christian left Evangelical left Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Christian pacifism Christian peacemaking Christian reconstructionism Christian republic Christian right Christian socialism In Utah Christian state Christian Zionism Cisalpinism Dominion Theology Febronianism Gallicanism Liberation theology Maronite politics Phoenicianism Papal state Pillarisation Political Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the state In Argentina Sphere sovereignty Subsidiarity Temporal power Theodemocracy Ultramontanism Neo-ultramontanism Islam and politics Hui pan-nationalism Human Rights in Islam Imamate Islamic anarchism Islamic anti-Masonry Islamic anti-Zionism Islamic democracy Islamic fascism Islamic feminism Sharia law by country In Pakistan In South Asia Islamic pacifism Islamic republic Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic Zionism Islamism Criticism Islamization Khilafat Petro-Islam Political quietism Taliban Talibanization Two-nation theory Judaism and politics Halachic state Jewish anarchism Jewish anti-Zionism Haredim Jewish Autonomism Jewish democracy Jewish fascism Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Jewish feminism Jewish law Jewish left Jewish pacifism Jewish political movements Jewish right Jewish secularism Jewish socialism Bundism Poale Zion Zionism Religious World Agudath Israel Hinduism and politics Akhand Bharat Hindu feminism Gandhism Hindu law Hindu modernism Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Rashtra Panun Kashmir Bangabhumi Hindu revolution Hindu revivalism Hindu environmentalism Integral humanism Indigenous Aryans Rama Rajya Saffronisation Shuddhi Uniform civil code Buddhism and politics Buddhist anti-communism Buddhist feminism Buddhist law Buddhist modernism Buddhist nationalism 969 Movement Nichirenism Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist socialism Engaged Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Secular Buddhism Other American civil religion Disestablishmentarianism Imperial cult Ancient Rome Gottgläubig Khalistan movement Neopaganist feminism Religious aspects of Nazism Cult of personality State Shinto Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islamic_feminism&oldid=1304241974 " Categories : Islamic feminism Feminist theory Women's rights in Islam Islam-related controversies Multicultural feminism Islamism Pan-Islamism Postmodernism Globalization Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages using div col with small parameter Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles CS1: unfit URL Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 21:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Islamic feminism 36 languages Add topic

