Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 1920s 2.2 1930s: Arab armed insurgency 2.2.1 The Arab revolt 2.2.2 Partition proposals 2.3 Second World War 2.3.1 Allied and Axis activity 2.3.2 Mobilisation 2.3.3 The Holocaust and immigration quotas 2.3.4 Beginning of Zionist insurgency 2.4 After the Second World War: Insurgency and the Partition Plan 2.5 Termination of the mandate 3 Politics Toggle Politics subsection 3.1 Palestinian Arab community 3.1.1 Palestinian Arab leadership and national aspirations 3.1.2 Palestinian Arab journalism 3.2 Jewish community 3.2.1 Jewish immigration 3.2.2 Jewish national home 3.3 Land ownership 3.3.1 Land ownership by district 3.3.2 Land ownership by corporation 3.3.3 Land ownership by type 3.3.4 List of Mandatory land laws 4 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 4.1 British censuses and estimations 4.2 By district 4.3 Urban areas 5 Government and institutions 6 Economy 7 Education 8 Gallery 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Bibliography 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Mandatory Palestine 73 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt West-Vlams ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British geopolitical entity (1920–1948) This article is about the geopolitical entity. For the document granting Britain a mandate over both Palestine and the Emirate of Transjordan, see Mandate for Palestine .

Palestine 1920–1948 Flag Public Seal [ 1 ] Mandatory Palestine in 1946 Status Mandate of the United Kingdom Capital Jerusalem Common languages Arabic , English , Hebrew Religion (1922) [ 2 ] 78% Islam 11% Judaism 10% Christianity 1% other including Baháʼí Faith , Druze faith Demonym(s) Palestinian High Commissioner • 1920–1925 (first) Sir Herbert L. Samuel • 1945–1948 (last) Sir Alan Cunningham Legislature • Parliamentary body of the Muslim community Supreme Muslim Council • Parliamentary body of the Jewish community Assembly of Representatives Historical era Interwar period Second World War Cold War • Mandate assigned 25 April 1920 • Britain officially assumes control 29 September 1923 • Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel 14 May 1948 Area • Total 25,585.3 km 2 (9,878.5 sq mi) [ 3 ] Population • Census 757,182 (1922) [ 4 ] Currency Egyptian pound (until 1927) Palestine pound (from 1927) ISO 3166 code PS Preceded by Succeeded by Occupied Enemy Territory Administration Israel Jordanian annexation of the West Bank All-Palestine Protectorate Today part of Israel Palestine Mandatory Palestine [ a ] [ 5 ] was  a British geopolitical entity that existed between 1920 and 1948 in the region of Palestine , and after 1922, under the terms of the League of Nations ' Mandate for Palestine .

After an Arab uprising against the Ottoman Empire during the First World War in 1916, British forces drove Ottoman forces out of the Levant .

[ 6 ] The United Kingdom had agreed in the McMahon–Hussein Correspondence that it would honour Arab independence in case of a revolt but, in the end, the United Kingdom and France divided what had been Ottoman Syria under the Sykes–Picot Agreement —an act of betrayal in the eyes of the Arabs. Another issue was the Balfour Declaration of 1917, in which Britain promised its support for the establishment of a Jewish "national home" in Palestine. Mandatory Palestine was then established in 1920, and the British obtained a Mandate for Palestine from the League of Nations in 1922.

[ 7 ] During the Mandate, the area saw successive waves of Jewish immigration and the rise of nationalist movements in both the Jewish and Arab communities. Competing interests of the two populations led to the 1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine and the 1944–1948 Jewish insurgency in Mandatory Palestine . The United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine to divide the territory into two states, one Arab and one Jewish, was passed in November 1947. The 1948 Palestine war ended with the territory of Mandatory Palestine divided among the State of Israel , the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , which annexed territory on the West Bank of the Jordan River , and the Kingdom of Egypt , which established the " All-Palestine Protectorate " in the Gaza Strip .

Mandatory Palestine was designated as a Class A Mandate , based on its social, political, and economic development. This classification was reserved for post-war mandates with the highest capacity for self-governance.

[ 8 ] All Class A mandates other than Mandatory Palestine had gained independence by 1946.

[ 9 ] Etymology See also: Timeline of the name "Palestine" The name given to the Mandate's territory was "Palestine", in accordance with local Palestinian Arab and Ottoman usage [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] and with European tradition.

[ b ] The Mandate charter stipulated that Mandatory Palestine would have three official languages: English, Arabic and Hebrew.

In 1926, the British authorities formally decided to use the traditional Arabic  equivalent to the English name, and its Hebrew transcription i.e.

Filasţīn (فلسطين) and Pālēśtīnā (פּלשׂתינה) respectively. The Jewish leadership proposed that the proper Hebrew name should be ʾĒrēts Yiśrāʾel (ארץ ישׂראל, Land of Israel ). The final compromise was to append the initials of the Hebrew proposed name, Alef - Yod , within parenthesis (א״י) after Pālēśtīnā whenever the Mandate's name was mentioned in Hebrew in official documents.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The Arab leadership saw this compromise as a violation of the mandate terms. Some Arab politicians suggested " Southern Syria " (سوريا الجنوبية) as the Arabic name instead. The British authorities rejected this proposal; according to the Minutes of the Ninth Session of the League of Nations' Permanent Mandates Commission : Colonel Symes explained that the country was described as "Palestine" by Europeans and as "Falestin" by the Arabs. The Hebrew name for the country was the designation "Land of Israel", and the Government, to meet Jewish wishes, had agreed that the word "Palestine" in Hebrew characters should be followed in all official documents by the initials which stood for that designation. As a set-off to this, certain of the Arab politicians suggested that the country should be called "Southern Syria" in order to emphasise its close relation with another Arab State.

[ 17 ] The adjective " mandatory " indicates that the entity's legal status derived from a League of Nations mandate ; it is not related to the word's more commonplace usage as a synonym for "compulsory" or "necessary".

[ 18 ] History For the background to the creation of the mandate, see Mandate for Palestine .

For the period of Palestine's history between the fall of the Ottoman Empire in 1917–18 and the beginning of British civil administration in July 1920, see Occupied Enemy Territory Administration .

1920s Palestinians in Jaffa in the 1920s Following the arrival of the British, Arab inhabitants established Muslim-Christian Associations in all of the major towns.

[ 19 ] In 1919 they joined to hold the first Palestine Arab Congress in Jerusalem.

[ 20 ] It was aimed primarily at representative government and opposition to the Balfour Declaration .

[ 21 ] Concurrently, the Zionist Commission formed in March 1918 and actively promoted Zionist objectives in Palestine. On 19 April 1920, elections took place for the Assembly of Representatives of the Palestinian Jewish community .

[ 22 ] In April 1920, riots in Jerusalem caused the deaths of five Jews and four Arabs.

In July 1920, a British civilian administration headed by a High Commissioner replaced the military administration.

[ 23 ] The first High Commissioner, Sir Herbert Samuel , a Zionist and a recent British cabinet minister, arrived in Palestine on 20 June 1920 to take up his appointment from 1 July. Samuel established his headquarters and official residence in part of the Augusta Victoria Hospital complex on Mount Scopus on what was then the northeastern edge of Jerusalem, a building that had been constructed for the Germans circa 1910.

[ 24 ] Damaged by an earthquake in 1927, this building served as the headquarters and official residence of the British High Commissioners until 1933.

[ 24 ] In that year, a new, purpose-built headquarters and official residence for the High Commissioner was completed on what was then the southeastern edge of Jerusalem.

[ 24 ] Referred to as Armon HaNetziv by the Jewish population, this building, located on the 'Hill of Evil Counsel' on the ridge of Jabel Mukaber , remained in use as the headquarters and official residence of the British High Commissioners until the end of British rule in 1948.

[ 24 ] The formal transfer of Jerusalem to British rule, with a "native priest" reading the proclamation from the steps of the Tower of David The arrival of Sir Herbert Samuel . From left to right: T. E. Lawrence , Emir Abdullah , Air Marshal Sir Geoffrey Salmond , Sir Wyndham Deedes and others An Arab "protest gathering" in session, in the Rawdat el Maaref hall, 1929. From left to right : unknown – Amin al-Husayni – Musa al-Husayni – Raghib al-Nashashibi – unknown One of the first actions of the newly installed civil administration was to begin granting concessions from the Mandatory government over key economic assets. In 1921 the government granted Pinhas Rutenberg – a Jewish entrepreneur – concessions for the production and distribution of electrical power. Rutenberg soon established an electric company whose shareholders were Zionist organisations, investors, and philanthropists. Palestinian-Arabs saw it as proof that the British intended to favour Zionism. The British administration claimed that electrification would enhance the economic development of the country as a whole, while at the same time securing their commitment to facilitate a Jewish National Home through economic – rather than political – means.

[ 25 ] In May 1921, following a disturbance between rival Jewish left-wing protestors and then attacks by Arabs on Jews, almost 100 died in rioting in Jaffa .

High Commissioner Samuel tried to establish self-governing institutions in Palestine, as required by the mandate, but the Arab leadership refused to co-operate with any institution which included Jewish participation.

[ 26 ] When Kamil al-Husayni , the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem , died in March 1921, High Commissioner Samuel appointed his half-brother, Mohammad Amin al-Husseini , to the position. Amin al-Husseini, a member of the al-Husayni clan of Jerusalem, was an Arab nationalist and Muslim leader. As Grand Mufti, as well as in the other influential positions that he held during this period, al-Husseini played a key role in violent opposition to Zionism . In 1922, al-Husseini was elected President of the Supreme Muslim Council which had been established by Samuel in December 1921.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] The Council controlled the Waqf funds, worth annually tens of thousands of pounds, [ 29 ] and the orphan funds, worth annually about £50,000, as compared to the £600,000 in the Jewish Agency 's annual budget.

[ 30 ] In addition, he controlled the Islamic courts in Palestine. Among other functions, these courts had the power to appoint teachers and preachers.

The 1922 Palestine Order in Council [ 31 ] established a Legislative Council, which was to consist of 23 members: 12 elected, 10 appointed, and the High Commissioner.

[ 32 ] Of the 12 elected members, eight were to be Muslim Arabs, two Christian Arabs, and two Jews.

[ 33 ] Arabs protested against the distribution of the seats, arguing that as they constituted 88% of the population, having only 43% of the seats was unfair.

[ 33 ] Elections took place in February and March 1923, but due to an Arab boycott , the results were annulled and a 12-member Advisory Council was established.

[ 32 ] At the First World Congress of Jewish Women which was held in Vienna , Austria, 1923, it was decided that: "It appears, therefore, to be the duty of all Jews to co-operate in the social-economic reconstruction of Palestine and to assist in the settlement of Jews in that country." [ 34 ] In October 1923, Britain provided the League of Nations with a report on the administration of Palestine for the period 1920–1922, which covered the period before the mandate.

[ 35 ] In August 1929, there were riots in which 250 people died.

1930s: Arab armed insurgency In 1930, Sheikh Izz ad-Din al-Qassam arrived in Palestine from Syria, then part of the French-ruled Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon , and organised and established the Black Hand , an anti-Zionist and anti-British militant organisation. He recruited and arranged military training for peasants, and by 1935 he had enlisted between 200 and 800 men. They used bombs and firearms against Zionist settlers and vandalised settlers' orchards and British-built railway lines.

[ 36 ] In November 1935, two of his men engaged in a firefight with a Palestine Police patrol hunting fruit thieves and a policeman was killed. Following the incident, British colonial police launched a search and surrounded al-Qassam in a cave near Ya'bad . In the ensuing battle, al-Qassam was killed.

[ 36 ] The Arab revolt Arab revolt against the British Main article: 1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine The death of al-Qassam on 20 November 1935 generated widespread outrage in the Arab community. Huge crowds accompanied Qassam's body to his grave in Haifa . A few months later, in April 1936, the Arab national general strike broke out. The strike lasted until October 1936, instigated by the Arab Higher Committee, headed by Amin al-Husseini. During the summer of that year, thousands of Jewish-farmed acres and orchards were destroyed. Jewish civilians were attacked and killed, and some Jewish communities, such as those in Beisan ( Beit She'an ) and Acre , fled to safer areas.

[ 37 ] The violence abated for about a year while the British sent the Peel Commission to investigate.

[ 38 ] During the first stages of the Arab Revolt, due to rivalry between the clans of al-Husseini and Nashashibi among the Palestinian Arabs, Raghib Nashashibi was forced to flee to Egypt after several assassination attempts ordered by Amin al-Husseini.

[ 39 ] After the Arab rejection of the Peel Commission recommendation, the revolt resumed in autumn 1937. Over the next 18 months, the British lost Nablus and Hebron. British forces, supported by 6,000 armed Jewish auxiliary police, [ 40 ] suppressed the widespread riots with overwhelming force. The British officer Charles Orde Wingate (who supported a Zionist revival for religious reasons [ 41 ] ) organised Special Night Squads of British soldiers and Jewish volunteers such as Yigal Allon ; these "scored significant successes against the Arab rebels in the lower Galilee and in the Jezreel valley" [ 42 ] by conducting raids on Arab villages.

[ 43 ] Irgun , a Jewish militia group, used violence also against Arab civilians as "retaliatory acts", [ 44 ] attacking marketplaces and buses .

By the time the revolt concluded in March 1939, more than 5,000 Arabs, 400 Jews, and 200 British had been killed and at least 15,000 Arabs were wounded.

[ 45 ] In total, 10% of the adult Arab male population was killed, wounded, imprisoned, or exiled.

[ 46 ] From 1936 to 1945, while establishing collaborative security arrangements with the Jewish Agency, the British confiscated 13,200 firearms from Arabs and 521 weapons from Jews.

[ 47 ] The attacks on the Jewish population by Arabs had three lasting effects: firstly, they led to the formation and development of Jewish underground militias, primarily the Haganah , which were to prove decisive in 1948. Secondly, it became clear that the two communities could not be reconciled, and the idea of partition was born. Thirdly, the British responded to Arab opposition with the White Paper of 1939 , which severely restricted Jewish land purchase and immigration. However, with the advent of the Second World War , even this reduced immigration quota was not reached. The White Paper policy itself radicalised segments of the Jewish population, who after the war would no longer cooperate with the British.

The revolt had also a negative effect on Palestinian Arab leadership, social cohesion, and military capabilities, and it contributed to the outcome of the 1948 War because "when the Palestinians faced their most fateful challenge in 1947–49, they were still suffering from the British repression of 1936–39, and were in effect without a unified leadership. Indeed, it might be argued that they were virtually without any leadership at all." [ 48 ] Partition proposals Jewish demonstration against White Paper in Jerusalem in 1939 In 1937, the Peel Commission proposed a partition between a small Jewish state, whose Arab population would have to be transferred, and an Arab state to be attached to the Emirate of Transjordan , this emirate also being part of the wider Mandate for Palestine . The proposal was rejected outright by the Arabs. The two main Jewish leaders, Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion , had convinced the Zionist Congress to equivocally approve the Peel recommendations as a basis for more negotiation.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] In a letter to his son in October 1937 , Ben-Gurion explained that partition would be a first step to "possession of the land as a whole".

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] The same sentiment was recorded by Ben-Gurion on other occasions, such as at a meeting of the Jewish Agency executive in June 1938, [ 57 ] as well as by Chaim Weizmann.

[ 56 ] [ 58 ] Following the London Conference in February and March 1939, the British Government published a White Paper which proposed a limit to Jewish immigration from Europe, restrictions on Jewish land purchases, and a programme for creating an independent state to replace the Mandate within ten years. This was seen by the Yishuv as betrayal of the mandatory terms, especially in light of the increasing persecution of Jews in Europe. In response, Zionists organised Aliyah Bet , a programme of illegal immigration into Palestine.

Lehi , a small group of extremist Zionists, staged armed attacks on British authorities in Palestine. However, the Jewish Agency , which represented the mainstream Zionist leadership and most of the Jewish population, still hoped to persuade Britain to allow resumed Jewish immigration and cooperated with Britain during the Second World War .

Second World War Allied and Axis activity Australian soldiers in Tel Aviv in 1942 On 10 June 1940, during the Second World War , the Kingdom of Italy declared war on the British Empire and sided with Nazi Germany . Within a month, the Italians attacked Palestine from the air , bombing Tel Aviv and Haifa , [ 59 ] inflicting multiple casualties.

In 1942, there was a period of great concern for the Yishuv , when the German forces of General Erwin Rommel advanced east across North Africa towards the Suez Canal , raising a fear that they would conquer Palestine. This period was referred to as the " 200 days of dread ". This event was the direct cause for the founding, with British support, of the Palmach [ 60 ] – a highly trained regular unit belonging to Haganah (a paramilitary group composed mostly of reserves).

The Yishuv rallied around the Allied war effort despite anger over British restrictions on Jewish immigration in the White Paper of 1939 .

David Ben-Gurion , Chairman of the Jewish Agency , declared that "We will fight the White Paper as if there is no war, and fight the war as if there is no White Paper." About 30,000 Jews from Mandatory Palestine served with the British Armed Forces during the war, more than 700 of whom were killed in action.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] As in most of the Arab world, there was no unanimity amongst the Palestinian Arabs as to their position regarding the belligerents in the Second World War. A number of leaders and public figures saw an Axis victory as the likely outcome and a way of securing Palestine back from the Zionists and the British. Even though Arabs were not highly regarded by Nazi racial theory , the Nazis encouraged Arab support as a counter to British hegemony.

[ 63 ] On the anniversary of the Balfour Declaration in 1943, Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler and Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop sent telegrams of support for the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem , Mohammad Amin al-Husseini , to read out for a radio broadcast to a rally of supporters in Berlin .

[ c ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] On the other hand, as many as 12,000 Palestinian Arabs, with the endorsement of many prominent figures such as the mayors of Nablus and Gaza and media such as "Radio Palestine" [ d ] and the prominent Jaffa -based Falastin newspaper, [ e ] volunteered to join and fight for the British, with many serving in units that also included Jews from Palestine. 120 Palestinian women also served as part of the Auxiliary Territorial Service . However, this history has been less studied, as Israeli sources put more focus in studying the role played by Jewish soldiers. Meanwhile, Palestinian sources "were not eager to glorify the names of those who cooperated with Britain not so many years after the British put down the Arab Revolt of 1936-1939, and thereby indirectly helped the Jews establish a state." [ 66 ] Mobilisation Jewish Brigade headquarters under the Union Flag and Jewish flag On 3 July 1944, the British government consented to the establishment of a Jewish Brigade within the British Army , with hand-picked Jewish and also non-Jewish senior officers. On 20 September 1944, an official communiqué by the War Office announced the formation of the Jewish Brigade Group of the British Army. The Jewish Brigade was shipped to Italy , where it joined the British Eighth Army under the 15th Army Group , and fought in the Spring Offensive of the Italian Campaign . The Jewish Brigade was then stationed in Tarvisio , near the border triangle of Italy, Yugoslavia , and Austria, where it played a key role in the Berihah 's efforts to help Jews escape Europe for Palestine, a role many of its members would continue after the brigade was disbanded. Among its projects was the education and care of the Selvino children . Later, veterans of the Jewish Brigade were to play a major role in the foundation of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF).

From the Palestine Regiment, two platoons, one Jewish, under the command of Brigadier Ernest Benjamin , and another Arab, were sent to join Allied forces on the Italian Front , having taken part in the final offensive there.

Besides Jews and Arabs from Palestine, in total by mid-1944 the British had assembled a multiethnic force consisting of volunteer European Jewish refugees (from German-occupied countries), Yemenite Jews and Abyssinian Jews .

[ 67 ] The Holocaust and immigration quotas Jewish State ship, one of several Haganah ships that carried Jewish immigrants from Europe, mostly illegal, at the Haifa Port , Mandatory Palestine, 1947 [ 68 ] In 1939, as a consequence of the White Paper of 1939 , the British reduced the number of immigrants allowed into Palestine. The Second World War and the Holocaust started shortly thereafter and once the 15,000 annual quota was exceeded, Jews fleeing Nazi persecution were interned in detention camps or deported to places such as Mauritius .

[ 69 ] Starting in 1939, a clandestine immigration effort called Aliya Bet was spearheaded by an organisation called Mossad LeAliyah Bet . Tens of thousands of European Jews escaped the Nazis in boats and small ships headed for Palestine. The British Royal Navy intercepted many of the vessels; others were unseaworthy and were wrecked; a Haganah bomb sunk the SS Patria , killing 267 people; two other ships were sunk by Soviet submarines : the motor schooner Struma was torpedoed and sunk in the Black Sea by a Soviet submarine in February 1942 with the loss of nearly 800 lives.

[ 70 ] The last refugee boats to try to reach Palestine during the war were the Bulbul , Mefküre and Morina in August 1944. A Soviet submarine sank the motor schooner Mefküre by torpedo and shellfire and machine-gunned survivors in the water, [ 71 ] killing between 300 and 400 refugees.

[ 72 ] Illegal immigration resumed after the end of the Second World War, especially by the Haganah, who carried mostly illegal Jewish immigrants in the period 1945-47.

[ 68 ] After the war, 250,000 Jewish refugees were stranded in displaced persons (DP) camps in Europe. Despite the pressure of world opinion, in particular the repeated requests of the U.S. President , Harry S. Truman , and the recommendations of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry that 100,000 Jews be immediately granted entry to Palestine, the British maintained the ban on immigration.

Beginning of Zionist insurgency Jerusalem on VE Day , 8 May 1945 The Jewish Lehi (Fighters for the Freedom of Israel) and Irgun (National Military Organisation) movements initiated violent uprisings against the British Mandate in the 1940s. On 6 November 1944, Eliyahu Hakim and Eliyahu Bet Zuri (members of Lehi) assassinated Lord Moyne in Cairo . Moyne was the British Minister of State for the Middle East and the assassination is said by some to have turned British Prime Minister Winston Churchill against the Zionist cause. After the assassination of Lord Moyne, the Haganah kidnapped, interrogated, and turned over to the British many members of the Irgun (" The Hunting Season "), and the Jewish Agency Executive decided on a series of measures against "terrorist organisations" in Palestine. Irgun ordered its members not to resist or retaliate with violence, so as to prevent a civil war.

After the Second World War: Insurgency and the Partition Plan Main articles: 1947 UN Partition Plan and 1947–1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine The three main Jewish underground forces later united to form the Jewish Resistance Movement and carry out several attacks and bombings against the British administration. In 1946, the Irgun blew up the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, the southern wing of which was the headquarters of the British administration, killing 92 people. Following the bombing, the British Government began interning illegal Jewish immigrants in Cyprus . In 1948, the Lehi assassinated Count Bernadotte , the UN mediator, in Jerusalem.

Yitzak Shamir , a future Prime Minister of Israel , was one of the conspirators.

The UN Partition Plan The negative publicity resulting from the situation in Palestine caused the Mandate to become widely unpopular in Britain itself and caused the United States Congress to delay granting the British vital loans for reconstruction. The British Labour Party had promised before its election in 1945 to allow mass Jewish migration into Palestine but reneged on this promise once in office. Anti-British Jewish militancy increased, and the situation required the presence of over 100,000 British troops in the country. Following the Acre Prison Break and the retaliatory hanging of British sergeants by the Irgun, the British announced their desire to terminate the mandate and to withdraw by no later than the beginning of August 1948.

[ 23 ] The Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry in 1946 was a joint attempt by Britain and the United States to agree on a policy regarding the admission of Jews to Palestine. In April, the Committee reported that its members had arrived at a unanimous decision. The Committee approved the American recommendation of the immediate acceptance of 100,000 Jewish refugees from Europe into Palestine. It also recommended that there be no Arab or Jewish state. The Committee stated that "in order to dispose, once and for all, of the exclusive claims of Jews and Arabs to Palestine, we regard it as essential that a clear statement of principle should be made that Jew shall not dominate Arab and Arab shall not dominate Jew in Palestine". U.S. President Harry S. Truman angered the British Government by issuing a statement supporting the 100,000 refugees but refusing to acknowledge the rest of the committee's findings. Britain had asked for U.S. assistance in implementing the recommendations. The US War Department had said earlier that to assist Britain in maintaining order against an Arab revolt, an open-ended US commitment of 300,000 troops would be necessary. The immediate admission of 100,000 new Jewish immigrants would almost certainly have provoked an Arab uprising.

[ 73 ] These events were the decisive factors that forced Britain to announce their desire to terminate the Palestine Mandate and place the Question of Palestine before the United Nations , the successor to the League of Nations . The UN created UNSCOP (the UN Special Committee on Palestine) on 15 May 1947, with representatives from 11 countries. UNSCOP conducted hearings and made a general survey of the situation in Palestine and issued its report on 31 August. Seven members (Canada, Czechoslovakia , Guatemala, Netherlands, Peru, Sweden, and Uruguay) recommended the creation of independent Arab and Jewish states, with Jerusalem to be placed under international administration . Three members (India, Iran, and Yugoslavia ) supported the creation of a single federal state containing both Jewish and Arab constituent states. Australia abstained.

[ 74 ] On 29 November 1947, the UN General Assembly, voting 33 to 13, with 10 abstentions, adopted a resolution recommending the adoption and implementation of the Plan of Partition with Economic Union as Resolution 181 (II), [ 75 ] [ 76 ] while making some adjustments to the boundaries between the two states proposed by it. The division was to take effect on the date of British withdrawal. The partition plan required that the proposed states grant full civil rights to all people within their borders, regardless of race, religion or gender. The UN General Assembly is only granted the power to make recommendations; therefore, UNGAR 181 was not legally binding.

[ 77 ] Both the US and the Soviet Union supported the resolution. Haiti, Liberia, and the Philippines changed their votes at the last moment after concerted pressure from the US and from Zionist organisations.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] The five members of the Arab League , who were voting members at the time, voted against the Plan.

The Jewish Agency, which was the Jewish state-in-formation, accepted the plan, and nearly all the Jews in Palestine rejoiced at the news.

The partition plan was rejected by the Palestinian Arab leadership and by most of the Arab population.

[ f ] [ g ] Meeting in Cairo on November and December 1947, the Arab League then adopted a series of resolutions endorsing a military solution to the conflict.

Britain announced that it would accept the partition plan, but refused to enforce it, arguing it was not accepted by the Arabs. Britain also refused to share the administration of Palestine with the UN Palestine Commission during the transitional period. In September 1947, the British government announced that the Mandate for Palestine would end at midnight on 14 May 1948.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] Some Jewish organisations also opposed the proposal.

Irgun leader Menachem Begin announced, "The partition of the Homeland is illegal. It will never be recognised. The signature by institutions and individuals of the partition agreement is invalid. It will not bind the Jewish people. Jerusalem was and will forever be our capital. Eretz Israel will be restored to the people of Israel. All of it. And for ever." [ 86 ] Termination of the mandate See also: End of the British Mandate for Palestine British troops leaving Haifa in 1948 When the United Kingdom announced the independence of the Emirate of Transjordan as the Hashemite Kingdom of Transjordan in 1946, the final Assembly of the League of Nations and the General Assembly both adopted resolutions welcoming the news.

[ 87 ] The Jewish Agency objected, claiming that Transjordan was an integral part of Palestine, and that according to Article 80 of the UN Charter , the Jewish people had a secured interest in its territory.

[ 88 ] During the General Assembly deliberations on Palestine, there were suggestions that it would be desirable to incorporate part of Transjordan's territory into the proposed Jewish state. A few days before the adoption of Resolution 181 (II) on 29 November 1947, US Secretary of State Marshall noted frequent references had been made by the Ad Hoc Committee regarding the desirability of the Jewish State having both the Negev and an "outlet to the Red Sea and the Port of Aqaba".

[ 89 ] According to John Snetsinger, Chaim Weizmann visited President Truman on 19 November 1947 and said it was imperative that the Negev and Port of Aqaba be within the Jewish state.

[ 90 ] Truman telephoned the US delegation to the UN and told them he supported Weizmann's position.

[ 91 ] However, the Trans-Jordan memorandum excluded territories of the Emirate of Transjordan from any Jewish settlement.

[ 92 ] Immediately after the UN resolution, civil war broke out between the Arab and Jewish communities, and British authority began to break down. On 16 December 1947, the Palestine Police Force withdrew from the Tel Aviv area, home to more than half the Jewish population, and turned over responsibility for the maintenance of law and order to Jewish police.

[ 93 ] As the civil war raged on, British military forces gradually withdrew from Palestine, although they occasionally intervened in favour of either side. Many of these areas became war zones. The British maintained strong presences in Jerusalem and Haifa , even as Jerusalem came under siege by Arab forces and became the scene of fierce fighting, though the British occasionally intervened in the fighting, largely to secure their evacuation routes, including by proclaiming martial law and enforcing truces. The Palestine Police Force was largely inoperative, and government services such as social welfare, water supplies, and postal services were withdrawn. In March 1948, all British judges in Palestine were sent back to Britain.

[ 94 ] In April 1948, the British withdrew from most of Haifa but retained an enclave in the port area to be used in the evacuation of British forces, and retained RAF Ramat David , an airbase close to Haifa, to cover their retreat, leaving behind a volunteer police force to maintain order. The city was quickly captured by the Haganah in the Battle of Haifa . After the victory, British forces in Jerusalem announced that they had no intention of overseeing any local administration but also that they would not permit actions that would hamper the safe and orderly withdrawal of their forces; military courts would try anybody who interfered.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] By this time British authority in most of Palestine had broken down, with most of the country in the hands of Jews or Arabs, but the British air and sea blockade of Palestine remained in place. Although Arab volunteers were able to cross the borders between Palestine and the surrounding Arab states to join the fighting, the British did not allow the regular armies of the surrounding Arab states to cross into Palestine.

The British had notified the UN of their intent to terminate the mandate not later than 1 August 1948.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] However, early in 1948, the United Kingdom announced its firm intention to end its mandate in Palestine on 15 May. In response, President Harry S. Truman made a statement on 25 March proposing UN trusteeship rather than partition , stating that "unfortunately, it has become clear that the partition plan cannot be carried out at this time by peaceful means... unless emergency action is taken, there will be no public authority in Palestine on that date capable of preserving law and order. Violence and bloodshed will descend upon the Holy Land. Large-scale fighting among the people of that country will be the inevitable result".

[ 100 ] The British Parliament passed the necessary legislation to terminate the Mandate with the Palestine Bill, which received Royal assent on 29 April 1948.

[ 101 ] On the day of its proclamation, Eliahu Epstein wrote to Harry S. Truman that the state had been proclaimed "within the frontiers approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations in its Resolution of November 29, 1947".

Hoisting of the Yishuv flag in Tel Aviv, 1 January 1948 By 14 May 1948, the only British forces remaining in Palestine were in the Haifa area and in Jerusalem. On that same day, the British garrison in Jerusalem withdrew, and the last High Commissioner, General Sir Alan Cunningham , left the city for Haifa, where he was to leave the country by sea. The Jewish leadership, led by the future Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, declared the establishment of a Jewish State in Eretz-Israel , to be known as the State of Israel , [ 102 ] on the afternoon of 14 May 1948 (5 Iyar 5708 in the Hebrew calendar ), to come into effect at the moment of termination of the Mandate at midnight.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Also on the 14th, the Provisional Government of Israel asked the US Government for recognition, on the frontiers specified in the UN Plan for Partition.

[ 106 ] The United States immediately replied, recognizing "the provisional government as the de facto authority".

[ 107 ] At midnight on 14/15 May 1948, the Mandate for Palestine expired, and the State of Israel came into being. The Palestine Government formally ceased to exist, the status of British forces still in the process of withdrawal from Haifa changed to occupiers of foreign territory, the Palestine Police Force formally stood down and was disbanded, with the remaining personnel evacuated alongside British military forces, the British blockade of Palestine was lifted, and all those who had been Palestinian citizens ceased to be British protected persons , with Mandatory Palestine passports no longer giving British protection.

[ 96 ] [ 108 ] The 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight took place both before and after the end of the Mandate.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Over the next few days, approximately 700 Lebanese, 1,876 Syrian, 4,000 Iraqi, and 2,800 Egyptian troops crossed over the borders into Palestine, starting the 1948 Arab–Israeli War .

[ 111 ] Around 4,500 Transjordanian troops, commanded partly by 38 British officers who had resigned their commissions in the British Army only weeks earlier, including overall commander, General John Bagot Glubb , entered the corpus separatum region encompassing Jerusalem and its environs (in response to the Haganah's Operation Kilshon ) [ 112 ] and moved into areas designated as part of the Arab state by the UN partition plan. The war, which was to last until 1949, would see Israel expand to encompass about 78% of the territory of the former British Mandate, with Transjordan seizing and subsequently annexing the West Bank and the Kingdom of Egypt seizing the Gaza Strip . With the end of the Mandate, the remaining British troops in Israel were concentrated in an enclave in the Haifa port area, through which they were being withdrawn, and at RAF Ramat David, which was maintained to cover the withdrawal. The British handed over RAF Ramat David to the Israelis on 26 May and on 30 June, the last British troops were evacuated from Haifa. The British flag was lowered from the administrative building of the Port of Haifa and the Israeli flag was raised in its place, and the Haifa port area was formally handed over to the Israeli authorities in a ceremony.

[ 113 ] Politics The administration of the Mandate was officially under British Government Service however, the Peel Commission noted that it was unreliable, understaffed, and over-centralised and that racial antagonism between Jews and Arabs had begun affecting the whole Administration. The Jewish Agency and the Arab Higher Committee representing the Jews and the Arabs respectively, had grown to be parallel governments themselves, a case of imperium in imperio .

[ 114 ] Palestinian Arab community Further information: Arab Higher Committee Front cover Biographical pages Passports from the British Mandate era The resolution of the San Remo Conference contained a safeguarding clause for the existing rights of the non-Jewish communities. The conference accepted the terms of the Mandate with reference to Palestine, on the understanding that there was inserted in the memorandum a legal undertaking by the Mandatory Power that it would not involve the surrender of the rights hitherto enjoyed by the non-Jewish communities in Palestine.

[ 115 ] The draft mandates for Mesopotamia and Palestine, and all of the post-war peace treaties, contained clauses for the protection of religious groups and minorities. The mandates invoked the compulsory jurisdiction of the Permanent Court of International Justice in the event of any disputes.

[ 116 ] Article 62 (LXII) of the Treaty of Berlin , signed on 13 July 1878, [ 117 ] dealt with religious freedom and civil and political rights in all parts of the Ottoman Empire.

[ 118 ] The guarantees have frequently been referred to as "religious rights" or "minority rights". However, the guarantees included a prohibition against discrimination in civil and political matters. Difference of religion could not be alleged against any person as a ground for exclusion or incapacity in matters relating to the enjoyment of civil or political rights, admission to public employments, functions, and honours, or the exercise of the various professions and industries, "in any locality whatsoever".

A legal analysis performed by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) noted that the Covenant of the League of Nations had provisionally recognised the communities of Palestine as independent nations. The mandate simply marked a transitory period, with the aim and object of leading the mandated territory to become an independent self-governing State.

[ 119 ] Judge Higgins explained that the Palestinian people are entitled to their territory, to exercise self-determination , and to have their own State." [ 120 ] The Court said that specific guarantees regarding freedom of movement and access to the Holy Sites contained in the Treaty of Berlin (1878) had been preserved under the terms of the Palestine Mandate and a chapter of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine .

[ 121 ] According to historian Rashid Khalidi , the mandate ignored the political rights of the Arabs.

[ 122 ] The Arab leadership repeatedly pressed the British to grant them national and political rights, such as representative government, over Jewish national and political rights in the remaining 23% of the Mandate of Palestine which the British had set aside for a Jewish homeland. The Arabs reminded the British of President Wilson 's Fourteen Points and British promises during the First World War . The British, however, made acceptance of the terms of the mandate a precondition for any change in the constitutional position of the Arabs. A legislative council was proposed in The Palestine Order in Council , of 1922, which implemented the terms of the mandate. It stated that: "No Ordinance shall be passed which shall be in any way repugnant to or inconsistent with the provisions of the Mandate." For the Arabs, this decree was unacceptable, akin to "self murder".

[ 123 ] As a result, the Arabs boycotted the elections to the Council held in 1923, which were subsequently annulled.

[ 124 ] During the interwar period, the British rejected the principle of majority rule or any other measure that would give Arabs control of the government.

[ 125 ] The terms of the mandate required the establishment of self-governing institutions in both Palestine and Transjordan. In 1947, the Foreign Secretary , Ernest Bevin , admitted that, during the previous twenty-five years, the British had done their best to further the legitimate aspirations of the Jewish communities without prejudicing the interests of the Arabs, but had failed to "secure the development of self-governing institutions" in accordance with the terms of the Mandate.

[ 126 ] Palestinian Arab leadership and national aspirations Main articles: Palestinian Nationalism and Arab nationalism A 1930 protest in Jerusalem against the British Mandate by Arab women. The sign reads "No dialogue, no negotiations until termination of the Mandate." Under the British Mandate, the office of "Mufti of Jerusalem", traditionally limited in authority and geographical scope, was refashioned into that of "Grand Mufti of Palestine". Furthermore, a Supreme Muslim Council (SMC) was established and given various duties, such as the administration of religious endowments and the appointment of religious judges and local muftis. In Ottoman times, these duties had been fulfilled by the Imperial bureaucracy in Constantinople ( Istanbul ).

[ 127 ] In dealings with the Palestinian Arabs, the British negotiated with the elite rather than the middle or lower classes.

[ 128 ] They chose Hajj Amin al-Husseini to become Grand Mufti, although he was young and had received the fewest votes from Jerusalem's Islamic leaders.

[ 129 ] One of the mufti's rivals, Raghib Bey al-Nashashibi , had already been appointed Mayor of Jerusalem in 1920, replacing Musa Kazim , whom the British removed after the Nabi Musa riots of 1920 , [ 130 ] during which he exhorted the crowd to give their blood for Palestine.

[ 131 ] During the entire Mandate period, but especially during the latter half, the rivalry between the mufti and al-Nashashibi dominated Palestinian politics. Khalidi ascribes the failure of the Palestinian leaders to enroll mass support to the fact that they had been part of the ruling elite and accustomed to their commands being obeyed; thus, the idea of mobilising the masses was unknown to them.

[ 132 ] On the Husseini-Nashashibi rivalry, an editorial in the Arabic-language Falastin newspaper in the 1920s commented: [ 133 ] The spirit of factionalism has penetrated most levels of society; one can see it among journalists, trainees, and the rank and file. If you ask anyone: who does he support? He will reply with pride, Husseini or Nashasibi, or ... he will start to pour out his wrath against the opposing camp in a most repulsive manner.

There had already been rioting and attacks on and massacres of Jews in 1921 and 1929 . During the 1930s, Palestinian Arab popular discontent with Jewish immigration grew. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, several factions of Palestinian society, especially from the younger generation, became impatient with the internecine divisions and ineffectiveness of the Palestinian elite and engaged in grass-roots anti-British and anti-Zionist activism, organised by groups such as the Young Men's Muslim Association . There was also support for the radical nationalist Independence Party ( Hizb al-Istiqlal ), which called for a boycott of the British in the manner of the Indian Congress Party . Some took to the hills to fight the British and the Jews . Most of these initiatives were contained and defeated by notables in the pay of the Mandatory Administration, particularly the mufti and his cousin Jamal al-Husseini . A six-month general strike in 1936 marked the start of the great Arab Revolt.

[ 134 ] Palestinian Arab journalism Main article: History of Palestinian journalism The Palestinian Arab Christian -owned Falastin newspaper featuring a caricature on its 18 June 1936 edition showing Zionism as a crocodile under the protection of a British officer telling Palestinian Arabs: "don't be afraid!!! I will swallow you peacefully...." [ 135 ] After the Palestinian Arab press during the Ottoman period had been suppressed due to the outbreak of World War I in 1914, only two of the three leading newspapers of the Ottoman era were reopened during the mandate period, Al-Karmil and Falastin . During this period, the press became more diverse, and increasingly reflected different political factions and national consciousness. According to one survey in the mid 1930s, over 250 Arabic newspapers and 65 in other languages were circulating in Mandatory Palestine.

[ 136 ] Twenty newspapers were established in Jerusalem , six in Jaffa , twelve in Haifa , and others in Bethlehem , Gaza and Tulkarem .

[ 136 ] The Ottoman Press Law, which mandated licensing and the submission of translations to government authorities, was adopted by the British, but they rarely interfered until the 1929 Palestine riots , which saw violent confrontations between Arabs and Zionists, and led to a radicalization of Arab newspapers. One outspoken newspaper was established in Jaffa called Al-Difa' ( The Defense ) in 1934, which was associated with Hizb Al-Istiqlal (The Independence Party).

[ 136 ] Falastin and Al-Difa' became the two most prominent dailies during the mandate period, and a rivalry developed between the two, which led to improvements in their quality.

[ 137 ] Many of the editors and owners of newspapers were members of political organizations, and used their publications for mobilizing the public.

[ 138 ] The British authorities' attitude towards Palestinian press was initially tolerant, given they had assessed that their impact on public life was minimal, but restrictive measures were soon increasingly introduced. A new Publications Law was issued in 1933, which gave the British authorities the power to revoke publication permits, suspend newspapers, and punish journalists. Regulations were issued that further restricted freedom of the press. Many major publications were suspended for extended periods between 1937 and 1938, including Falastin , Al-Difa , and Al-Liwa . After the outbreak of World War II , emergency laws were enacted and the British closed almost all the newspapers, with the exception of Falastin and Al-Difa , due to the moderation of their tone and the publishing of censored news.

[ 139 ] Jewish community Further information: Jewish National Council See also: History of Zionism and History of Israel Scenes of Jewish life in Palestine, photographed by Zoltan Kluger and collected by Baruch Charney Vladeck , featured in The Jewish Daily Forward , November 15, 1936 The conquest of Ottoman Syria by British forces in 1917 found a mixed community in the region, with Palestine , the southern part of Ottoman Syria, containing a mixed population of Muslims, Christians, Jews and Druze. In this period, the Jewish community ( Yishuv ) in Palestine was composed of traditional Jewish communities in cities (the Old Yishuv ), which had existed for centuries, [ 140 ] and the newly established agricultural Zionist communities (the New Yishuv ), established since the 1870s. With the establishment of the Mandate, the Jewish community in Palestine formed the Zionist Commission to represent its interests.

In 1929, the Jewish Agency for Palestine took over from the Zionist Commission its representative functions and administration of the Jewish community. During the Mandate period, the Jewish Agency was a quasi-governmental organisation that served the administrative needs of the Jewish community. Its leadership was elected by Jews from all over the world by proportional representation.

[ 141 ] The Jewish Agency was charged with facilitating Jewish immigration to Palestine, land purchase and planning the general policies of the Zionist leadership. It ran schools and hospitals and formed the Haganah . The British authorities offered to create a similar Arab Agency but this offer was rejected by Arab leaders.

[ 142 ] In response to numerous Arab attacks on Jewish communities, the Haganah , a Jewish paramilitary organisation, was formed on 15 June 1920 to defend Jewish residents. Tensions led to widespread violent disturbances on several occasions, notably in 1921 (see Jaffa riots ), 1929 (primarily violent attacks by Arabs on Jews – see 1929 Hebron massacre ) and 1936–1939. Beginning in 1936, Jewish groups such as Etzel (Irgun) and Lehi (Stern Gang) conducted campaigns of violence against British military and Arab targets.

Jewish immigration Main article: Aliyah Jewish immigration to Mandatory Palestine from 1920 to 1945 During the Mandate, the Yishuv grew from one-sixth to almost one-third of the population. According to official records, 367,845 Jews and 33,304 non-Jews immigrated legally between 1920 and 1945.

[ 143 ] It was estimated that another 50–60,000 Jews and a marginal number of Arabs, the latter mostly on a seasonal basis, immigrated illegally during this period.

[ 144 ] Immigration accounted for most of the increase of Jewish population, while the non-Jewish population increase was largely natural.

[ 145 ] Of the Jewish immigrants, in 1939 most had come from Germany and Czechoslovakia, but in 1940–1944 most came from Romania and Poland, with an additional 3,530 immigrants arriving from Yemen during the same period.

[ 146 ] Initially, Jewish immigration to Palestine met little opposition from the Palestinian Arabs . However, as anti-Semitism grew in Europe during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Jewish immigration (mostly from Europe) to Palestine began to increase markedly. Combined with the growth of Arab nationalism in the region and increasing anti-Jewish sentiments the growth of the Jewish population created much Arab resentment. The British government placed limitations on Jewish immigration to Palestine. These quotas were controversial, particularly in the latter years of British rule, and both Arabs and Jews disliked the policy, each for their own reasons.

Jewish immigrants were to be afforded Palestinian citizenship: Article 7. The Administration of Palestine shall be responsible for enacting a nationality law. There shall be included in this law provisions framed so as to facilitate the acquisition of Palestinian citizenship by Jews who take up their permanent residence in Palestine.

[ 147 ] Jewish national home In 1919, the general secretary (and future President) of the Zionist Organisation, Nahum Sokolow, published History of Zionism (1600–1918) . He also represented the Zionist Organisation at the Paris Peace Conference.

Nahum Sokolow, History of Zionism [ 148 ] One of the objectives of British administration was to give effect to the Balfour Declaration , which was also set out in the preamble of the mandate, as follows: Whereas the Principal Allied Powers have also agreed that the Mandatory should be responsible for putting into effect the declaration originally made on November 2nd, 1917 , by the Government of His Britannic Majesty, and adopted by the said Powers, in favour of the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people , it being clearly understood that nothing should be done which might prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country.

[ 149 ] The United Nations Special Committee on Palestine said the Jewish National Home, which derived from the formulation of Zionist aspirations in the 1897 Basle program has provoked many discussions concerning its meaning, scope and legal character, especially since it had no known legal connotation and there are no precedents in international law for its interpretation. It was used in the Balfour Declaration and in the Mandate, both of which promised the establishment of a "Jewish National Home" without, however, defining its meaning. A statement on "British Policy in Palestine", issued on 3 June 1922 by the Colonial Office, [ 150 ] placed a restrictive construction upon the Balfour Declaration. The statement said the British government did not contemplate "the disappearance or subordination of the Arabic population, language or customs in Palestine" or "the imposition of Jewish nationality upon the inhabitants of Palestine as a whole", and made it clear that in the eyes of the mandatory Power, the Jewish National Home was to be founded in Palestine and not that Palestine as a whole was to be converted into a Jewish National Home. The Committee noted that the construction, which restricted considerably the scope of the National Home, was made prior to the confirmation of the Mandate by the Council of the League of Nations and was formally accepted at the time by the Executive of the Zionist Organisation.

[ 151 ] In March 1930, Lord Passfield, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, had written a Cabinet Paper [ 152 ] which said: In the Balfour Declaration there is no suggestion that the Jews should be accorded a special or favoured position in Palestine as compared with the Arab inhabitants of the country, or that the claims of Palestinians to enjoy self-government (subject to the rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory as foreshadowed in Article XXII of the Covenant) should be curtailed in order to facilitate the establishment in Palestine of a National Home for the Jewish people." ... Zionist leaders have not concealed and do not conceal their opposition to the grant of any measure of self-government to the people of Palestine either now or for many years to come. Some of them even go so far as to claim that that provision of Article 2 of the Mandate constitutes a bar to compliance with the demand of the Arabs for any measure of self-government. In view of the provisions of Article XXII of the Covenant and of the promises made to the Arabs on several occasions that claim is inadmissible.

The League of Nations Permanent Mandates Commission took the position that the Mandate contained a dual obligation. In 1932 the Mandates Commission questioned the representative of the Mandatory on the demands made by the Arab population regarding the establishment of self-governing institutions, in accordance with various articles of the mandate, and in particular Article 2. The chairman noted that "under the terms of the same article, the mandatory Power had long since set up the Jewish National Home".

[ 153 ] In 1937, the Peel Commission , a British Royal Commission headed by Earl Peel , proposed solving the Arab–Jewish conflict by partitioning Palestine into two states. The two main Jewish leaders, Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion , had convinced the Zionist Congress to approve equivocally the Peel recommendations as a basis for more negotiation.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 154 ] The US Consul General at Jerusalem told the State Department that the Mufti had refused the principle of partition and declined to consider it. The Consul said that the Emir Abdullah urged acceptance on the ground that realities must be faced, but wanted modification of the proposed boundaries and Arab administrations in the neutral enclave. The Consul also noted that Nashashibi sidestepped the principle, but was willing to negotiate for favourable modifications.

[ 155 ] A collection of private correspondence published by David Ben Gurion contained a letter written in 1937 which explained that he was in favour of partition because he did not envision a partial Jewish state as the end of the process. Ben Gurion wrote "What we want is not that the country be united and whole, but that the united and whole country be Jewish." He explained that a first-class Jewish army would permit Zionists to settle in the rest of the country with or without the consent of the Arabs.

[ 156 ] Benny Morris said that both Chaim Weizmann and David Ben Gurion saw partition as a stepping stone to further expansion and the eventual takeover of the whole of Palestine.

[ 157 ] Former Israeli Foreign Minister and historian Schlomo Ben Ami writes that 1937 was the same year that the "Field Battalions" under Yitzhak Sadeh wrote the "Avner Plan", which anticipated and laid the groundwork for what would become in 1948, Plan D . It envisioned going far beyond any boundaries contained in the existing partition proposals and planned the conquest of the Galilee, the West Bank, and Jerusalem.

[ 158 ] In 1942, the Biltmore Program was adopted as the platform of the World Zionist Organisation. It demanded "that Palestine be established as a Jewish Commonwealth".

In 1946 an Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry noted that the demand for a Jewish State went beyond the obligations of either the Balfour Declaration or the Mandate and had been expressly disowned by the Chairman of the Jewish Agency as recently as 1932.

[ 159 ] The Jewish Agency subsequently refused to accept the subsequent Morrison-Grady Plan as the basis for discussion. A spokesman for the agency, Eliahu Epstein, told the US State Department that the Agency could not attend the London conference if the Grady-Morrison proposal was on the agenda. He stated that the Agency was unwilling to be placed in a position where it might have to compromise between the Grady-Morrison proposals on the one hand and its own partition plan on the other. He stated that the Agency had accepted partition as the solution for Palestine which it favoured.

[ 160 ] Land ownership See also: Jewish land purchase in Palestine Map of Palestinian land ownership by sub-district (1945) originally published in the Village Statistics, 1945 Palestinian index of villages and settlements, showing land in Jewish possession as of 31 December 1944 After transition to the British rule, much of the agricultural land in Palestine (about one third of the whole territory) was still owned by the same landowners as under Ottoman rule, mostly powerful Arab clans and local Muslim sheikhs. Other lands had been held by foreign Christian organisations (most notably the Greek Orthodox Church), as well as Jewish private and Zionist organisations, and to lesser degree by small minorities of Baháʼís, Samaritans and Circassians.

As of 1931, the territory of the British Mandate of Palestine was 26,625,600 dunams (26,625.6 km 2 ), of which 8,252,900 dunams (8,252.9 km 2 ) or 33% were arable.

[ 161 ] Official statistics show that Jews privately and collectively owned 1,393,531 dunams (1,393.53 km 2 ), or 5.23% of Palestine's total in 1945.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] The Jewish owned agricultural land was largely located in the Galilee and along the coastal plain. Estimates of the total volume of land that Jews had purchased by 15 May 1948 are complicated by illegal and unregistered land transfers, as well as by the lack of data on land concessions from the Palestine administration after 31 March 1936. According to Avneri, Jews held 1,850,000 dunams (1,850 km 2 ) of land in 1947, or 6.94% of the total.

[ 164 ] Stein gives the estimate of 2,000,000 dunams (2,000 km 2 ) as of May 1948, or 7.51% of the total.

[ 165 ] According to Fischbach, by 1948, Jews and Jewish companies owned 20% percent of all cultivable land in the country.

[ 166 ] According to Clifford A. Wright, by the end of the British Mandate period in 1948, Jewish farmers cultivated 425,450 dunams of land, while Palestinian farmers had 5,484,700 dunams of land under cultivation.

[ 167 ] The 1945 UN estimate shows that Arab ownership of arable land was on average 68% of a district, ranging from 15% ownership in the Beer-Sheba district to 99% ownership in the Ramallah district. These data cannot be fully understood without comparing them to those of neighbouring countries: in Iraq, for instance, still in 1951 only 0.3 per cent of registered land (or 50 per cent of the total amount) was categorised as 'private property'.

[ 168 ] Land ownership by district The following table shows the 1945 land ownership of mandatory Palestine by district : Land ownership of Palestine in 1945 by district District Sub-district Arab-owned Jewish-owned Public / other Haifa Haifa 42% 35% 23% Galilee Acre 87% 3% 10% Beisan 44% 34% 22% Nazareth 52% 28% 20% Safad 68% 18% 14% Tiberias 51% 38% 11% Lydda Jaffa 47% 39% 14% Ramle 77% 14% 9% Samaria Jenin 84% <1% 16% Nablus 87% <1% 13% Tulkarm 78% 17% 5% Jerusalem Hebron 96% <1% 4% Jerusalem 84% 2% 14% Ramallah 99% <1% 1% Gaza Beersheba 15% <1% 85% Gaza 75% 4% 21% Data from the Land Ownership of Palestine [ 169 ] Land ownership by corporation The table below shows the land ownership of Palestine by large Jewish Corporations (in square kilometres) on 31 December 1945.

Land ownership of Palestine by large Jewish Corporations (in square kilometres) on 31 December 1945 Corporations Area JNF 660.10 PICA 193.70 Palestine Land Development Co. Ltd.

9.70 Hemnuta Ltd 16.50 Africa Palestine Investment Co. Ltd.

9.90 Bayside Land Corporation Ltd.

8.50 Palestine Kupat Am. Bank Ltd.

8.40 Total 906.80 Data is from Survey of Palestine (vol. I, p. 245).

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] Land ownership by type The land was either owned privately and collectively by Jews, Arabs and others or belonged to the government domain which included approximately one half of the total territory of Mandatory Palestine.

[ 171 ] : 257 It was classified as urban, rural built-on, cultivable (farmed), and uncultivable in the Survey of Palestine (1946).

Land ownership of Palestine (in square kilometres) on 1 April 1943 Category Arab / non-Jewish ownership Jewish ownership Total Urban 76.66 70.11 146.77 Rural built-on 36.85 42.33 79.18 Cereal (taxable) 5,503.18 814.10 6,317.29 Cereal (not taxable) 900.29 51.05 951.34 Plantation 1,079.79 95.51 1,175.30 Citrus 145.57 141.19 286.76 Banana 2.30 1.43 3.73 Uncultivable 16,925.81 298.52 17,224.33 Total 24,670.46 1,514.25 26,184.70 Data is from Survey of Palestine (vol. II, p. 566).

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] By the end of 1946, Jewish ownership had increased to 1624 km 2 .

[ 173 ] The Arab / non-Jewish ownership includes government-owned land.

List of Mandatory land laws Land classification as prescribed in 1940 Land Transfer Ordinance of 1920 1926 Correction of Land Registers Ordinance Land Settlement Ordinance of 1928 Land Transfer Regulations of 1940 In February 1940, the British Government of Palestine promulgated the Land Transfer Regulations which divided Palestine into three regions with different restrictions on land sales applying to each. In Zone "A", which included the hill-country of Judea as a whole, certain areas in the Jaffa sub-District, and in the Gaza District , and the northern part of the Beersheba sub-District, new agreements for sale of land other than to a Palestinian Arab were forbidden without the High Commissioner's permission. In Zone "B", which included the Jezreel Valley , eastern Galilee, a parcel of coastal plain south of Haifa , a region northeast of the Gaza District, and the southern part of the Beersheba sub-District, sale of land by a Palestinian Arab was forbidden except to a Palestinian Arab with similar exceptions. In the "free zone", which consisted of Haifa Bay, the coastal plain from Zikhron Ya'akov to Yibna , and the neighborhood of Jerusalem, there were no restrictions. The reason given for the regulations was that the Mandatory was required to "ensur[e] that the rights and positions of other sections of the population are not prejudiced", and an assertion that "such transfers of land must be restricted if Arab cultivators are to maintain their existing standard of life and a considerable landless Arab population is not soon to be created" [ 174 ] Demographics Main article: Demographic history of Palestine (region) § British Mandate era British censuses and estimations Street in As-Salt in the 1920s Population distribution near the end of the Mandate In 1920, the majority of the approximately 750,000 people in this multi-ethnic region were Arabic -speaking Muslims, including a Bedouin population (estimated at 103,331 at the time of the 1922 census [ 2 ] and concentrated in the Beersheba area and the region south and east of it), as well as Jews (who accounted for some 11% of the total) and smaller groups of Druze , Syrians, Sudanese, Somalis, Circassians , Egyptians, Copts, Greeks, and Hejazi Arabs : The first census of 1922 showed a population of 757,182, of whom 78% were Muslim, 11% Jewish and 10% Christian.

The second census , of 1931, gave a total population of 1,035,154 of whom 73.4% were Muslim, 16.9% Jewish and 8.6% Christian.

A discrepancy between the two censuses and records of births, deaths and immigration, led the authors of the second census to postulate the illegal immigration of about 9,000 Jews and 4,000 Arabs during the intervening years.

[ 175 ] Arab Christian Palestinian boys at the Jerusalem YMCA , 1938 There were no further censuses but statistics were maintained by counting births, deaths and migration. By the end of 1936 the total population was approximately 1,300,000, the Jews being estimated at 384,000. The Arabs had also increased their numbers rapidly, mainly as a result of the cessation of the military conscription imposed on the country by the Ottoman Empire , the campaign against malaria and a general improvement in health services. In absolute figures their increase exceeded that of the Jewish population, but proportionally, the latter had risen from 13 per cent of the total population at the census of 1922 to nearly 30 per cent at the end of 1936.

[ 176 ] Some components such as illegal immigration could only be estimated approximately. The White Paper of 1939 , which placed immigration restrictions on Jews, stated that the Jewish population "has risen to some 450,000" and was "approaching a third of the entire population of the country". In 1945, a demographic study showed that the population had grown to 1,764,520, comprising 1,061,270 Muslims, 553,600 Jews, 135,550 Christians and 14,100 people of other groups.

Year Total Muslim Jewish Christian Other 1922 752,048 589,177 (78%) 83,790 (11%) 71,464 (10%) 7,617 (1%) 1931 1,036,339 761,922 (74%) 175,138 (17%) 89,134 (9%) 10,145 (1%) 1945 1,764,520 1,061,270 (60%) 553,600 (31%) 135,550 (8%) 14,100 (1%) Average compounded population growth rate per annum, 1922–1945 3.8% 2.6% 8.6% 2.8% 2.7% By district Map of the municipalities in Mandatory Palestine by population count (1945) 150,000 and more 100,000 50,000 20,000 10,000 5,000 2,000 1,000 500 less than 500 Nomadic regions in the Negev desert The following table gives the religious demography of each of the 16 districts of the Mandate in 1945.

Demography of Palestine in 1945 by district [ 177 ] District Sub-District Muslim Jewish Christian Total Number % Number % Number % Haifa Haifa 95,970 38% 119,020 47% 33,710 13% 253,450 Galilee Acre 51,130 69% 3,030 4% 11,800 16% 73,600 Beisan 16,660 67% 7,590 30% 680 3% 24,950 Nazareth 30,160 60% 7,980 16% 11,770 24% 49,910 Safad 47,310 83% 7,170 13% 1,630 3% 56,970 Tiberias 23,940 58% 13,640 33% 2,470 6% 41,470 Lydda Jaffa 95,980 24% 295,160 72% 17,790 4% 409,290 Ramle 95,590 71% 31,590 24% 5,840 4% 134,030 Samaria Jenin 60,000 98% negligible <1% 1,210 2% 61,210 Nablus 92,810 98% negligible <1% 1,560 2% 94,600 Tulkarm 76,460 82% 16,180 17% 380 1% 93,220 Jerusalem Hebron 92,640 99% 300 <1% 170 <1% 93,120 Jerusalem 104,460 41% 102,520 40% 46,130 18% 253,270 Ramallah 40,520 83% negligible <1% 8,410 17% 48,930 Gaza Beersheba 6,270 90% 510 7% 210 3% 7,000 Gaza 145,700 97% 3,540 2% 1,300 1% 150,540 Total 1,076,780 58% 608,230 33% 145,060 9% 1,845,560 Urban areas The table below shows the population of the municipal areas of Palestine in 1922, at the start of the mandate period, per the 1922 census of Palestine .

[ 178 ] Municipality Muslims Jews Christians Druze Samaritans Baha'is Metawilehs Hindus Sikhs TOTAL Jerusalem 13413 33971 14699 6 0 0 0 484 5 62578 Jaffa 20699 20152 6850 0 8 0 0 0 0 47709 Haifa 9377 6230 8863 12 0 152 0 0 0 24634 Gaza 16722 54 701 0 0 0 3 0 0 17480 Hebron 16074 430 73 0 0 0 0 0 0 16577 Nablus 15238 16 544 2 147 0 0 0 0 15947 Safad 5431 2986 343 1 0 0 0 0 0 8761 Lydda 7166 11 926 0 0 0 0 0 0 8103 Nazareth 2486 53 4885 0 0 0 0 0 0 7424 Ramleh 5837 35 1440 0 0 0 0 0 0 7312 Tiberias 2096 4427 422 1 0 4 0 0 0 6950 Bethlehem 818 2 5838 0 0 0 0 0 0 6658 Acre 4883 78 1344 13 0 102 0 0 0 6420 Majdal 5064 0 33 0 0 0 0 0 0 5097 Khan Yunis 3866 1 23 0 0 0 0 0 0 3890 Tulkarem 3109 23 208 1 8 1 0 0 0 3350 Ramallah 125 7 2972 0 0 0 0 0 0 3104 Beit Jala 41 0 3060 0 0 0 0 0 0 3101 Jenin 2307 7 108 0 0 0 0 212 3 2637 Beersheba 2012 98 235 11 0 0 0 0 0 2356 Shefa-Amr 623 0 1263 402 0 0 0 0 0 2288 Beisan 1687 41 213 0 0 0 0 0 0 1941 TOTAL 139074 68622 55043 449 163 259 3 696 8 264317 Government and institutions Jerusalem City Hall , 1939 Under the terms of the August 1922 Palestine Order in Council, the Mandate territory was divided into administrative regions known as districts and were administered by the office of the British High Commissioner for Palestine .

[ 179 ] Britain continued the millet system of the Ottoman Empire whereby all matters of a religious nature and personal status were within the jurisdiction of Muslim courts and the courts of other recognised religions, called confessional communities . The High Commissioner established the Orthodox Rabbinate and retained a modified millet system which only recognised eleven religious communities: Muslims, Jews and nine Christian denominations (none of which were Christian Protestant churches). All those who were not members of these recognised communities were excluded from the millet arrangement. As a result, there was no possibility, for example, of marriages between confessional communities, and there were no civil marriages. Personal contacts between communities were nominal.

Apart from the Religious Courts, the judicial system was modelled on the British one, having a High Court with appellate jurisdiction and the power of review over the Central Court and the Central Criminal Court.
The five consecutive Chief Justices were: Sir Thomas Haycraft (1921–1927) [ 180 ] Sir Michael McDonnell (1927–1936) [ 180 ] Sir Harry Trusted [ 181 ] (1936–1941; knighted in 1938) (afterwards Chief Justice of the Federated Malay States , 1941) Frederick Gordon-Smith (1941–1944) [ 182 ] Sir William Fitzgerald (1944–1948) [ 183 ] The local newspaper The Palestine Post was founded in 1932 by Gershon Agron . In 1950, its name was changed to The Jerusalem Post . In 1923, Pinhas Rutenberg founded the Palestine Electric Company (to become the Israel Electric Corporation in 1961).

Economy Main article: Economy of Mandatory Palestine 1927 Mandatory Palestine postage stamp 1941 Mandatory Palestine coin 1927 Mandatory Palestine revenue stamp 1927 Mandatory Palestine coin " Palestine " is shown in English, Arabic ( فلسطين ) and Hebrew; the latter includes the acronym א״י for Eretz Yisrael (Land of Israel).

Between 1922 and 1947, the annual growth rate of the Jewish sector of the economy was 13.2%, mainly due to immigration and foreign capital, while that of the Arab was 6.5%. Per capita, these figures were 4.8% and 3.6% respectively. By 1936, Jews earned 2.6 times as much as Arabs.

[ 184 ] Compared to Arabs in other countries, Palestinian Arabs earned slightly more.

[ 185 ] The Jaffa Electric Company was founded in 1923 by Pinhas Rutenberg , and was later absorbed into a newly created Palestine Electric Corporation ; the First Jordan Hydro-Electric Power House was opened in 1933.

Palestine Airways was founded in 1934, Angel Bakeries in 1927, and the Tnuva dairy in 1926. Electric current mainly flowed to Jewish industry, following it to its nestled locations in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Although Tel Aviv had by far more workshops and factories, the demand for electric power for industry was roughly the same for both cities by the early 1930s.

[ 186 ] The country's largest industrial zone was in Haifa , where many housing projects were built for employees.

[ 187 ] On the scale of the UN Human Development Index determined for around 1939, of 36 countries, Palestinian Jews were placed 15th, Palestinian Arabs 30th, Egypt 33rd and Turkey 35th.

[ 188 ] The Jews in Palestine were mainly urban, 76.2% in 1942, while the Arabs were mainly rural, 68.3% in 1942.

[ 189 ] Overall, Khalidi concludes that Palestinian Arab society, while overmatched by the Yishuv , was as advanced as any other Arab society in the region and considerably more than several.

[ 190 ] Education Under the British Mandate, the country developed economically and culturally. In 1919, the Jewish community founded a centralised Hebrew school system, and the following year established the Assembly of Representatives , the Jewish National Council and the Histadrut labour federation. The Technion university was founded in 1924, and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1925.

There were several attempts by the Arab Palestinians to establish an Arab higher education institution, starting from the 1920s, but it did not materialise. Israeli historian Ilan Pappé attributed this to "Zionist pressure, British anti-Arab racism, and lack of resources." He added that "the colonial mentality of the British authorities who deemed the Palestinians yet another colonized people who had to be oppressed, while regarding the Zionist settlers as fellow colonialists, feared that such a university would enhance the Palestinian national movement." [ 191 ] Literacy rates in 1932 were 86% for the Jews compared to 22% for the Palestinian Arabs, but Arab literacy rates steadily increased thereafter. By comparison, Palestinian Arab literacy rates were higher than those of Egypt and Turkey, but lower than in Lebanon.

[ 192 ] Gallery General Sir Edmund Allenby 's final attacks of the Palestine Campaign gave Britain control of the area.

General Allenby entering Jerusalem with British troops on 11 December 1917 (Allenby was later created a field marshal , in April 1919) Brigadier-General Watson meeting with Hussein al-Husayni , the Mayor of Jerusalem , in December 1917 The surrender of Jerusalem by the Ottomans to the British on 9 December 1917 following the Battle of Jerusalem Main post office, Jaffa Road , Jerusalem The Palestine Archaeological Museum (PAM; known since 1967 as the Rockefeller Archaeological Museum ), built in Jerusalem during the British Mandate Main post office, Jaffa Alhambra Cinema, Jaffa The Anglo-Palestine Bank The Western Wall , 1933 Supreme Military Tribunal of the British Mandate, Kiryat Shmuel, Jerusalem YMCA in Jerusalem, built during the British Mandate Entertainment program in Jericho by the Palestine Broadcasting Service , which produced its programs in Arabic, Hebrew, and English "Bevingrad" in Jerusalem, Russian Compound behind barbed wire Mandate-era pillar box , Jerusalem 1941 currency coin Movement and curfew pass, issued under the authority of the British Military Commander, East Palestine, 1946 Palestine maritime ensign Palestine customs and postal services ensign Flag of the High Commissioner See also Mandatory Palestine passport Palestinian Citizenship Order 1925 History of Palestinian journalism History of agriculture in Palestine Palestine Command Palestine pound High Commissioners for Palestine and Transjordan Israeli Declaration of Independence List of post offices in the British Mandate of Palestine Postage stamps and postal history of Palestine Notes ^ During its existence the territory was officially known simply as Palestine , but, in later years, a variety of other names and descriptors have been used, including Mandatory or Mandate Palestine , the British Mandate of Palestine and British Palestine ( Arabic : فلسطين الانتدابية Filasṭīn al-Intidābiyah ; Hebrew : פָּלֶשְׂתִּינָה (א״י) Pāleśtīnā (E.Y.) , where "E.Y." indicates ’Eretz Yiśrā’ēl , the Land of Israel ).

^ Historian Nur Masalha describes the "British preoccupation with Palestine" and the large increase in European books, articles, travelogues and geographical publications during the 18th and 19th centuries.

[ 14 ] ^ From Himmler: The National Socialist movement of Greater Germany has, since its inception, inscribed upon its flag the fight against the world Jewry. It has therefore followed with particular sympathy the struggle of freedom-loving Arabs, especially in Palestine, against Jewish interlopers. In the recognition of this enemy and of the common struggle against it lies the firm foundation of the natural alliance that exists between the National Socialist Greater Germany and the freedom-loving Muslims of the whole world. In this spirit I am sending you on the anniversary of the infamous Balfour declaration my hearty greetings and wishes for the successful pursuit of your struggle until the final victory.

From Ribbentrop: I am sending my greetings to your eminence and to the participants of the meeting held today in the Reich capital under your chairmanship. Germany is linked to the Arab nation by old ties of friendship, and today we are united more than ever before. The elimination of the socalled Jewish national home and the liberation of all Arab countries from the oppression and exploitation of the Western powers is an unchangeable part of the Great German Reich policy. Let the hour not be far off when the Arab nation will be able to build its future and find unity in full independence.

^ For example, Radio Palestine broadcast the comments of an Egyptian writer who said, "The war is between the lofty and humane values represented by England and the forces of darkness represented by the Nazis." [ 66 ] ^ A British recruiting poster in Arabic, published in the Falastin newspaper in January 1942, read: "She couldn't stop thinking about contribution and sacrifice, she felt ongoing pride and exaltation of spirit – when she did what she saw as her sacred duty for her nation and its sons. When your country is crying out to you and asking for your service, when your country makes it plain that our Arab men need your love and support, and when your country reminds you of how cruel the enemy is – when your country is calling you, can you stand by and do nothing?" [ 66 ] ^ p. 50, at 1947 "Haj Amin al-Husseini went one better: he denounced also the minority report, which, in his view, legitimized the Jewish foothold in Palestine, a "partition in disguise", as he put it."; p. 66, at 1946 "The League demanded independence for Palestine as a "unitary" state, with an Arab majority and minority rights for the Jews. The AHC went one better and insisted that the proportion of Jews to Arabs in the unitary state should stand at one to six, meaning that only Jews who lived in Palestine before the British Mandate be eligible for citizenship"; p. 67, at 1947 "The League's Political Committee met in Sofar, Lebanon, on 16–19 September, and urged the Palestine Arabs to fight partition, which it called "aggression", "without mercy". The League promised them, in line with Bludan, assistance "in manpower, money and equipment" should the United Nations endorse partition."; p. 72, at Dec 1947 "The League vowed, in very general language, "to try to stymie the partition plan and prevent the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine," [ 81 ] ^ "The Arabs rejected the United Nations Partition Plan so that any comment of theirs did not specifically concern the status of the Arab section of Palestine under partition but rather rejected the scheme in its entirety." [ 82 ] References ^ "Palestine seal" .

www.royalmintmuseum.org.uk .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2024 . Retrieved 12 February 2024 .

^ a b " "Hope Simpson report, Chapter III" . Zionism-israel.com. October 1930.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2012 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ Department of Statistics (1945).

Village Statistics, April, 1945 . Government of Palestine.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 .

Scan of the original document at the National Library of Israel.

^ 1922 Census of Palestine Archived 29 January 2024 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved 19 February 2024.

^ "League of Nations decision confirming the Principal Allied Powers' agreement on the territory of Palestine" . Archived from the original on 25 November 2013.

^ Hughes, Matthew, ed. (2004).

Allenby in Palestine: The Middle East Correspondence of Field Marshal Viscount Allenby June 1917 – October 1919 . Army Records Society. Vol. 22. Phoenix Mill, Thrupp, Stroud, Gloucestershire: Sutton Publishing Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7509-3841-9 .

Allenby to Robertson 25 January 1918 in Hughes 2004, p. 128 ^ Article 22, The Covenant of the League of Nations Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine and "Mandate for Palestine", Encyclopaedia Judaica , Vol. 11, p. 862, Keter Publishing House, Jerusalem, 1972 ^ Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion of 9 July 2004, 2004 International Court of Justice 63.

^ Victor Kattan.

From Coexistence to Conquest, International Law and the Origins of the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1891–1949 . London, New York: Pluto Press, 2009.

^ Nur Masalha (2018).

Palestine: A Four Thousand Year History . Zed.

ISBN 978-1-78699-272-7 .

Chapter 9: Being Palestine, becoming Palestine, p. 287: "the sense of continuity between the ancient, medieval and modern political geography and naming traditions of Palestine eventually came into play in the designation of the British Mandatory Government of Palestine". The preceding pages, p.259-287, document in detail the usage of the term Palestine by native Palestinians from the moment the printing press was introduced into the area in the late 19th century.

^ Khalidi 1997 , pp. 151–152.

^ Büssow, Johann (11 August 2011).

Hamidian Palestine: Politics and Society in the District of Jerusalem 1872–1908 . BRILL. p. 5.

ISBN 978-90-04-20569-7 . Retrieved 17 May 2013 .

^ |The 1915 Filastin Risalesi ("Palestine Document") is a country survey of the VIII Corps of the Ottoman Army, which identified Palestine as a region including the sanjaqs of Akka (the Galilee), the Sanjaq of Nablus, and the Sanjaq of Jerusalem (Kudus Sherif), see Ottoman Conceptions of Palestine-Part 2: Ethnography and Cartography, Salim Tamari Archived 27 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ Nur Masalha (2018).

Palestine A Four Thousand year History . Zed Books. pp.

242– 245.

ISBN 978-1-78699-274-1 .

^ Caplan, Neil (1994).

"ZIONIST VISIONS OF PALESTINE, 1917–1936 1 " .

The Muslim World .

84 ( 1– 2): 19– 35.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.1994.tb03587.x .

^ Ronald Storrs , Orientations, Nicholson & Watson   1943 pp.383-384.|quote='When . .the first civil issue of Palestine stamps was being designed, strong pressure was exerted on the authorities to render Palestine, in the Hebrew title, by Eretz Yisrael , the Land of Israel, the ancient and traditional Jewish name. Jews have never called the country Palestine, which was indeed a Roman name etymologically akin to Philistia. .the Government was undoubtedly right in resisting a nomenclature intolerable to the vast majority of Palestinians, and in substituting the device, relatively inoffensive to all parties (though giving complete satisfaction to none), of adding to "Palestine" in Hebrew the two Hebrew initials (E.Y.).' ^ League of Nations, Permanent Mandate Commission, Minutes of the Ninth Session Archived 2011-06-28 at the Wayback Machine (Arab Grievances), Held at Geneva from 8 to 25 June 1926, ^ Rayman, Noah (29 September 2014).

"Mandatory Palestine: What It Was and Why It Matters" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2020.

^ Ira M. Lapidus, A History of Islamic Societies , 2002: "The first were the nationalists, who in 1918 formed the first Muslim-Christian associations to protest against the Jewish national home" p.558 ^ Tessler, A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict, Second Edition , 2009: "An All-Palestine Congress, known also as the First Congress of the Muslim-Christian Societies, was organised by the MCA and convened in Jerusalem in February 1919." p.220-221 ^ "First Arab Congress 1919 Paris Resolution (in Arabic)" (PDF) .

ecf.org.il . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2017.

^ "Palestine Through History: A Chronology (I)" . Archived from the original on 17 June 2011 . Retrieved 14 February 2016 .

The Palestine Chronicle ^ a b "United Nations Maintenance Page" .

unispal.un.org . Archived from the original on 3 June 2014.

^ a b c d 'A Colonial Room With a View of Jerusalem' ( Haaretz , 24 April 2012).

https://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/culture/2012-04-24/ty-article/a-colonial-room-with-a-view-of-Jerusalem/0000017f-deec-db22-a17f-fefd9e520000 ^ Shamir, Ronen (2013) Current Flow: The Electrification of Palestine Stanford: Stanford University Press ^ Caplan, Neil.

Palestine Jewry and the Arab Question, 1917 – 1925 . London and Totowa, NJ: F. Cass, 1978.

ISBN 978-0-7146-3110-3 . pp. 148–161.

^ Mattar, Philip (2003). "al-Husayni, Amin". In Mattar, Philip (ed.).

Encyclopedia of the Palestinians (Revised ed.). New York: Facts On File.

ISBN 978-0-8160-5764-1 .

^ "It was not scholarly religious credentials that made Hajj Amin an attractive candidate for president of the SMC in the eyes of colonial officials. Rather, it was the combination of his being an effective nationalist activist and a member of one of Jerusalem's most respected notable families that made it advantageous to align his interests with those of the British administration and thereby keep him on a short tether." Weldon C. Matthews, Confronting an Empire, Constructing a Nation: Arab Nationalists and Popular Politics in Mandate Palestine , I.B.Tauris, 2006 pp. 31–32 ^ For details see Yitzhak Reiter, Islamic Endowments in Jerusalem under British Mandate , Frank Cass, London Portland, Oregon, 1996 ^ Excluding funds for land purchases. Sahar Huneidi, A Broken Trust: Herbert Samuel, Zionism and the Palestinians 1920–1925 , I.B. Tauris, London and New York, 2001 p. 38. The 'Jewish Agency', mentioned in article 4 of the Mandate only became the official term in 1928. At the time the organisation was called the Palestine Zionist Executive.

^ "1922 Palestine Order in Council" . Archived from the original on 16 September 2014.

^ a b "Palestine. The Constitution Suspended. Arab Boycott Of Elections. Back To British Rule" The Times , 30 May 1923, p. 14, Issue 43354 ^ a b Legislative Council (Palestine) Archived 15 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine Answers.com ^ Las, Nelly.

"International Council of Jewish Women" . International Council of Jewish Women.

Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2018 .

^ League of Nations, Official Journal , October 1923, p. 1217.

^ a b Segev 2000 , pp.

360–362 ^ Gilbert 1998 , p. 80 ^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 87–90 ^ Smith, Charles D. (2007).

Palestine and the Arab–Israeli Conflict: A History with Documents (Sixth ed.). pp.

111– 225.

^ Gilbert 1998 , p. 85: The Jewish Settlement Police were created and equipped with trucks and armoured cars by the British working with the Jewish Agency .

^ "The Zionism of Orde", Covenant , vol. 3, IDC, archived from the original on 1 August 2014 , retrieved 4 August 2014 ^ Black 1991 , p. 14 ^ Shapira 1992 , pp. 247, 249, 350 ^ Firestone, Reuven (2012).

Holy War in Judaism: The Fall and Rise of a Controversial Idea . Oxford University Press. p. 192.

ISBN 978-0-19-986030-2 .

^ "Aljazeera: The history of Palestinian revolts" . Archived from the original on 15 December 2005 . Retrieved 15 December 2005 .

^ Khalidi 2001 , p. 26 ^ Khalidi 1987 , p. 845.

^ Khalidi 2001 , p. 28.

^ a b Louis, William Roger (2006).

Ends of British Imperialism: The Scramble for Empire, Suez, and Decolonization Archived 28 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine , p. 391.

^ a b Morris, Benny (2009).

One State, Two States: Resolving the Israel/Palestine Conflict , p. 66 ^ a b Morris, Benny (2004) [1988].

The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited . Cambridge University Press. pp. 11, 48, 49.

ISBN 978-0-521-00967-6 . Retrieved 12 February 2022 .

p. 11 "while the Zionist movement, after much agonising, accepted the principle of partition and the proposals as a basis for negotiation"; p. 49 "In the end, after bitter debate, the Congress equivocally approved—by a vote of 299 to 160—the Peel recommendations as a basis for further negotiation." ^ 'Zionists Ready To Negotiate British Plan As Basis', The Times Thursday, 12 August 1937; p. 10; Issue 47761; col B.

^ Eran, Oded (2002). "Arab-Israel Peacemaking." The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East . Ed.

Avraham Sela . New York: Continuum, p. 122.

^ Letter from David Ben-Gurion to his son Amos, written 5 October 1937 Archived 12 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Obtained from the Ben-Gurion Archives in Hebrew, and translated into English by the Institute of Palestine Studies , Beirut ^ Morris, Benny (2011), Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 1881–1998 , Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, p. 138, ISBN 978-0-307-78805-4 Quote: "No Zionist can forgo the smallest portion of the Land Of Israel. [A] Jewish state in part [of Palestine] is not an end, but a beginning ….. Our possession is important not only for itself … through this we increase our power, and every increase in power facilitates getting hold of the country in its entirety. Establishing a [small] state …. will serve as a very potent lever in our historical effort to redeem the whole country" ^ a b Finkelstein, Norman (2005), Beyond Chutzpah: On the Misuse of Anti-semitism and the Abuse of History , University of California Press, p. 280, ISBN 978-0-520-24598-3 ^ Quote from a meeting of the Jewish Agency executive in June 1938: "[I am] satisfied with part of the country, but on the basis of the assumption that after we build up a strong force following the establishment of the state, we will abolish the partition of the country and we will expand to the whole Land of Israel." in Masalha, Nur (1992), Expulsion of the Palestinians: The Concept of "Transfer" in Zionist Political Thought, 1882–1948 , Inst for Palestine Studies, p.

107 , ISBN 978-0-88728-235-5 ; and Segev 2000 , p.

403 ^ From a letter from Chaim Weizmann to General Sir Arthur G. Wauchope , High Commissioner for Palestine , while the Peel Commission was convening in 1937: "We shall spread in the whole country in the course of time ….. this is only an arrangement for the next 25 to 30 years." Masalha, Nur (1992), Expulsion of the Palestinians: The Concept of "Transfer" in Zionist Political Thought, 1882–1948 , Inst for Palestine Studies, p.

62 , ISBN 978-0-88728-235-5 ^ "Why Italian Planes Bombed Tel-Aviv?" . Archived from the original on 21 September 2011.

^ How the Palmach was formed Archived 12 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine (History Central) ^ The Untold Story Behind the Palmach’s First Mission ^ Jewish Brigade Group ^ Secret World War II documents released by the UK in July 2001, include documents on Operation ATLAS (See References: KV 2/400–402 Archived 2 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine . A German task force led by Kurt Wieland parachuted into Palestine in September 1944. This was one of the last German efforts in the region to attack the Jewish community in Palestine and undermine British rule by supplying local Arabs with cash, arms and sabotage equipment. The team was captured shortly after landing.

^ Moshe Pearlman (1947).

Mufti of Jerusalem; the story of Haj Amin el Husseini . V. Gollancz. p. 50.

^ Rolf Steininger (17 December 2018).

Germany and the Middle East: From Kaiser Wilhelm II to Angela Merkel . Berghahn Books. pp. 55–.

ISBN 978-1-78920-039-3 .

^ a b c Aderet, Ofer. "12,000 Palestinians Fought for U.K. in WWII alongside Jewish Volunteers, Historian Finds." Haaretz.com. Haaretz, May 31, 2019.

Link Archived 27 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Corrigan, Gordon.

The Second World War Thomas Dunne Books, 2011 ISBN 978-0-312-57709-4 p. 523, last paragraph ^ a b "United States: British Collaboration on Illegal Immigration to Palestine, 1945-1947" .

Miriam Joyce Haron . JSTOR. 1980.

JSTOR 4467083 . Retrieved 6 December 2023 .

^ Lenk, RS (1994).

The Mauritius Affair, The Boat People of 1940–41 . London: R Lenk.

ISBN 978-0-9518805-2-4 .

^ Aroni, Samuel (2002–2007).

"Who Perished on the Struma And How Many?" . JewishGen.org.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2016 . Retrieved 27 March 2013 .

^ Подводная лодка "Щ-215" .

Черноморский Флот информационный ресурс (in Russian). 2000–2013.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2013 . Retrieved 27 March 2013 .

^ "מפקורה SS Mefküre Mafkura Mefkura" .

Haapalah Aliyah Bet Database . 27 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ Kenneth Harris, Attlee (1982) pp 388–400.

^ Howard Adelman, "UNSCOP and the Partition Recommendation." (Centre for Refugee Studies, York University, 2009) online Archived 19 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "A/RES/181(II) of 29 November 1947" . United Nations. 1947. Archived from the original on 24 May 2012 . Retrieved 11 January 2012 .

^ Cathy Hartley; Paul Cossali (2004).

Survey of Arab-Israeli Relations . Routledge. pp.

52– 53.

ISBN 978-1-135-35527-2 .

^ Article 11 of the United Nations Charter ^ Roosevelt, Kermit (1948). "The Partition of Palestine: A lesson in pressure politics".

Middle East Journal .

2 (1): 1– 16.

JSTOR 4321940 .

^ Snetsinger, John (1974).

Truman, the Jewish vote, and the creation of Israel . Hoover Institution. pp.

66–67 .

ISBN 978-0-8179-3391-3 .

^ Sarsar, Saliba (2004). "The question of Palestine and United States behavior at the United Nations".

International Journal of Politics, Culture and Society .

17 (3): 457– 470.

doi : 10.1023/B:IJPS.0000019613.01593.5e .

ISSN 0891-4486 .

S2CID 143484109 .

^ Morris, Benny (2008).

1948: a history of the first Arab-Israeli war . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-12696-9 . Retrieved 24 July 2013 .

^ "UNITED NATIONS CONCILIATION COMMISSION FOR PALESTINE A/AC.25/W/19 30 July 1949: (Working paper prepared by the Secretariat)" . Archived from the original on 2 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 August 2013 .

^ "Palestine" . Encyclopædia Britannica Online School Edition, 2006. 15 May 2006.

^ Stefan Brooks (2008). "Palestine, British Mandate for". In Spencer C. Tucker (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli Conflict . Vol. 3. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 770.

ISBN 978-1-85109-842-2 .

^ A. J. Sherman (2001).

Mandate Days: British Lives in Palestine, 1918–1948 . The Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-6620-3 .

^ Menachem Begin (1977).

"The Revolt" .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2014 .

^ See Mandates, Dependencies and Trusteeship , by H. Duncan Hall, Carnegie Endowment, 1948, pp. 266–267.

^ "The Mandate is Indivisble" .

Historical Jewish Press, Tel Aviv University, Palestine Post . 9 April 1946. p. 3. Archived from the original on 29 September 2010.

^ "The Near East and Africa" .

Foreign relations of the United States . 1947. p. 1255.

Archived from the original on 23 August 2013 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

^ Snetsinger, John (1974).

Truman, the Jewish vote, and the creation of Israel . Hoover Press. pp.

60– 61.

ISBN 978-0-8179-3391-3 .

^ "The Near East and Africa, Volume V (1947)" .

United States Department of State, Foreign relations of the United States . p. 1271.

^ The British Empire in the Middle East, 1945–1951 Archived 28 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine , p. 348. William Roger Louis, Clarendon Press, 1984 ^ "Violence Ebbs; British Police Withdrawn from Tel Aviv and Its Environs – Jewish Telegraphic Agency" .

www.jta.org . 16 December 1947.

Archived from the original on 18 February 2020 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 .

^ Michael J Cohen (24 February 2014).

Britain's Moment in Palestine: Retrospect and Perspectives, 1917–1948 . Routledge. pp. 481–.

ISBN 978-1-317-91364-1 .

^ "British Forces in Jerusalem Alerter Following Haifa Victory; Fear Haganah Raid on City – Jewish Telegraphic Agency" .

www.jta.org . 23 April 1948.

Archived from the original on 18 February 2020 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 .

^ a b "PALESTINE BILL" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . 10 March 1948.

^ Herzog, Chaim and Gazit, Shlomo: The Arab-Israeli Wars: War and Peace in the Middle East from the 1948 War of Independence to the Present , p. 46 ^ " 'U.N. Resolution 181 (II). Future Government of Palestine, Part 1-A, Termination of Mandate, Partition and Independence" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2009 . Retrieved 20 May 2017 .

^ U.N. Resolution 181 (II). Future Government of Palestine, Part 1-A, Termination of Mandate, Partition and Independence Archived 29 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "President Truman's Trusteeship Statement – 1948" .

www.mideastweb.org .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 13 February 2011 .

^ Northey, Ruth (project ed.) (2013).

Whitaker's Britain . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 127.

ISBN 978-1-4729-0305-1 .

^ "Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Declaration of Establishment of State of Israel: 14 May 1948 : Retrieved 10 April 2012" .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 9 April 2012 .

^ Bier, Aharon, & Slae, Bracha, For the sake of Jerusalem , Mazo Publishers, 2006, p. 49 ^ Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel , 14 May 1948.

^ J. Sussmann (1950). "Law and Judicial Practice in Israel".

Journal of Comparative Legislation and International Law .

32 : 29– 31.

^ "Copy of telegram from Epstein to Shertok" (PDF) . Government of Israel. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2013 . Retrieved 3 May 2013 .

^ "Our Documents – Press Release Announcing U.S. Recognition of Israel (1948)" .

www.ourdocuments.gov . 9 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 10 April 2012 .

^ "Palestine Passports Cease to Give British Protection After May Govt. Announces – Jewish Telegraphic Agency" .

www.jta.org . 26 March 1948.

^ Masalha, Nur (1992). "Expulsion of the Palestinians." Institute for Palestine Studies, this edition 2001, p. 175.

^ Rashid (1997). p.

21 Archived 28 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine "In 1948 half of Palestine's 1.4 million Arabs were uprooted from their homes and became refugees".

^ Appendix IX-B, 'The Arab Expeditionary Forces to Palestine, 15/5/48, Khalidi, 1971, p. 867.

^ Bayliss, 1999, p. 84.

^ Cohen-Hattab, Kobi (8 July 2019).

Zionism's Maritime Revolution: The Yishuv's Hold on the Land of Israel's Sea and Shores, 1917–1948 . Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG.

ISBN 978-3-11-063352-8 .

^ "Plan of partition - Summary of the UK Palestine Royal Commission (Peel Commission) report - League of Nations/Non-UN document" .

un.org .

^ See Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States "The Paris Peace Conference" . 1919. p. 94.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2011 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

^ League of Nations Union (1922).

"Summary of the work of the League of Nations, January 1920 – March 1922" . London – via Internet Archive.

^ "Internet History Sourcebooks" .

www.fordham.edu . Archived from the original on 8 June 2008 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

^ See Defending the Rights of Others, by Carol Fink, Cambridge University, 2006, ISBN 978-0-521-02994-0 , p. 28 ^ See the Statement of the Principal Accredited Representative, Hon.

W. Ormsby-Gore , C.330.M.222, Mandate for Palestine – Minutes of the Permanent Mandates Commission/League of Nations 32nd session, 18 August 1937 Archived 3 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ See the Judgment in "Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory" Archived 2011-01-12 at the Wayback Machine (PDF) ^ See paragraphs 49, 70, and 129 of the International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory PDF Archived 2010-07-06 at the Wayback Machine and PAUL J. I. M. DE WAART (2005). "International Court of Justice Firmly Walled in the Law of Power in the Israeli–Palestinian Peace Process." Leiden Journal of International Law , 18, pp. 467–487, doi : 10.1017/S0922156505002839 ^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 32–33.

^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 33–34.

^ "Palestine. The Constitution Suspended., Arab Boycott Of Elections., Back To British Rule" The Times , 30 May 1923, p. 14, Issue 43354 ^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 32, 36.

^ See Foreign relations of the United States, 1947. The Near East and Africa Volume V, p. 1033 ^ Khalidi 2006 , p. 63.

^ Khalidi 2006 , p. 52.

^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 56–57.

^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 63, 69; Segev 2000 , pp. 127–144.

^ Morris 2001 , p. 112.

^ Khalidi 2006 , p. 81.

^ "Filastin" .

National Library of Israel .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 March 2019 .

^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 87–90.

^ Sufian, Sandy (1 January 2008).

"Anatomy of the 1936–39 Revolt: Images of the Body in Political Cartoons of Mandatory Palestine" .

Journal of Palestine Studies .

37 (2): 23– 42.

doi : 10.1525/jps.2008.37.2.23 .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2022 . Retrieved 14 January 2008 .

^ a b c Kominko 2015 , p. 384.

^ Gorman & Monciaud 2018 , p. 106.

^ Regan 2018 , p. 135, 137.

^ Kominko 2015 , p. 386–387.

^ In June 1947, the British Mandate Government of Palestine had published the following statistics: "It is estimated that over a quarter of the Jewish population in Palestine are Sephardic Jews of whom some 60,000 were born of families resident in Palestine for centuries. The bulk of the Sephardic community, however, consists of oriental Jews emanating from Syria, Egypt, Persia, Iraq, Georgia, Bokhara and other Eastern countries. They are confined mainly to the larger towns ..." (From: Supplement to Survey of Palestine – Notes compiled for the information of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine – June 1947 , Gov. Printer Jerusalem, pp. 150–151) ^ "Jewish Agency History" . Archived from the original on 15 February 2006 . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ Palestine Jewry and the Arab Question, 1917–1925 , by Caplan, Neil. London and Totowa, NJ: F. Cass, 1978.

ISBN 978-0-7146-3110-3 . pp. 161–165.

^ A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry . Vol. 1. Palestine: Govt. printer. 1946. p. 185.

^ A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry . Vol. 1. Palestine: Govt. printer. 1946.

p. 210: "Arab illegal immigration is mainly ... casual, temporary and seasonal". pp. 212: "The conclusion is that Arab illegal immigration for the purpose of permanent settlement is insignificant".

^ J. McCarthy (1995).

The population of Palestine: population history and statistics of the late Ottoman period and the Mandate . Princeton, N.J.: Darwin Press.

^ Supplement to Survey of Palestine – Notes compiled for the information of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine – June 1947 , Gov. Printer Jerusalem, p. 18 ^ John B. Quigley (2010).

The Statehood of Palestine: International Law in the Middle East Conflict . Cambridge University Press. p. 54.

ISBN 978-0-521-15165-8 .

^ See History of Zionism (1600–1918), Volume I, Nahum Sokolow, 1919 Longmans, Green, and Company, London, pp. xxiv–xxv ^ "The Avalon Project : The Palestine Mandate" .

avalon.law.yale.edu .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2019 . Retrieved 20 October 2008 .

^ "British White Paper of June 1922" .

avalon.law.yale.edu .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2011 . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ See the report of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, UN Document A/364, 3 September 1947 ^ Memorandum by the Secretary of State for the Colonies, "Palestine: High Commissioners Views on Policy", March 1930, UK National Archives Cabinet Paper CAB/24/211, formerly C.P. 108 (30) ^ "PERMANENT MANDATES COMMISSION MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SESSION" . LEAGUE OF NATIONS. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved 8 June 2010 .

^ Partner to Partition: The Jewish Agency's Partition Plan in the Mandate Era , by Yossi Katz , Routledge, 1998, ISBN 978-0-7146-4846-0 ^ "FRUS: Foreign relations of the United States diplomatic papers, 1937. The British Commonwealth, Europe, Near East and Africa: Palestine" .

digicoll.library.wisc.edu .

^ See Letters to Paula and the Children , David Ben Gurion, translated by Aubry Hodes, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1971 pp. 153–157 ^ See Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist–Arab Conflict, 1881–1999 , by Benny Morris, Knopf, 1999, ISBN 978-0-679-42120-7 , p. 138 ^ See Scars of war, Wounds of Peace: The Israeli–Arab Tragedy , by Shlomo Ben-Ami, Oxford University Press, USA, 2006, ISBN 978-0-19-518158-6 , p. 17 ^ "Avalon Project – Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry – Chapter V" .

avalon.law.yale.edu .

Archived from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

^ See Foreign relations of the United States, 1946, The Near East and Africa Volume VII, pp. 692–693 ^ Stein 1984 , p. 4.

^ "Land Ownership in Palestine", CZA, KKL5/1878. The statistics were prepared by the Palestine Lands Department for the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, 1945, ISA, Box 3874/file 1. See Khalaf 1991 , p. 27 ^ Stein 1984 , p. 226.

^ Avneri 1984 , p. 224.

^ Stein 1984 , pp. 3–4, 247.

^ Fischbach, Michael R. (13 August 2013).

Jewish Property Claims Against Arab Countries . Columbia University Press. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-231-51781-2 .

By 1948, after several decades of Jewish immigration, the Jewish population of Palestine had risen to about one third of the total, and Jews and Jewish companies owned 20 percent of all cultivable land in the country ^ Wright, Clifford A. (2015).

Facts and Fables (RLE Israel and Palestine): The Arab-Israeli Conflict .

Routledge . p. 38.

ISBN 978-1-317-44775-7 .

^ Kamel, Lorenzo (2014).

"Whose Land? Land Tenure in Late Nineteenth- and Early Twentieth-Century Palestine" .

British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies .

41 (2): 230– 242.

doi : 10.1080/13530194.2013.878518 .

S2CID 153944896 .

^ Land Ownership of Palestine Archived 26 February 2024 at the Wayback Machine – Map prepared by the Government of Palestine on the instructions of the UN Ad Hoc Committee on the Palestine Question.

^ Table 2 showing Holdings of Large Jewish Lands Owners as of December 31st, 1945, British Mandate: A Survey of Palestine: Volume I – Page 245. Chapter VIII: Land: Section 3., prepared by the British Mandate for the United Nations Archived 18 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine Survey of Palestine Retrieved 4 July 2015 ^ a b c Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry on Jewish Problems in Palestine and Europe, J. V. W. Shaw, General Assembly, Special Committee on Palestine, United Nations (1991).

A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December, 1945 and January, 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry . Vol. 1.

Institute for Palestine Studies .

ISBN 978-0-88728-211-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ownership of land in Palestine, Share of Palestinan (sic) Arabs and Jews as of 1 April 1943, prepared by the British Mandate for the United Nations Archived 29 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine Survey of Palestine Retrieved 25 August 2014 ^ ibid , Supplement p30.

^ A Survey of Palestine (Prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry), vol. 1, chapter VIII, section 7, Government Printer of Jerusalem, pp.

260–262 Archived 12 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Mills, E.

Census of Palestine, 1931 (UK government, 1932), Vol I, pp. 61–65.

^ The Political History of Palestine under British Administration , Memorandum to the United Nations Special Committee ^ prepared in December 1945 and January 1946 for the information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry. (1991).

A Survey of Palestine: Prepared in December, 1945 and January, 1946 for the Information of the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry . Vol. 1. Institute for Palestine Studies. pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 978-0-88728-211-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ File:J. B. Barron, ed. Palestine, Report and General Abstracts of the Census of 1922. Government of Palestine.djvu , page 9 ^ The Palestine Order in Council, 10 August 1922, article 11 Archived 16 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine : "The High Commissioner may, with the approval of a Secretary of State, by Proclamation divide Palestine into administrative divisions or districts in such manner and with such subdivisions as may be convenient for purposes of administration describing the boundaries thereof and assigning names thereto." ^ a b Likhovski 2006 , p. 64.

^ "H.h. Trusted Named Chief Justice of Palestine" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 27 October 1936.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 November 2015 .

^ Likhovski 2006 , p. 74.

^ Likhovski 2006 , p. 75.

^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 13–14.

^ Khalidi 2006 , p. 27.

^ Shamir, Ronen (2013).

Current Flow: The Electrification of Palestine . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

^ Noam Dvir (5 April 2012).

"Haifa's glass house transparent, but still an Israeli mystery" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2023 . Retrieved 4 May 2012 .

^ Khalidi 2006 , p. 16.

^ Khalidi 2006 , p. 17.

^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 29–30.

^ "Why Only a Hebrew University? The Tale of the Arab University in Mandatory Jerusalem" (PDF) .

Jerusalem Quarterly . Institute for Palestine Studies. 2023 . Retrieved 16 April 2023 .

^ Khalidi 2006 , pp. 14, 24.

Bibliography Aruri, Naseer Hasan (1972).

Jordan: A Study in Political Development 1923–1965 . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers .

ISBN 978-90-247-1217-5 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Avneri, Aryeh L. (1984).

The Claim of Dispossession: Jewish Land-Settlement and the Arabs, 1878–1948 .

Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-87855-964-0 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Bayliss, Thomas (1999).

How Israel Was Won: A Concise History of the Arab–Israeli Conflict . Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0-7391-0064-6 .

Bethell, Nicholas (1979).

The Palestine Triangle: the Struggle Between the British, the Jews and the Arabs, 1935–48 . London: Deutsch.

ISBN 978-0-233-97069-1 .

Biger, Gideon (2004).

The Boundaries of Modern Palestine, 1840–1947 . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-7146-5654-0 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Black, Ian (1991).

Israel's Secret Wars: A History of Israel's Intelligence Services . Morris, Benny. Grove Press.

ISBN 978-0-8021-1159-3 .

El-Eini, Roza I.M. (2006).

Mandated Landscape: British Imperial Rule in Palestine, 1929–1948 . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-7146-5426-3 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

Gilbert, Martin (1998).

Israel: a history .

Doubleday .

ISBN 978-0-385-40401-3 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Gorman, Anthony; Monciaud, Didier, eds. (2018).

The Press in the Middle East and North Africa . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4744-3064-7 . Retrieved 2 April 2024 .

Hughes, Matthew, ed. (2004).

Allenby in Palestine: The Middle East Correspondence of Field Marshal Viscount Allenby June 1917 – October 1919 . Army Records Society. Vol. 22. Phoenix Mill, Thrupp, Stroud, Gloucestershire: Sutton Publishing Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7509-3841-9 .

Katz, Shmuel (1973).

Battleground: Fact and Fantasy in Palestine .

Bantam Books .

ISBN 978-0-929093-13-0 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Khalaf, Issa (1991).

Politics in Palestine: Arab Factionalism and Social Disintegration, 1939–1948 .

State University of New York Press .

ISBN 978-0-7914-0708-0 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

Khalidi, Rashid (1997).

Palestinian Identity: The Construction of Modern National Consciousness . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-10575-0 . Retrieved 12 February 2022 .

Khalidi, Rashid (2006).

The Iron Cage: The Story of the Palestinian Struggle for Statehood .

Beacon Press .

ISBN 978-0-8070-0308-4 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Khalidi, Rashid (2007) [1st ed. 2001].

"The Palestinians and 1948: the underlying causes of failure" . In Eugene L. Rogan & Avi Shlaim (ed.).

The War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of 1948 (2nd ed.).

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-69934-1 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Khalidi, Walid (1987) [Original in 1971].

From Haven to Conquest: Readings in Zionism and the Palestine Problem Until 1948 .

Institute for Palestine Studies .

ISBN 978-0-88728-155-6 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Kominko, Maja (16 February 2015).

From Dust to Digital: Ten Years of the Endangered Archives Programme . Open Book Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-78374-062-8 . Retrieved 31 March 2024 .

Likhovski, Assaf (8 December 2006).

Law and Identity in Mandate Palestine . Univ of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-7718-0 .

Louis, Wm. Roger (1969). "The United Kingdom and the Beginning of the Mandates System, 1919–1922".

International Organization .

23 (1): 73– 96.

doi : 10.1017/s0020818300025534 .

S2CID 154745632 .

Morris, Benny (2001) [1999].

Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist–Arab Conflict, 1881–1999 . New York: Alfred A. Knopf .

ISBN 978-0-679-74475-7 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Pappé, Ilan (15 August 1994).

"Introduction" .

The Making of the Arab–Israeli Conflict, 1947–1951 .

I.B.Tauris .

ISBN 978-1-85043-819-9 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Paris, Timothy J. (2003).

Britain, the Hashemites and Arab Rule, 1920–1925: The Sherifian Solution . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-7146-5451-5 .

Regan, Bernard (30 October 2018).

The Balfour Declaration: Empire, the Mandate and Resistance in Palestine . Verso Books.

ISBN 978-1-78663-248-7 . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

Segev, Tom (2000).

One Palestine, Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate . Translated by Watzman, Haim. London: Henry Holt and Company .

ISBN 978-0-8050-4848-3 .

Shapira, Anita (1992).

Land and Power: The Zionist Resort to Force, 1881–1948 . trans. William Templer.

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-506104-8 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Sherman, A. J. (1998).

Mandate Days: British Lives in Palestine, 1918–1948 . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-8018-6620-3 .

Stein, Kenneth W.

(1987) [Original in 1984].

The Land Question in Palestine, 1917–1939 .

University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-0-8078-4178-5 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 .

Vareilles, Guillaume (2010).

Les frontières de la Palestine, 1914–1947 . Paris: L'Harmattan.

ISBN 978-2-296-13621-2 .

Further reading Bar-Yosef, Eitan (Spring–Summer 2017). "Bonding with the British: Colonial Nostalgia and the Idealization of Mandatory Palestine in Israeli Literature and Culture after 1967".

Jewish Social Studies .

22 (3): 1– 37.

doi : 10.2979/jewisocistud.22.3.01 .

ISSN 0021-6704 .

JSTOR 10.2979/jewisocistud.22.3.01 .

Cohen, Michael Joseph (2014).

Britain's moment in Palestine: retrospect and perspectives, 1917-48 . Israeli history, politics and society. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-72985-7 .

Eini, Roza I. M. el- (2006).

Mandated landscape: British imperial rule in Palestine, 1929-1948 . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-7146-5426-3 .

Galnoor, Itzhak (1995).

The partition of Palestine: decision crossroads in the Zionist movement . SUNY series in Israeli studies. Albany, NY: SUNY Press .

ISBN 978-0-7914-2193-2 .

Hanna, Paul Lamont (1942).

British policy in Palestine . Washington, D.C.: American Council of Public Affairs.

OCLC 3485546 .

Harris, Kenneth (1982).

Attlee . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson . pp.

388– 400.

ISBN 978-0-297-77993-3 .

Kamel, Lorenzo (April 2014). "Whose Land? Land Tenure in Late Nineteenth- and Early Twentieth-Century Palestine".

British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies .

41 (2): 230– 242.

doi : 10.1080/13530194.2013.878518 .

ISSN 1353-0194 .

JSTOR 43917062 .

Miller, Rory (2010).

Britain, Palestine and Empire: the mandate years . Farnham: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-7546-6808-4 .

Morgan, Kenneth O. (1990).

The people's peace: British history 1945-1989 . Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp.

49– 52.

ISBN 978-0-19-822764-9 .

Ravndal, Ellen Jenny (15 September 2010). "Exit Britain: British Withdrawal From the Palestine Mandate in the Early Cold War, 1947–1948".

Diplomacy & Statecraft .

21 (3): 416– 433.

doi : 10.1080/09592296.2010.508409 .

ISSN 0959-2296 .

Roberts, Nicholas E. (March 2011). "Re-Remembering the Mandate: Historiographical Debates and Revisionist History in the Study of British Palestine: Re-Remembering the Mandate".

History Compass .

9 (3): 215– 230.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-0542.2010.00751.x .

Sargent, Andrew (1980).

The British Labour Party and Palestine 1917-1949 (PDF) (PhD thesis).

University of Nottingham .

Shelef, Nadav G. (Spring 2004). "From "Both Banks of the Jordan" to the "Whole Land of Israel:" Ideological Change in Revisionist Zionism".

Israel Studies .

9 (1): 125– 148.

ISSN 1084-9513 .

JSTOR 30245747 .

Sinanoglou, Penny (March 2009). "British Plans for the Partition of Palestine, 1929-1938".

The Historical Journal .

52 (1): 131– 152.

doi : 10.1017/S0018246X08007346 .

ISSN 0018-246X .

JSTOR 40264161 .

Wright, Quincy (September 1926). "The Palestine Problem".

Political Science Quarterly .

41 (3): 384– 412.

doi : 10.2307/2142128 .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

JSTOR 2142128 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Mandatory Palestine .

Media related to British Mandate of Palestine at Wikimedia Commons v t e Mandatory Palestine articles History Sinai and Palestine campaign Occupied Enemy Territory Administration Intercommunal conflict Palestinian nationalism Zionism Geography Survey Districts Lakes Dead Sea Sea of Galilee Land of Israel Palestine (region) Rivers Jordan River Politics Mandate document High Commissioner Assembly of Representatives Jewish National Council Arab Higher Committee Passport Tegart's Wall Flag Seal Security Palestine Command Palestine Police Force Jewish Settlement Police Jewish Supernumerary Police Special Night Squads During WWII Palestine Regiment Jewish Brigade Italian bombing Sectarian conflict in Mandatory Palestine Jaffa riots 1929 Palestine riots Arab Revolt Jewish insurgency Economy Palestine Airways Anglo-Palestine Bank Palestine pound List of post offices Arab boycott Culture Archaeology Football Settlements Kibbutz Moshav Olympics Demographics Censuses 1922 1931 Immigration Arab Bedouin Jewish 1919-1923 1924-1928 1929-1939 clandestine Languages Arabic English Hebrew Religion Christianity Islam Shia Judaism Category v t e Former British Empire and current British Overseas Territories Legend Former territory Current territory *Current Commonwealth realm † Current member of the Commonwealth of Nations Europe Akrotiri and Dhekelia since 1960 (before as part of Cyprus ) Corsica 1794–1796 † Cyprus 1878–1960 Gibraltar since 1713 Heligoland 1807–1890 Ionian Islands 1809–1864 Lordship of Ireland 1177–1542 Kingdom of Ireland 1542–1800 ( integrated into the UK ) Free State 1921–1931 † Malta Protectorate 1800–1813 Colony 1813–1964 Minorca 1708–1757, 1763–1782 and 1798–1802 Africa Basutoland ( † Lesotho ) 1868–1966 Bechuanaland ( † Botswana ) 1884–1966 Cameroons 13 1919–1961 Cape Colony 1795–1803 Cape of Good Hope 1806–1910 Central Africa 1891–1907 East Africa 1895–1920 Egypt 1882–1922 † The Gambia 1816–1965 Gold Coast ( † Ghana ) 1874–1957 † Kenya 1920–1963 Lagos 1862–1906 Madeira 1807–1808 † Mauritius 1810–1968 Natal 1856–1910 Niger Coast 1884–1900 † Nigeria 1914–1960 Northern Nigeria 1900–1914 Northern Rhodesia 15 1924–1964 Nyasaland 1891–1964 Orange River 1900–1910 † Seychelles 1903–1976 † Sierra Leone 1792–1961 Somaliland 1884–1960 † South Africa 1910–1931 South-West Africa 12 1915–1931 Southern Rhodesia 14 1923–1965 and 1979–1980 Southern Nigeria 1900–1914 † Swaziland 1893–1968 Sudan 1899–1956 Tanganyika 13 1922–1961 Transvaal 1900–1910 † Uganda 1890–1962 Zanzibar 1890–1963 Zululand 1887–1897 12 Now † Namibia 13 League of Nations mandate . British Cameroons is now part of † Cameroon and Nigeria , while Tanganyika is part of † Tanzania .

14 Self-governing Southern Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence in 1965 (as Rhodesia ) and continued as an unrecognised state until the 1979 Lancaster House Agreement . After recognised independence in 1980, Zimbabwe was a member of the Commonwealth until it withdrew in 2003.

15 Now † Zambia Asia Aden Colony 1839–1967 Afghanistan 1839–1842 Protectorate 1879–1919 Bencoolen 1685–1824 Banka and Billiton 1812–1824 Bengal 1757–1947 Bhutan (protectorate) 1907–1949 Borneo 1874–1963 British Indian Ocean Territory since 1965 (before as part of Mauritius and Seychelles ) 26 Burma 1824–1948 † Brunei 1888–1984 † Ceylon 1795–1948 † Cyprus 1878–1960 Hong Kong 1841–1997 † India 18 1858–1947 Java 1811–1816 Kuwait 1918–1961 Labuan 1848–1946 Malaya 1819–1826 Federated States 1895–1946 Unfederated States 1885–1946 Union 1946–1948 Federation 1948–1957 Malacca 1824–1946 Crown Colony 1946–1957 † Maldives 1796–1965 Manila and Cavite 1762–1764 Mesopotamia 19 1920–1932 Muscat and Oman 1891–1971 North Borneo 1882–1963 Crown Colony 1946–1963 Padang 1781–1784 and 1795–1819 Palestine 19 1923–1948 Penang 1786–1946 Crown Colony 1946–1957 Pulo Condore 1702–1705 Sarawak 1841–1946 Crown Colony 1946–1963 † Singapore 1946–1963 South Vietnam 1945–1946 Straits Settlements 1826–1946 Transjordan 1921–1946 Trucial States 1892–1971 Weihai 1898–1930 18 Now † India , † Pakistan and † Bangladesh 19 League of Nations mandate . Iraq's mandate was not enacted and replaced by the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty 26 Legitimacy of territorial establishment disputed North America Anguilla since 1650 * Antigua 1632–1860 * Antigua and Barbuda 1860–1981 † * Bahamas 1670–1973 † Barbados 1624–1966 Bay Islands 1643–1860 † * Belize 1871–1981 Bermuda since 1619 British Arctic Territories 16th c.–1880 British Columbia 1858–1866 1866–1871 Cape Breton Island 1754–1820 † Dominica 1763–1978 East Florida 1763–1783 † * Grenada 1762–1974 † * Canada Lower 1791–1841 Upper 1791–1841 Province 1841–1867 Dominion 1867–1931 Carolina 1663–1712 Cayman Islands since 1670 Columbia District / Oregon Country 1818–1846 Connecticut 1636–1776 Delaware 1701–1776 East Jersey 1674–1702 Georgia 1733–1776 † * Jamaica 1655–1962 Leeward Islands 1671–1816, 1833–1960 Massachusetts Bay 1629–1691 Province , 1691–1776 Maryland 1632–1776 Montserrat since 1632 Mosquito Coast 1655–1860 Nevis 1628–1983 New Albion 1579 New Brunswick 1784–1867 New England 1686–1689 New Hampshire 1680–1776 New Haven 1637–1662 New Jersey 1665–1674 and 1702–1776 New York 1664–1776 Newfoundland 1907–1949 Newfoundland and Labrador 1583–1907 North Carolina 1712–1776 North-Western Territory 1859–1870 Nova Scotia 1713–1867 Paulet affair 1843 Prince Edward Island 1763–1873 Pennsylvania 1681–1776 Plymouth 1620–1691 Quebec 1763–1791* Queen Charlotte Islands 1853–1863 Rhode Island 1636–1776 Rupert's Land 1670–1870 Saint Croix 1625–1650 Saint Kitts 1623–1983 † * Saint Kitts and Nevis 1882–1983 † * Saint Lucia 1605–1979 † * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 1627–1979 Saybrook 1635–1644 South Carolina 1712–1776 Stickeen 1862–1863 † Trinidad and Tobago 1889–1962 Turks and Caicos Islands since 1799 Vancouver Island 1849–1866 Virgin Islands since 1666 Virginia 1607–1776 West Florida 1763–1783 West Indies Federation 1958–1962 Associated States 1967–1983 West Jersey 1674–1702 Windward Islands 1833–1960 South America Providence Island 1631–1641 Willoughbyland 1651–1667 Saint Andrew and Providence Islands 4 1670–1688 † Guiana 1831–1966 4 Now a department of Colombia Oceania New South Wales 1788–1901 Van Diemen's Land / Tasmania 1803–1901 Auckland Islands 20 1807–1863 New Hebrides 21 1824–1980 Queensland 1824–1901 Swan River / Western Australia 1829–1901 South Australia 1836–1901 Pitcairn Islands since 1838 New Zealand 1841–1907 North Australia 1846–1847 Victoria 1851–1901 † Fiji 1874–1970 Western Pacific Territories 1877–1976 Papua 1884–1902 Rarotonga / Cook Islands 20 1888–1901 Union Islands 20 1889–1948 Gilbert and Ellice Islands 22 1892–1979 † * Solomon Islands 1893–1978 † Tonga 1900–1970 Niue 20 1900–1974 † * Australia 1901–1942 † * New Zealand 1907–1947 † Samoa 1914–1962 † Nauru 1919–1942 and 1945–1968 20 Now part of the † Realm of New Zealand 21 Now † Vanuatu 22 Now † Kiribati and † * Tuvalu Antarctica and the South Atlantic Saint Helena 23 since 1658 Ascension Island 23 since 1815 Tristan da Cunha 23 since 1816 Falkland Islands 5 since 1833 † Australian Antarctic Territory (transferred to the Commonwealth of Australia ) 1841–1933 † Ross Dependency (transferred to the Realm of New Zealand ) 1841–1947 British Antarctic Territory 24 since 1908 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 25 since 1908 5 Occupied by Argentina during the Falklands War of April–June 1982.

23 Since 2009 part of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha ; Ascension Island (1922–) and Tristan da Cunha (1938–) were previously dependencies of Saint Helena.

24 Claimed in 1908; territory formed 1962; overlaps portions of Argentine and Chilean claims, borders not enforced but claim not renounced under the Antarctic Treaty .

25 Claimed in 1908; territory formed 1985 Historical flags of the British Empire Anglosphere culture Category Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vhb2t
Cached time: 20250818065455
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.367 seconds
Real time usage: 2.695 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18729/1000000
Revision size: 165042/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 448097/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 30772/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 48/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 550977/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.415/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22765447/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2244.242      1 -total
 30.72%  689.327      2 Template:Reflist
 16.62%  373.053     61 Template:Cite_book
 12.23%  274.451     41 Template:Cite_web
  8.14%  182.690      1 Template:Infobox_country
  7.95%  178.472     32 Template:Sfn
  5.50%  123.414      1 Template:Mandatory_Palestine_topics
  5.48%  122.975      7 Template:Efn
  5.40%  121.190      1 Template:Country_topics
  4.82%  108.157      2 Template:Langx Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38584582:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818065455 and revision id 1306413764. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mandatory_Palestine&oldid=1306413764 " Categories : Mandatory Palestine League of Nations mandates Former countries in West Asia 20th century in Jordan History of Zionism Political entities in the Land of Israel 1920s in the British Empire 1930s in the British Empire 1940s in the British Empire 1920s establishments in Asia States and territories established in 1920 States and territories disestablished in 1948 Sykes–Picot Agreement 1948 disestablishments in Asia 1920 establishments in the British Empire 1948 disestablishments in the British Empire Yishuv during World War II Hidden categories: Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2024 Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata Gaza Strip articles missing geocoordinate data Israel articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates with coordinates on Wikidata Palestine articles missing geocoordinate data This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 16:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mandatory Palestine 73 languages Add topic

