Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Obsolete alternative definition 3 CSS 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Em (typography) 20 languages Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "1Em" redirects here; not to be confused with IEM (disambiguation) or lem (disambiguation) .

Typographic unit equal to the point size An em (from em quadrat ) is a unit in the field of typography , equal to the currently specified point size. It corresponds to the body height of the typeface .

[ 1 ] For example, one em in a 16-point typeface is 16 points. Therefore, this unit is the same for all typefaces at a given point size.

[ 2 ] The em space is one em wide.

Typographic measurements using this unit are frequently expressed in decimal notation (e.g., 0.7 em) or as fractions of 100 or 1000 (e.g., 70 ⁄ 100 em or 700 ⁄ 1000 em). The number of pixels per em varies depending on system.

History [ edit ] A metal sort . The line height, c , is the precursor of the em.

In metal type , the point size (and hence the em , from em quadrat ) was equal to the line height of the metal body from which the letter rises. In metal type, the physical size of a letter could not normally exceed the em.

A digital font's design space in digital type is called the em, which is a grid with arbitrary resolution. Scaling the em to a particular point size is how imaging systems—whether for screen or print—work.

In digital type, the relationship of the height of particular letters to the em is arbitrarily set by the typeface designer. However, as a very rough guideline, an "average" font might have a cap height of 70% of the em, and an x-height of 48% of the em.

[ 3 ] Obsolete alternative definition [ edit ] The letter M , on the left in Perpetua and on the right in Calisto , inside squares of one em on each side. The M in Perpetua does not match the point size of the em.

In some older texts, but not all, the em is defined, or said to have been defined, as the width of the capital 'M' in the current typeface and point size.

[ 4 ] Possibly, this is because the 'M' (or 'm') sort in such cases cast the full-width of the quad (also known as em quad , mutton quad , or m quadrat ); and thus, the width of the sort would equal its point size.

[ 5 ] Note however, that in the oldest attested English text from 1683 mentioning em (as m or m quadrat ), this alternative definition is not used, and also not in many other older texts.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] CSS [ edit ] In Cascading Style Sheets , the em unit is the height of the font in nominal points or inches. The actual, physical height of any given portion of the font depends on the user-defined DPI setting , current element font-size, and the particular font being used.

To make style rules that depend only on the default font size, another unit was developed: the rem. The rem «rem unit» , or root-em , is the font size of the root element of the document. Unlike the em, which may be different for each element, the rem is constant throughout the document.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Em dash (—) En (typography) Fullwidth forms List of XML and HTML character entity references Non-breaking space width variations Responsive web design Whitespace characters Point «pt» (typography) Pica «pc» (typography) Pixel (px) Centimetre (cm) Measurement (mm) Micrometre (UM-μm) References [ edit ] ^ Stokes, Roy Bishop (2001).

Esdaile's manual of bibliography . Scarecrow Press. p. 152.

ISBN 978-0-8108-3922-9 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 .

^ Bringhurst, Robert (1992).

The Elements of Typographic Style .

Vancouver , BC: Hartley & Marks. pp.

25– 26.

ISBN 978-0-88179-033-7 .

OCLC 25411784 .

^ Phinney, Thomas (18 March 2011).

"Point Size and the Em Square: Not What People Think" . Retrieved 20 October 2014 .

^ This alternative definition is shown in the Adobe Glossary and the Pocket Oxford Dictionary Third revised edition 1996.

^ McKerrow, Ronald B.

(1928).

An Introduction To Bibliography For Literary Students (Second Impression ed.). Oxford: at the Clarendon Press. p.

13 .

Quads were no doubt originally square spaces, as broad as the height of a line. From the fact that the letter m (or M) used to be cast on a square body, such a square space is called an em-quad.

^ Moxon, Joseph (1683).

Mechanick exercises: Or, the Doctrine of handy-works. Applied to the art of printing . London: Printed for Joseph Moxon on the west-side of Fleet-ditch, at the sign of Atlas. p.

99 .

^ Blokland, Frank E.

"em and en Squares" .

www.lettermodel.org . Retrieved 28 October 2022 .

^ "CSS: em, px, pt, cm, in..." W3C . Retrieved 20 December 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Look up em , Em , em dash , or M in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

CSS Length and Units CSS Units and Values The amazing em unit and other best practices v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Em_(typography)&oldid=1290046398 " Categories : Display technology Typography Units of length Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 13:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Em (typography) 20 languages Add topic

