Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Economic Profile 2 Population distribution Toggle Population distribution subsection 2.1 Language 2.1.1 New South Wales 2.1.2 Victoria 3 Notable Zimbabwean Australians 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Zimbabwean Australians Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian citizens of Zimbabwean descent Ethnic group Zimbabwean Australians Total population 65,000 Regions with significant populations Perth ; Sydney ; Melbourne ; Brisbane ; Western Australia ; southeast Queensland Languages English Shona Ndebele Afrikaans Nyanja Related ethnic groups African Australians ; South African Australians , Mozambican Australians , Zambian Australians , Botswanan Australians Zimbabwean Australians are Australian citizens who are fully or partially of Zimbabwean descent or Zimbabwe -born people who reside in Australia. They include migrants to Australia of people from Zimbabwe ( Rhodesia or Southern Rhodesia until 1980), as well as their descendants. Today,  there are over 65,000 Zimbabwean Australians, with significant growth since 2000, coinciding with the sociopolitical crisis there.

[ 1 ] Australia's Zimbabwean community is now well established, with some of the highest incomes in the country, [ 2 ] as well as with community institutions such as Zimbabwean language schools.

[ 3 ] Background [ edit ] The number of permanent settlers arriving in Australia from Zimbabwe since 1991 (monthly) Much like South Africans, Zimbabweans began immigrating to Australia in the late 1970s, in modest numbers of mostly white Zimbabweans until the late nineties. Since 2000, the volume of migration has increased and diversified significantly, with a mix of professionals, investors, students and recent graduates choosing to move to Australia. Compared to their contemporaries in South Africa, the Zimbabwean community in Australia is highly educated and firmly within the middle class.

[ 4 ] The vast majority are skilled and educated, with 74.5% of the Zimbabwe-born aged 15 years and over possessing higher non-school 
qualifications, compared to 55.9% of the Australian population.

[ 4 ] Some Zimbabweans had originally moved to South Africa or the UK, but decided to settle in Australia instead.

[ 5 ] Economic Profile [ edit ] Zimbabweans form a significant community in Australia with their numbers having grown to over 34,787 Zimbabwe-born as of 2018. When including their Australian and foreign born members, the government estimates at least 80,000 people being equally divided between black and white Zimbabweans [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The community is now well established, with some of the highest incomes in the country, [ 8 ] as well as with community institutions such as Zimbabwean language schools.

[ 9 ] One in three of Australia's Shona and Ndebele-speakers live in Sydney with other concentrations of Zimbabweans in Perth , Melbourne and Queensland . Indeed, some 78 per cent of Zimbabwean Aussie adults hold a tertiary degree, making them the best educated group in the country [ 6 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Along with their fellow South African immigrants, the Zimbabwean Australian community has become something of an invisible model minority in Australia, in part because they are represented as having a high degree of integration within the Australian society as well as economic and academic success.

[ 12 ] Furthermore, Zimbabweans in Australia on average have a high level of education attainment, as well as higher than average incomes, which can be partially attributed to Zimbabwe's high education rates as well as the growing popularity of Australian universities as an affordable alternative for foreign students.

[ 12 ] Unlike their counterparts from Asia, they have not formed distinct enclaves within the major cities of Australia and the degree of assimilation is higher than most recent migrants to Australia, due to better cultural, historical, and linguistic similarities with Australia. Despite this, the community is still strongly attached to its homeland while being increasing integrated into Australian society, with many travelling back and forth.

[ 12 ] Population distribution [ edit ] Australia's Zimbabwean population is biggest in Sydney . Historically, Perth was a popular first stop for recent migrants, thanks to its relative proximity to Southern Africa and its already established South African Australian population but increasingly, modern immigrants are drawn to Sydney and Melbourne [ 13 ] although a large proportion of Zimbabweans in Australia still reside in Western Australia .

[ 4 ] Many white Zimbabweans have settled in Queensland, [ 14 ] whereas people of indigenous Shona and Ndebele ethnicities commonly settle in Sydney or Melbourne.

[ 4 ] Language [ edit ] New South Wales [ edit ] Australians who speak a language indigenous to Zimbabwe at home are most numerous in Sydney. One in three of Australia's Ndebele-speakers and one in three of Australia's Shona-speakers live in Sydney.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Victoria [ edit ] English, Shona and Afrikaans are the main languages Zimbabwean Australians in Victoria speak at home. 53% of Zimbabwean Australians in Victoria speak English, while 36% speak Shona and 1% speak Afrikaans.

[ 17 ] Notable Zimbabwean Australians [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Zimbabwean Australians" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) George Gregan Kevin Parker Sara Zwangobani Rob Adams – architect Greg Aplin – former television manager and politician in New South Wales Scott Brant Hilton Cartwright – cricket player for Western Australia and the Australian national cricket team Rick Cosnett – actor Chris Ellison – lawyer and former Senator for Western Australia Jerome Farah – musician George Gregan – Rugby World Cup winner and former captain of Australia Kyle Godwin – rugby player for the Western Force Murray Goodwin – cricketer for Zimbabwe and Western Australia Elizabeth Haran – novelist Panashe Madanha – professional football player for Adelaide United Tkay Maidza – singer-songwriter Solomon Mire – Big Bash and retired Zimbabwean cricketer Audius Mtawarira – singer and record producer Andrew Murray – former Senator for the Australian Democrats Janine Murray – rhythmic gymnast Mufaro Mugwenhi - Musician Pacharo Mzembe – actor Tendai Mzungu – Australian rules footballer for Fremantle Football Club and Greater Western Sydney Giants Sekai Nzenza-Shand Akime Marisa – Pharmacy Proprietor Mluleki Nkala Bank Operations Manager- ex-Zimbabwean cricketer Henry Olonga – opera singer and ex-Zimbabwean cricketer.

The Voice contestant.

Kevin Parker – multi-instrumentalist , producer and lead singer of Tame Impala [ 18 ] Ian Perrie – former Australian rules footballer who played for the Adelaide Crows David Pocock – Senator and former player for the Australian national rugby union team Ian Prior – rugby player for the Western Force Clive Puzey – racing driver Carmouflage Rose – stage name of rapper Larry Herrington.

Thando Sikwila – singer, songwriter and actor Tando Velaphi – professional football player for Perth Glory Elijah Ziyambe – Association footballer who has played for Werribee City FC and Hume City FC Alfonso Zvenyika Lambarda Sara Zwangobani – actress The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power [ 19 ] Nyasha Mudzinganyama - Business & Finance See also [ edit ] Zimbabwean diaspora South African Australian Zimbabwean Canadians Zimbabwean Americans Zimbabweans in the United Kingdom Zimbabwean New Zealanders References [ edit ] ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

www.immi.gov.au . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 September 2006 . Retrieved 22 May 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Irish among Australia's best paid workers" . Irish Echo.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Learning parents' language helps keep culture alive" . SBS.

^ a b c d "The Zimbabwe-born Community" . Department of Social Services.

^ "Zimbabwe: First Family Has Low Opinion of the People" . AllAfrica.

^ a b "Zimbabwe-born Community Information Summary" (PDF) . Retrieved 2023-08-22 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Community Information Summary Zimbabwe-born" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-11-01 . Retrieved 2023-08-22 .

^ "Irish among Australia's best paid workers" . Irish Echo.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Learning parents' language helps keep culture alive" . SBS.

^ "Redirect to Census data page" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Redirect to Census data page" . Archived from the original on 2018-12-25 . Retrieved 2013-11-03 .

^ a b c "SOUTHERN AFRICAN MIGRATION PROGRAMME ZIMBABWE'S EXODUS TO AUSTRALIA" (PDF) . Retrieved 2023-08-22 .

^ Ndlovu, Ray (19 Apr 2013).

"Rough estimates: Millions of Zimbabweans Abroad" . AllAfrica.

^ "White Zimbabwean families make their way to country Qld" . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 15 August 2023.

^ "Languages in Sydney" . Australian Bureau of Statistics.

[ dead link ] ^ "Redirect to Census data page" .

Abs.gov.au . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

^ "History of immigration from Zimbabwe" . Museum Victoria. Archived from the original on October 3, 2010.

^ Weiner, Jonah (21 May 2019).

"The Cosmic Healing of Tame Impala" .

Rollingstone.com . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

^ Musa, Helen (June 2, 2011).

"Sara comes home a star" .

citynews.com.au . Archived from the original on 2014-07-27.

v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e Zimbabwean diaspora Australia Botswana Canada New Zealand South Africa United Kingdom United States Zambia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zimbabwean_Australians&oldid=1304995385 " Categories : Ethnic groups in Australia Australian people of Zimbabwean descent African diaspora in Australia Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles needing additional references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 12:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zimbabwean Australians Add languages Add topic

