Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Etymology 3 Orders Toggle Orders subsection 3.1 Major orders 3.2 Lesser orders 3.3 Order of Malta 4 Other Christian traditions 5 Historical duties 6 Historical persecution 7 Other usage of the term 8 References Toggle the table of contents Friar 32 languages Aragonés Azərbaycanca Bikol Central Català Corsu Dansk Deutsch Eesti Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Euskara فارسی Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Li Niha Lombard Nederlands Polski Português Simple English Slovenčina Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about members of religious and great orders. For the surname, see Fryer (surname) and Fryar . For other uses, see Friar (disambiguation) .

"Frays" redirects here. For other uses, see Fray (disambiguation) .

"Fra" redirects here. For other uses, see FRA (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Friar" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Member of a mendicant Christian order A group of friars; novices of the Order of Augustinian Recollects at the Monastery of Monteagudo in 2006 A friar is a member of one of the mendicant orders in the Catholic Church . There are also friars outside of the Catholic Church, such as within the Anglican Communion . The term, first used in the 12th or 13th century, distinguishes the mendicants' itinerant apostolic character, exercised broadly under the jurisdiction of a superior general , from the older monastic orders ' allegiance to a single monastery formalized by their vow of stability. A friar may be in holy orders or be a non-ordained brother . The most significant orders of friars are the Dominicans , Franciscans , Augustinians , and Carmelites .

[ 1 ] Definition [ edit ] Friars are different from monks in that they are called to the great evangelical counsels (vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience) in service to society, rather than through cloistered asceticism and devotion. Whereas monks live in a self-sufficient community, friars work among laypeople and are supported by donations or other charitable support.

[ 2 ] Monks or nuns make their vows and commit to a particular community in a particular place. Friars commit to a community spread across a wider geographical area known as a province and so they will typically move around, spending time in different houses of the community within their province.

Etymology [ edit ] The English term friar is derived from the Norman French word frere (brother), from the Latin frater (brother), which was widely used in the Latin New Testament to refer to members of the Christian community. Fray is sometimes used in Spain and former Spanish colonies such as the Philippines or the American Southwest as a title, such as in Fray Juan de Torquemada .

Orders [ edit ] Part of a series on the Hierarchy of the Catholic Church Saint Peter Ecclesiastical titles ( order of precedence ) Pope Pope emeritus Cardinal Cardinal Vicar Crown Prince Protector Moderator of the curia Chaplain of His Holiness Papal legate Papal majordomo Apostolic nuncio Apostolic delegate Apostolic Syndic Apostolic visitor Vicar apostolic Apostolic exarch Apostolic prefect Assistant to the papal throne Eparch Metropolitan Patriarch Catholicos Bishop Archbishop Bishop emeritus Diocesan bishop Major archbishop Primate Suffragan bishop Titular bishop Coadjutor bishop Auxiliary bishop Prelate Provost Pontiff Territorial prelate Territorial abbot Liturgical titles Acolyte Consecrator Lector Subdeacon Administrative and pastoral titles Auditor Brother Chancellor Chaplain Military chaplain Military ordinary Coarb Confessor Consultor Curate Deacon Archdeacon Defender of the bond Definitor Devil's advocate Diocesan administrator Ecclesiastical judge Exorcist Laity Lay abbot Abthain Commendatory Lay cardinal Minister Major orders Minor orders Missionary Monsignor Officialis Ostiarius Pastor Assistant pastor Palatinus Personal prelate Preacher Prefect Presbyter Elder Priest Principal Protonotary apostolic Reverend Saint Servant of God Blessed Venerable Seminarian Vicar Judicial vicar Vicar general Vicar forane Sub-dean Consecrated and professed titles Abbess Abbot Consecrated virgin Corrector Custos Friar Dean Grand master Hermit Master of novices Monk Novice Nun Postulant Prior Provincial superior Rector Religious Superior general Additional titles Almoner Altar server Archimandrite Archpriest Archdeacon Canon Captain General of the Church Chorbishop Coarb Commissary Apostolic Conclavist Custos Datarius Gonfalonier of the Church Honorary prelate Minor canon Notarius Ostiarius Peritus Postulator Prebendary Precentor Prince-bishop Prince-abbot Prince-primate Prince-provost Promotor Fidei Protopriest Protodeacon Protosyncellus Regionarius Sacristan Sidewalk counselor Usher Associations and organization titles Third orders Oblates Confraternities Pious Unions Grand master Knights Hospitaller Order of the Holy Sepulchre Teutonic Knights Inquisitor Grand Inquisitor Preceptor Catholic Church portal v t e In the Catholic church, there are two classes of orders known as friars, or mendicant orders: the four great orders and the so-called lesser orders.

Major orders [ edit ] The four great orders were mentioned by the Second Council of Lyons (1274): The Carmelites , founded c.

1155.

[ 3 ] They are also known as the White Friars because of the white cloak which covers their brown habit. They received papal approval from Honorius III in 1226 and later by Innocent IV in 1247. The Carmelites were founded as a purely contemplative order, but became mendicants in 1245. There are two types of Carmelites, those of the Ancient Observance (OCarm) and those of the Discalced Carmelites (OCD), founded by St.

Teresa of Ávila in the 16th century.

Conventual Franciscans in their variant grey habits The Franciscans , founded in 1209. They are also known as the Friars Minor. The Franciscans were founded by St. Francis of Assisi and received oral papal approval by Innocent III in 1209 and formal papal confirmation by Honorius III in 1223. Today the Friars Minor is composed of three branches: the Order of Friars Minor (Brown Franciscans), Order of Friars Minor Capuchin (Brown Friars with long pointed hoods) and the Order of Friars Minor Conventual wearing grey or black habits (thus known as Grey Friars). In the Franciscan order, a friar may be an ordained priest or a religious brother.

[ 4 ] The Dominicans , founded c.

1216. They are also known as the Friar Preachers or the Black Friars from the black mantle (cappa) worn over their white habit. The Dominicans were founded by St. Dominic and received papal approval from Honorius III in 1216 as the Ordo Praedicatorum under the Rule of St. Augustine . They became a mendicant order in 1221. There are also Dominican Orders within the Anglican Communion, such as the Order of Christ the Saviour .

[ 5 ] The Augustinians , founded in 1244 (the "Little Union") and enlarged in 1256 (the Grand Union). They are also known as the Hermits of St. Augustine or the Austin Friars. Their rule is based on the writings of Augustine of Hippo . The Augustinians were assembled from various groups of hermits as a mendicant order by Pope Innocent IV in 1244 (Little Union). Additional groups were added by Alexander IV in 1256 (Grand Union).

Lesser orders [ edit ] Some of the lesser orders are: The Trinitarians , established in 1198 The Mercedarians , established in 1218 The Servites , established in 1240 The Minims , established in 1474 The Third Order Regular of St. Francis, a branch of the Third Order of St. Francis , part of the Franciscan Order established in 1447 The Discalced Carmelites , established in 1568 The Order of Augustinian Recollects , established in 1598 through the Chapter of Toledo The Discalced Trinitarians , established in 1599 The Order of Penance , established in 1781.

Order of Malta [ edit ] In the Sovereign Military Order of Malta the term Fra' (an abbreviation for the Latin word "frater" meaning "brother") is used when addressing the professed Knights of Justice who have taken vows.

Other Christian traditions [ edit ] Orders of friars (and sisters) exist in other Christian traditions, including the Order of Lutheran Franciscans , the Order of Ecumenical Franciscans and the Order of Lesser Sisters and Brothers.

[ 6 ] In the Anglican Communion there are also a number of mendicant groups such as the Anglican Friars Preachers , the Society of Saint Francis and the Order of St Francis.

[ 7 ] Historical duties [ edit ] Beginning under the Papacy of Gregory IX , friars of the Dominican and Franciscan mendicant orders were asked to serve in armies as religious preachers and chaplains [ 8 ] . These roles were traditionally held by Bishops during the early Middle Ages, but as European armies grew larger, they became unable to hear the confessions of thousands of soldiers [ 8 ] As both the Dominican and Franciscan orders grew in popularity after their acknowledgements by the Papacy in 1210 and 1216 respectively, the number of priests grew to support the needs of Ad Liberandum, the Papal bull which outlines the duties the Catholic priesthood performs during crusade. These duties included hearing confession, administering sacrament, and assigning penances [ 8 ] .

During the campaign of William II in Germany during the mid 1200's, Papal legate Reinerus of Viterbo wrote letters to pope Innocent IV , noting the lengths at which the mendicant friars would go to deliver the last rites to fallen soldiers, entering the battlefield even after Conrad IV ordered their execution upon capture [ 8 ] .

Philosopher and Dominican friar Thomas Aquinas encouraged mendicants to provide spiritual support and guidance to soldiers on campaign, written in his work the Summa Theologiae [ 8 ] . Aquinas references the Old Testament , citing a chapter in the book of Joshua where priests blow horns during battle [ 8 ] . Aquinas compares the blowing of the horns to the spiritual support that mendicants can provide to the soldiers, though he stressed that under no circumstances should a priest bear arms and participate in the conflict itself [ 8 ] .

Friars have also been known to act as agents of the inquisition , travelling to isolated regions and seeking out heretics [ 9 ] to be tried before secular or papal authorities. Dominican friars were most common of any mendicant order represented, likely as author Holly Grieco describes their founder Saint Dominic was known for his preaching against heretics in southern Toulouse [ 9 ] . Greico further ascribes the Dominicans prominent inquisitorial presence to their particularly learned nature, allowing them to adequately convince laymen and reestablish papal doctrine [ 9 ] .

While many mendicant friars take vows of poverty , the priories or convents where they live, eat, and preach still require financial upkeep. Friars often sustain themselves on donations from a variety of people across the economic spectrum, from the common layman to the merchant class or even the nobility. Authors Tarryn Chub and Francisco García-Serrano articulate that friars in the Mediterranean countries including Italy and Spain, played host to their various patrons to facilitate trade and economic growth [ 10 ] . Friars, particularly Franciscan and Dominican of merchant background, preached in favor of mercantilism as opposed to the traditionally hostile attitude of the Catholic church [ 10 ] . Notable proponents of mercantilism and commerce were Thomas Aquinas and Ramón de Penyafort [ 10 ] .

Historical persecution [ edit ] In response to various political or religious events, Friars have been subjects to violence, mockery, and political oppression. Assaults on friars and other mendicant groups across Europe were stable yet infrequent in the late Middle Ages , most common in regions where friars acted in Inquisitorial positions like northern Italy and southern France [ 11 ] . The majority of these assaults happened in urban areas, carried out in most part by mobs, not individuals [ 11 ] . though there were several cases to the contrary. Cases of friars and mendicants being assaulted on the roads were rare [ 11 ] , likely due in part to their impoverished lifestyle, and that monks would travel in groups when able.

Far more common than death or lasting harm, in unwelcome places monks were more commonly publicly mocked, shamed, or ignored [ 11 ] . In his travels to Germany , Franciscan chronicler Jordan of Giano writes of an incident where travelling friars were beaten, stripped of their clothes, and imprisoned before being mocked by the public [ 11 ] .

Violence against friars noticeably increases during periods of anti-Catholic sentiment and religious conflict.

In the late 1500's, the city of Ghent accused several mendicant Friars of sodomy or homosexual behaviors [ 12 ] . Beginning in 1578, these trials would result in the incarceration, exile, and execution of more than a dozen friars. These trials were part of a larger anti-monastic sentiment across northern Europe and the Holy Roman Empire , in part spread by author Martin Luther , who in several of his speeches and writings associated the Catholic clergy with the practice of sodomy [ 12 ] . This practice of association would be continued through following protestant writers by the likes of Henri Estienne , John Bale and John Foxe [ 12 ] . Two years later in 1580, 5 friars were killed, and their monasteries were looted and burned after Calvinists took control of the city of Malines [ 12 ] .

Other usage of the term [ edit ] Several high schools , as well as Providence College , founded by the Dominicans, use friars as their school mascot .

The Major League Baseball team San Diego Padres have the Swinging Friar ("padre" is also a Spanish word for the priestly title "father"; in 1769 San Diego was founded by Spanish Franciscan friars under Junípero Serra ).

The University of Michigan 's oldest a cappella group is a male octet known as The Friars.

[ 13 ] The University of Pennsylvania has a senior honor society known as Friars. Sports teams at Father Dueñas Memorial School on the island of Guam are known as the Friars.

References [ edit ] ^ Stravinskas, Peter M.J., ed. (2002).

Catholic Dictionary, Revised . Huntington, IN: Our Friday Visitor.

ISBN 978-0879733902 .

^ Catholic encyclopedia entry for "friar" ^ The Carmelite Order ^ "Is a Friar a Priest or a Brother?", Franciscan Friars, Province of Saint Barbara ^ "Communities" .

naecc . Retrieved 2024-02-08 .

^ Order of Lesser Sisters and Brothers ^ "Order of St Francis" . Archived from the original on 2020-09-22 . Retrieved 2017-07-02 .

^ a b c d e f g Bachrach, David Steward (October 2004).

"The Friars Go to War: Mendicant Military Chaplains, 1216-c. 1300" .

The Catholic Historical Review .

90 (4): 617– 633.

doi : 10.1353/cat.2005.0003 .

ISSN 1534-0708 .

^ a b c Grieco, Holly J. (September 2008).

"Franciscan inquisition and mendicant rivalry in mid-thirteenth-century Marseille" .

Journal of Medieval History .

34 (3): 275– 290.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmedhist.2008.02.001 .

ISSN 0304-4181 .

^ a b c Chubb, Taryn E. L.; Kelley, Emily (2012-01-01), "Mendicants and Merchants in the Medieval Mediterranean: An Introduction" , Mendicants and Merchants in the Medieval Mediterranean , BRILL, pp.

1– 25, doi : 10.1163/9789004250338_003 , ISBN 978-90-04-25033-8 , retrieved 2025-06-02 ^ a b c d e Geltner, G. (June 2010).

"Mendicants as victims: scale, scope and the idiom of violence" .

Journal of Medieval History .

36 (2): 126– 141.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmedhist.2010.02.001 .

ISSN 0304-4181 .

^ a b c d Roelens, Jonas (2015-09-01).

"From Slurs to Silence? Sodomy and Mendicants in the Writings of Catholic Laymen in Early Modern Ghent" .

The Sixteenth Century Journal .

46 (3): 629– 649.

doi : 10.1086/scj4603005 .

ISSN 0361-0160 .

^ "The University of Michigan Friars :: History" . University of Michigan Friars. Archived from the original on 31 August 2010 . Retrieved 1 October 2010 .

v t e Consecrated life in the Catholic Church Types Consecrated virgin Hermit Religious institute Orders Monastic Cenobitic Chapter Enclosed Idiorrhythmic Canons regular Mendicants Second orders Cleric regular Congregations Secular institute Society of apostolic life Vows Evangelical counsels Poverty Chastity Obedience Profession Solemn vow Vow of silence Vow of enclosure Monastery ( List ) Abbey Chapter house Cloister Convent Double Hermitage Priory Refectory Scriptorium Prayer Contemplation Liturgy of the Hours Mass Meditation Rosary Habit Clerical clothing Coif Cornette Scapular Vestment Members Superior General Provincial Abbot / Abbess Prior / Prioress Grand master Rector Brother Friar Monk Basilian Sister Nun Hermit Anchorite Novice Master Oblate Postulant Lay brother Porter Other Asceticism Foolishness for Christ Tonsure Vocational discernment Monastic cell List of religious institutes Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friar&oldid=1296417424 " Categories : 12th-century neologisms Christian religious occupations Catholicism in the Middle Ages Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 22:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friar 32 languages Add topic

