Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Additional projects 3 Positions 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Remnant (newspaper) 4 languages Español Esperanto Italiano Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Traditionalist Catholic newspaper This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "The Remnant" newspaper – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Remnant Type Biweekly newspaper Owner(s) The Remnant, Inc.

Founder(s) Walter Matt Editor Michael Matt Political alignment Traditionalist Catholicism Pre-conciliar Catholic social teaching Traditionalist conservatism Headquarters Forest Lake, Minnesota ISSN 0274-9726 Website www .remnantnewspaper .com This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Remnant is a Traditionalist Catholic newspaper published twice a month in the United States . Although its editors are not affiliated with any particular institute or traditionalist group, the paper is sympathetic to Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre and the Society of St. Pius X . Founded in 1968, it is the oldest Traditionalist Catholic newspaper in the United States.

[ 1 ] The Southern Poverty Law Center organization has listed Remnant Press as a Radical Traditionalist Catholic hate group .

The Remnant claims to adhere to Catholic teaching in every aspect of its journalism. The name The Remnant is a reference to the remnant of Isaiah , and the belief of how only a remnant of Catholics holding to traditional teachings and practice of the Church will remain after the sweeping changes brought by the Second Vatican Council .

History [ edit ] The Remnant traces its roots back to The Wanderer , the "parent paper" of The Remnant and the oldest Catholic weekly newspaper in the United States.

The Remnant was a result of a dispute between Walter Matt, the editor of The Wanderer who served the paper for over thirty years , and his brother Alphonse Matt. Walter Matt opposed the changes within the Catholic Church after the Second Vatican Council; Alphonse Matt supported them.

[ 1 ] Walter Matt left The Wanderer , which remained under Alphonse, to start The Remnant in 1967. The paper has described itself as the flagship of the traditional Catholic movement in the United States.

[ 1 ] The Remnant is now edited by Walter Matt's youngest son, Michael J. Matt. Notable traditionalists who have written for the paper include Thomas Woods , Christopher Ferrara , John C. Rao , and Michael Davies .  From 2005 to 2013, The Remnant was a very vigorous defender of the pontificate of Benedict XVI as its writers believe he has vindicated them on issues that have divided them from other Traditionalists and from conservative Catholics associated with The Wanderer , EWTN , Church Militant and Catholic Answers . Under the pontificate of Pope Francis , the newspaper heavily criticized his policies.

[ citation needed ] Additional projects [ edit ] After producing daily video updates from Rome after the resignation of Pope Benedict XVI and the conclave which ultimately elected Pope Francis , The Remnant began producing  video commentary and events coverage under the title of Remnant TV . Remnant TV releases weekly talk show -styled YouTube videos in three series: Remnant TV Forum, Remnant Special Report, and The Remnant Underground. Michael Matt is the host and principal commentator; regular guests include contributors to The Remnant , and other Catholic commentators.

[ 2 ] The Remnant has also hosted and organized tours and pilgrimages to the Holy Land and throughout Europe under the name "Remnant Tours". It has also organized the United States Chapter of the three-day Pilgrimage to Chartres , a seventy-mile walking pilgrimage from Paris to Chartres Cathedral done during Pentecost weekend.

[ 3 ] Positions [ edit ] Catholic apologist Dave Armstrong has described The Remnant as "radical Catholic reactionary ." [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Southern Poverty Law Center have listed The Remnant and The Remnant Press as a Radical Traditionalist Catholic hate group , which the SPLC defines as "organizations that embrace anti-Semitism and whose theology is typically rejected by the Vatican and mainstream Catholics in general." [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The editors reject this label.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "The Remnant Newspaper - Our History" . Retrieved May 25, 2015 .

^ "The Remnant Newspaper - Remnant Television" . Retrieved May 25, 2015 .

^ "The Remnant: It's Not Just a Newspaper Anymore!" (PDF) .

remnantnewspaper.com . Retrieved May 25, 2015 .

^ Catholicism, Biblical Evidence for (March 10, 2016).

" "Remnant" Reactionary Michael Matt's Reading / Logic Disabilities" .

^ Catholicism, Biblical Evidence for (February 15, 2016).

"Critique of "The Remnant" (Radical Catholic Reactionary)" .

^ Begley, Sarah (February 15, 2017).

"Read the New List of 917 Hate Groups According to the Southern Poverty Law Center" .

Time . Retrieved April 19, 2019 .

^ "Radical Traditional Catholicism" .

Southern Poverty Law Center .

^ "Southern Poverty Law Center Accuses Traditionalists of Anti-Semitism" .

www.remnantnewspaper.com . Retrieved July 29, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Official site Remnant TV Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Remnant_(newspaper)&oldid=1292651586 " Categories : Newspapers established in 1967 Traditionalist Catholic newspapers Catholic newspapers published in the United States Conservative media in the United States Right-wing politics in the United States Traditionalist Catholicism in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from November 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Use mdy dates from November 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 03:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Remnant (newspaper) 4 languages Add topic

