Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 De architectura Toggle De architectura subsection 2.1 Scope 2.2 Proportions of man 2.3 Lists of names given in Book VII Introduction 2.4 Rediscovery 2.5 Notable editions 3 Roman technology Toggle Roman technology subsection 3.1 Machines 3.2 Aqueducts 3.3 Materials 3.4 Dewatering machines 3.5 Surveying instruments 3.6 Central heating 4 Legacy 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Vitruvius 77 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Marcus Vitruvius Pollio ) 1st-century BC Roman architect and engineer This article is about the Roman architect. For the lunar impact crater, see Vitruvius (crater) . For the fictional character, see List of The Lego Movie (franchise) characters § Vitruvius .

Vitruvius Engraving by Jacopo Bernardi after Vincenzo Raggio, 1823 or 1847 Born 80–70 BC Roman Republic Died after 15 BC (aged 55–65) Occupations Author architect civil engineer military engineer Notable work De architectura Vitruvius ( / v ɪ ˈ t r uː v i ə s / vi- TROO -vee-əs ; Latin: [wɪˈtruːwi.ʊs] ; c.

80 –70 BC – after c.

15 BC ) was a Roman architect and engineer during the 1st century BC, known for his multi-volume work titled De architectura .

[ 1 ] As the only treatise on architecture to survive from antiquity, it has been regarded since the Renaissance as the first book on architectural theory , as well as a major source on the canon of classical architecture .

[ 2 ] It is not clear to what extent his contemporaries regarded his book as original or important.

He states that all buildings should have three attributes: firmitas , utilitas , and venustas ("strength", "utility", and "beauty"), [ 3 ] principles reflected in much Ancient Roman architecture . His discussion of perfect proportion in architecture and the human body led to the famous Renaissance drawing of the Vitruvian Man by Leonardo da Vinci .

Little is known about Vitruvius' life, but by his own description [ 4 ] he served as an artilleryman, the third class of arms in the Roman military offices. He probably served as a senior officer of artillery in charge of doctores ballistarum (artillery experts) and libratores who actually operated the machines.

[ 5 ] As an army engineer he specialized in the construction of ballista and scorpio artillery war machines for sieges . It is possible that Vitruvius served with Julius Caesar 's chief engineer Lucius Cornelius Balbus .

Vitruvius' De architectura was well-known and widely copied in the Middle Ages and survives in many dozens of manuscripts, [ 6 ] though in 1414 it was "rediscovered" by the Florentine humanist Poggio Bracciolini in the library of Saint Gall Abbey .

Leon Battista Alberti published it in his seminal treatise on architecture, De re aedificatoria ( c.

1450 ). The first known Latin printed edition was by Fra Giovanni Sulpitius in Rome in 1486. Translations followed in Italian, French, English, German, Spanish, and several other languages. Though any original illustrations have been lost, the first illustrated edition was published in Venice in 1511 by Fra Giovanni Giocondo , with woodcut illustrations based on descriptions in the text.

Bramante , Michelangelo , Palladio , Vignola and earlier architects are known to have studied the work of Vitruvius, and consequently it has had a significant impact on the architecture of many European countries.

[ 1 ] Life and career [ edit ] Little is known about Vitruvius' life. Most inferences about him are extracted from his only surviving work De Architectura . His full name is sometimes given as "Marcus Vitruvius Pollio", but both the first and last names are uncertain.

[ 7 ] Marcus Cetius Faventinus writes of "Vitruvius Polio aliique auctores"; this can be read as "Vitruvius Polio, and others" or, less likely, as "Vitruvius, Polio, and others". An inscription in Verona, which names a Lucius Vitruvius Cordo , and an inscription from Thilbilis in North Africa, which names a Marcus Vitruvius Mamurra have been suggested as evidence that Vitruvius and Mamurra (who was a military praefectus fabrum under Julius Caesar ) were from the same family; [ 8 ] or were even the same individual. Neither association, however, is borne out by De Architectura (which Vitruvius dedicated to Augustus ), nor by the little that is known of Mamurra.

Vitruvius was a military engineer ( praefectus fabrum ), or a praefect architectus armamentarius of the apparitor status group (a branch of the Roman civil service). He is mentioned in Pliny the Elder 's table of contents for Naturalis Historia (Natural History), in the heading for mosaic techniques.

[ 9 ] Frontinus refers to "Vitruvius the architect" in his late 1st-century work De aquaeductu .

Likely born a free Roman citizen, by his own account Vitruvius served in the Roman army under Caesar with the otherwise poorly identified Marcus Aurelius, Publius Minidius, and Gnaeus Cornelius. These names vary depending on the edition of De architectura . Publius Minidius is also written as Publius Numidicus and Publius Numidius, speculated as the same Publius Numisius inscribed on the Roman Theatre at Heraclea .

[ 10 ] As an army engineer he specialized in the construction of ballista and scorpio artillery war machines for sieges . It is speculated that Vitruvius served with Caesar's chief engineer Lucius Cornelius Balbus .

[ 11 ] The locations where he served can be reconstructed from, for example, descriptions of the building methods of various "foreign tribes". Although he describes places throughout De Architectura , he does not say he was present. His service likely included north Africa , Hispania , Gaul (including Aquitaine ), and Pontus .

To place the role of Vitruvius the military engineer in context, a description of "The Prefect of the camp" or army engineer is quoted here as given by Flavius Vegetius Renatus in The Military Institutions of the Romans : The Prefect of the camp, though inferior in rank to the [Prefect], had a post of no small importance. The position of the camp, the direction of the entrenchments, the inspection of the tents or huts of the soldiers and the baggage were comprehended in his province. His authority extended over the sick, and the physicians who had the care of them; and he regulated the expenses relative thereto. He had the charge of providing carriages, bathhouses and the proper tools for sawing and cutting wood, digging trenches, raising parapets, sinking wells and bringing water into the camp. He likewise had the care of furnishing the troops with wood and straw, as well as the rams, onagri , balistae and all the other engines of war under his direction. This post was always conferred on an officer of great skill, experience and long service, and who consequently was capable of instructing others in those branches of the profession in which he had distinguished himself.

[ 12 ] At various locations described by Vitruvius, [ 13 ] battles and sieges occurred. He is the only source for the siege of Larignum in 56 BC.

[ 14 ] Of the battlegrounds of the Gallic War there are references to: The siege and massacre of the 40,000 residents at Avaricum in 52 BC.

Vercingetorix commented that "the Romans did not conquer by valour nor in the field, but by a kind of art and skill in assault, with which they [Gauls] themselves were unacquainted." [ 15 ] The broken siege at Gergovia in 52 BC.

The circumvallation and Battle of Alesia in 52 BC. The women and children of the encircled city were evicted to conserve food, and then starved to death between the opposing walls of the defenders and besiegers.

The siege of Uxellodunum in 51 BC.

These are all sieges of large Gallic oppida . Of the sites involved in Caesar's civil war , we find the Siege of Massilia in 49 BC (modern France), [ 16 ] the Battle of Dyrrhachium of 48 BC (modern Albania), the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC (Hellas – Greece), the Battle of Zela of 47 BC (modern Turkey), and the Battle of Thapsus in 46 BC in Caesar's African campaign.

[ 17 ] A legion that fits the same sequence of locations is the Legio VI Ferrata , of which ballista would be an auxiliary unit.

Mainly known for his writings, Vitruvius was himself an architect. In Roman times architecture was a broader subject than at present including the modern fields of architecture, construction management , construction engineering , chemical engineering , civil engineering, materials engineering , mechanical engineering, military engineering and urban planning ; [ 18 ] architectural engineers consider him the first of their discipline, a specialization previously known as technical architecture.

In his work describing the construction of military installations, he also commented on the miasma theory – the idea that unhealthy air from wetlands was the cause of illness, saying: For fortified towns the following general principles are to be observed. First comes the choice of a very healthy site. Such a site will be high, neither misty nor frosty, and in a climate neither hot nor cold, but temperate; further, without marshes in the neighbourhood. For when the morning breezes blow toward the town at sunrise, if they bring with them mists from marshes and, mingled with the mist, the poisonous breath of the creatures of the marshes to be wafted into the bodies of the inhabitants, they will make the site unhealthy. Again, if the town is on the coast with southern or western exposure, it will not be healthy, because in summer the southern sky grows hot at sunrise and is fiery at noon, while a western exposure grows warm after sunrise, is hot at noon, and at evening all aglow.

[ 19 ] Frontinus mentions Vitruvius in connection with the standard sizes of pipes : [ 20 ] probably the role for which he was most widely respected in Roman times. He is often credited as father of architectural acoustics for describing the technique of echeas placement in theaters.

[ 21 ] The only building, however, that we know Vitruvius to have worked on is one he tells us about, [ 22 ] a basilica completed in 19 BC.

[ 23 ] It was built at Fanum Fortunae, now the modern town of Fano . The Basilica di Fano (to give the building its Italian name) has disappeared so completely that its very site is a matter of conjecture, although various attempts have been made to visualise it.

[ 24 ] The early Christian practice of converting Roman basilicae (public buildings) into cathedrals implies the basilica may be incorporated into the Romanesque Fano Cathedral .

In later years the emperor Augustus, through his sister Octavia Minor , sponsored Vitruvius, entitling him with what may have been a pension to guarantee financial independence.

[ 4 ] Whether De architectura was written by one author or is a compilation completed by subsequent librarians and copyists, remains an open question. The date of his death is unknown, which suggests that he had enjoyed only a little popularity during his lifetime.

[ citation needed ] Gerolamo Cardano , in his 1552 book De subtilitate rerum , ranks Vitruvius as one of the 12 persons whom he supposes to have excelled all men in the force of genius and invention; and might have given him first place if it was clear that he had set down his own discoveries.

[ 25 ] James Anderson's "The Constitutions of the Free-Masons" (1734), reprinted by Benjamin Franklin, describes Vitruvius as "the Father of all true Architects to this Day." [ 26 ] De architectura [ edit ] Main article: De architectura Further information: Mathematics and architecture Roman house plan after Vitruvius Vitruvius is the author of De architectura, libri decem , known today as The Ten Books on Architecture , [ 27 ] a treatise written in Latin on architecture, dedicated to the emperor Augustus. In the preface of Book I, Vitruvius dedicates his writings to giving personal knowledge of the quality of buildings to the emperor. Likely Vitruvius is referring to Marcus Agrippa 's campaign of public repairs and improvements. This work is the only surviving major book on architecture from classical antiquity . According to Petri Liukkonen, this text "influenced deeply from the Early Renaissance onwards artists, thinkers, and architects, among them Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472), Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), and Michelangelo (1475–1564)." [ 17 ] The next major book on architecture, Alberti's reformulation of Ten Books , was not written until 1452.

However, we know there was a significant body of writing about architecture in Greek, where "architects habitually wrote books about their work", including two we know of about the Parthenon alone. To A. W. Lawrence , Vitruvius "has recorded a most elaborate set of rules taken from Greek authors, who must have compiled them gradually in the course of the preceding centuries".

[ 28 ] Vitruvius is famous for asserting in his book De architectura that a structure must exhibit the three qualities of firmitatis, utilitatis, venustatis – that is, stability, utility, and beauty. These are sometimes termed the Vitruvian virtues or the Vitruvian Triad . According to Vitruvius, architecture is an imitation of nature. As birds and bees built their nests, so humans constructed housing from natural materials, that gave them shelter against the elements. When perfecting this art of building, the Greeks invented the architectural orders: Doric , Ionic and Corinthian . It gave them a sense of proportion, culminating in understanding the proportions of the greatest work of art: the human body. This led Vitruvius in defining his Vitruvian Man , as drawn later by Leonardo da Vinci : the human body inscribed in the circle and the square (the fundamental geometric patterns of the cosmic order). In this book series, Vitruvius also wrote about climate in relation to housing architecture and how to choose locations for cities.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Scope [ edit ] Vitruvius designed and supervised the construction of this basilica in Fano (reconstruction). However, many of the other things he did would not now be considered the realm of architecture [ clarification needed ] Vitruvius is the first Roman architect to have written surviving records of his field. He himself cites older but less complete works. He was less an original thinker or creative intellect than a codifier of existing architectural practice.

Roman architects practised a wide variety of disciplines; in modern terms they would also be described as landscape architects, civil engineers, military engineers, structural engineers, surveyors, artists, and craftsmen combined. Etymologically the word architect derives from Greek words meaning 'master' and 'builder'. The first of the Ten Books deals with many subjects which are now within the scope of landscape architecture .

In Book I, Chapter 1, titled The Education of the Architect, Vitruvius instructs...

1. Architecture is a science arising out of many other sciences, and adorned with much and varied learning; by the help of which a judgment is formed of those works which are the result of other arts. Practice and theory are its parents. Practice is the frequent and continued contemplation of the mode of executing any given work, or of the mere operation of the hands, for the conversion of the material in the best and readiest way. Theory is the result of that reasoning which demonstrates and explains that the material wrought has been so converted as to answer the end proposed.

2. Wherefore the mere practical architect is not able to assign sufficient reasons for the forms he adopts; and the theoretic architect also fails, grasping the shadow instead of the substance. He who is theoretic as well as practical, is therefore doubly armed; able not only to prove the propriety of his design, but equally so to carry it into execution.

[ 31 ] He goes on to say that the architect should be versed in drawing, geometry, optics (lighting), history, philosophy, music, theatre, medicine, and law.

In Book I, Chapter 3 ( The Departments of Architecture ), Vitruvius divides architecture into three branches, namely: building; the construction of sundials and water clocks ; [ 32 ] and the design and use of machines in construction and warfare.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] He further divides building into public and private. Public building includes city planning, public security structures such as walls, gates and towers; the convenient placing of public facilities such as theatres, forums and markets, baths, roads and pavings; and the construction and position of shrines and temples for religious use.

[ 31 ] Later books are devoted to the understanding, design and construction of each of these.

Proportions of man [ edit ] "Vitruvian Man", illustration in the edition of De architectura by Vitruvius; illustrated edition by Cesare Cesariano (1521) Vitruvian Man by Leonardo da Vinci , an illustration of the human body inscribed in the circle and the square derived from a passage about geometry and human proportions in Vitruvius' writings In Book III, Chapter 1, Paragraph 3, Vitruvius writes about the proportions of man: 3. Just so the parts of Temples should correspond with each other, and with the whole. The navel is naturally placed in the centre of the human body, and, if in a man lying with his face upward, and his hands and feet extended, from his navel as the centre, a circle be described, it will touch his fingers and toes. It is not alone by a circle, that the human body is thus circumscribed, as may be seen by placing it within a square. For measuring from the feet to the crown of the head, and then across the arms fully extended, we find the latter measure equal to the former; so that lines at right angles to each other, enclosing the figure, will form a square.

[ 35 ] It was upon these writings that Renaissance engineers, architects and artists like Mariano di Jacopo Taccola , Pellegrino Prisciani and Francesco di Giorgio Martini and finally Leonardo da Vinci based the illustration of the Vitruvian Man .

[ 36 ] Vitruvius described the human figure as being the principal source of proportion.

The drawing itself is often used as an implied symbol of the essential symmetry of the human body, and by extension, of the universe as a whole.

[ 37 ] Lists of names given in Book VII Introduction [ edit ] In the introduction to book seven, Vitruvius goes to great lengths to present why he is qualified to write De Architectura . This is the only location in the work where Vitruvius specifically addresses his personal breadth of knowledge. Similar to a modern reference section, the author's position as one who is knowledgeable and educated is established. The topics range across many fields of expertise reflecting that in Roman times as today construction is a diverse field. Vitruvius is clearly a well-read man.

[ citation needed ] In addition to providing his qualification, Vitruvius summarizes a recurring theme throughout the 10 books, a non-trivial and core contribution of his treatise beyond simply being a construction book. Vitruvius makes the point that the work of some of the most talented is unknown, while many of those of lesser talent but greater political position are famous.

[ 27 ] This theme runs through Vitruvius's ten books repeatedly – echoing an implicit prediction that he and his works will also be forgotten.

Vitruvius illustrates this point by naming what he considers the most talented individuals in history.

[ 27 ] Implicitly challenging the reader that they have never heard of some of these people, Vitruvius goes on and predicts that some of these individuals will be forgotten and their works lost , while other, less deserving political characters of history will be forever remembered with pageantry.

List of physicists: Thales , Democritus , Anaxagoras , Xenophanes List of philosophers: Socrates , Plato , Aristotle , Zeno , Epicurus List of kings: Croesus , Alexander the Great , Darius On plagiarism: Aristophanes , Ptolemy I Soter , a person named Attalus On abusing dead authors: Zoilus Homeromastix , Ptolemy II Philadelphus On divergence of the visual rays: Agatharchus , Aeschylus , Democritus , Anaxagoras List of writers on temples: Silenus, Theodorus , Chersiphron and Metagenes , Ictinus and Carpion , Theodorus the Phocian , Hermogenes , Arcesius , Satyrus and a person named Pytheos List of artists: Leochares , Bryaxis , Scopas , Praxiteles , Timotheos List of writers on laws of symmetry: Nexaris , Theocydes , a person named Demophilus , Pollis , a person named Leonidas , Silanion , Melampus , Sarnacus , Euphranor List of writers on machinery: Diades of Pella , Archytas , Archimedes , Ctesibius , Nymphodorus , Philo of Byzantium , Diphilus , Democles , Charias , Polyidus of Thessaly , Pyrrus , Agesistratus List of writers on architecture: Fuficius , Terentius Varro , Publius Septimius (writer) List of architects: Antistates , Callaeschrus , Antimachides , Pormus , Cossutius List of greatest temple architects: Chersiphron of Gnosus , Metagenes , Demetrius , Paeonius the Milesian , Ephesian Daphnis , Ictinus , Philo , Cossutius , Gaius Mucianus Rediscovery [ edit ] Battle of Thapsus as depicted in an engraving after Andrea Palladio The interior of the Pantheon (from an 18th-century painting by Panini ). Although built after Vitruvius' death, its excellent state of preservation makes it of great importance to those interested in Vitruvian architecture Vitruvius' De architectura was "rediscovered" in 1414 by the Florentine humanist Poggio Bracciolini in the library of Saint Gall Abbey .

Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) publicised it in his seminal treatise on architecture, De re aedificatoria ( c.

1450 ). The first known Latin printed edition was by Fra Giovanni Sulpitius in Rome, 1486.

[ 38 ] Translations followed in Italian ( Cesare Cesariano , 1521), French (Jean Martin, 1547 [ 39 ] ), English, German ( Walther H. Ryff , 1543) and Spanish and several other languages. The original illustrations had been lost and the first illustrated edition was published in Venice in 1511 by Fra Giovanni Giocondo , with woodcut illustrations based on descriptions in the text.

[ 40 ] Later in the 16th-century Andrea Palladio provided illustrations for Daniele Barbaro 's commentary on Vitruvius, published in Italian and Latin versions. The most famous illustration is probably Da Vinci's Vitruvian Man .

The surviving ruins of Roman antiquity, the Roman Forum , temples, theatres, triumphal arches and their reliefs and statues offered visual examples of the descriptions in the Vitruvian text. Printed and illustrated editions of De Architectura inspired Renaissance , Baroque and Neoclassical architecture .

Filippo Brunelleschi , for example, invented a new type of hoist to lift the large stones for the dome of the cathedral in Florence and was inspired by De Architectura as well as surviving Roman monuments such as the Pantheon and the Baths of Diocletian .

Notable editions [ edit ] De architectura , 1543 Latin 1495–1496 De architectura (in Latin). Venezia: Cristoforo Pensi.

1543 De architectura (in Latin). Strasbourg: Georg Messerschmidt.

1800 Augustus Rode, Berlin [ 41 ] 1857 Teubner Edition by Valentin Rose 1899 Teubner Edition 1912 Teubner edition at The Latin Library [ 42 ] Bill Thayer, transcription of the 1912 Teubner Edition [ 43 ] Italian Cesare Cesariano , 1521, Como, Italy , includes illustrations by Cesare Cesariano Danielle Barbaro, includes illustration by Andrea Palladio French Jean Martin, 1547 [ 44 ] Claude Perrault , 1673 [ 45 ] Auguste Choisy , 1909 English Henry Wotton , 1624 Joseph Gwilt , 1826 Bill Thayer transcription of the Gwilt 1826 Edition [ 31 ] Morris H. Morgan , with illustrations prepared by Herbert Langford Warren , 1914, Harvard University Press [ 46 ] Frank Granger, Loeb Edition, 1931 [ 47 ] Ingrid Rowland , 2001 [ 48 ] Thomas Gordon Smith, The Monacelli Press (5 January 2004) [ 49 ] Roman technology [ edit ] Drainage wheel from Rio Tinto mines Books VIII, IX and X form the basis of much of what we know about Roman technology, now augmented by archaeological studies of extant remains, such as the water mills at Barbegal in France. The other major source of information is the Naturalis Historia compiled by Pliny the Elder much later in c.

75 AD .

Machines [ edit ] The work is important for its descriptions of the many different machines used for engineering structures such as hoists , cranes and pulleys , as well as war machines such as catapults , ballistae , and siege engines . As a practising engineer, Vitruvius must be speaking from personal experience rather than simply describing the works of others. He also describes the construction of sundials and water clocks , and the use of an aeolipile (the first steam engine ) as an experiment to demonstrate the nature of atmospheric air movements (wind).

Aqueducts [ edit ] His description of aqueduct construction includes the way they are surveyed, and the careful choice of materials needed, although Frontinus (a general who was appointed in the late 1st century AD to administer the many aqueducts of Rome), writing a century later, gives much more detail of the practical problems involved in their construction and maintenance. Surely Vitruvius' book would have been of great assistance in this. Vitruvius was writing in the 1st century BC when many of the finest Roman aqueducts were built, and survive to this day, such as those at Segovia and the Pont du Gard . The use of the inverted siphon is described in detail, together with the problems of high pressures developed in the pipe at the base of the siphon, a practical problem with which he seems to be acquainted.

Materials [ edit ] He describes many different construction materials used for a wide variety of different structures, as well as such details as stucco painting. Concrete and lime receive in-depth descriptions.

Vitruvius is cited as one of the earliest sources to connect lead mining and manufacture, its use in drinking water pipes, and its adverse effects on health. For this reason, he recommended the use of clay pipes and masonry channels in the provision of piped drinking-water.

[ 50 ] Vitruvius is the source for the anecdote that credits Archimedes with the discovery of the mass-to-volume ratio while relaxing in his bath. Having been asked to investigate the suspected adulteration of the gold used to make a crown, Archimedes realised that the crown's volume could be measured exactly by its displacement of water, and ran into the street with the cry of Eureka!

Dewatering machines [ edit ] Design for an Archimedean water-screw He describes the construction of Archimedes' screw in Chapter X (without mentioning Archimedes by name). It was a device widely used for raising water to irrigate fields and drain mines. Other lifting machines he mentions include the endless chain of buckets and the reverse overshot water-wheel . Remains of the water wheels used for lifting water were discovered when old mines were re-opened at Rio Tinto in Spain, Rosia Montana in Romania and Dolaucothi in west Wales .

[ citation needed ] The Rio Tinto wheel is now shown in the British Museum , and the Dolaucothi specimen in the National Museum of Wales .

Surveying instruments [ edit ] That he must have been well practised in surveying is shown by his descriptions of surveying instruments, especially the water level or chorobates , which he compares favourably with the groma , a device using plumb lines . They were essential in all building operations, but especially in aqueduct construction, where a uniform gradient was important to the provision of a regular supply of water without damage to the walls of the channel. He also developed one of the first odometers , consisting of a wheel of known circumference that dropped a pebble into a container on every rotation.

Central heating [ edit ] Ruins of the hypocaust under the floor of a Roman villa. The part under the exedra is covered.

He describes the many innovations made in building design to improve the living conditions of the inhabitants. Foremost among them is the development of the hypocaust , a type of central heating where hot air developed by a fire was channelled under the floor and inside the walls of public baths and villas . He gives explicit instructions how to design such buildings so that fuel efficiency is maximised, so that for example, the caldarium is next to the tepidarium followed by the frigidarium . He also advises on using a type of regulator to control the heat in the hot rooms, a bronze disc set into the roof under a circular aperture which could be raised or lowered by a pulley to adjust the ventilation. Although he does not suggest it himself, it is likely that his dewatering devices such as the reverse overshot water-wheel were used in the larger baths to lift water to header tanks at the top of the larger thermae , such as the Baths of Diocletian . The one which was used in Bath of Caracalla for grinding flour.

Legacy [ edit ] Vitruvian Man – a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvius Britannicus – 18th century work on British architecture named after Vitruvius.

Den Danske Vitruvius – 18th century work on Danish architecture – inspired by Vitruvius Britannicus.

[ 51 ] The American Vitruvius – 20th century work on civil architecture by Werner Hegemann William Vitruvius Morrison (1794–1838), the son of Irish architect Sir Richard Morrison and himself a noted architect of great houses, bridges, court houses and prisons.

A small lunar crater has been named after Vitruvius and also an elongated lunar mountain Mons Vitruvius close by.

The Design Quality Indicator (DQI) tool for buildings uses Vitruvius's principles.

See also [ edit ] Aristotle Ctesibius Colen Campbell Frontinus Pliny the Elder Roman architecture Roman aqueducts Roman engineering Roman technology Vitruvian Man Vitruvian scroll Lucius Vitruvius Cordo References [ edit ] ^ a b Middleton, John Henry (1911).

"Vitruvius" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). pp.

150– 151.

^ Kruft, Hanno-Walter.

A History of Architectural Theory from Vitruvius to the Present (New York, Princeton Architectural Press: 1994).

^ The Oxford handbook of Greek and Roman art and architecture . Marconi, Clemente, 1966–. New York. 2015.

ISBN 978-0-19-978330-4 .

OCLC 881386276 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b De Arch. Book 1, preface. section 2.

^ Yann Le Bohec , "The Imperial Roman Army", Routledge, p. 49, 2000, ISBN 0-415-22295-8 .

^ Krinsky, Carol Herselle (1967). "Seventy-Eight Vitruvius Manuscripts".

Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes .

30 : 36– 70.

doi : 10.2307/750736 .

JSTOR 750736 .

S2CID 195019013 .

^ John Oksanish, Vitruvian Man: Rome under Construction , Oxford UP (2019), p. 33 ^ Pais, E.

Ricerche sulla storia e sul diritto publico di Roma (Rome, 1916).

^ Moore, Richard E. M. (January 1968). "A Newly Observed Stratum in Roman Floor Mosaics".

American Journal of Archaeology .

72 (1). Archaeological Institute of America: 57– 68.

doi : 10.2307/501823 .

JSTOR 501823 .

S2CID 191364921 .

^ Niccolò Marcello Venuti Description of the First Discoveries of the Ancient City of Heraclea, Found Near Portici A Country Palace Belonging to the King of the Two Sicilies published by R. Baldwin, translated by Wickes Skurray, 1750. p62 [1] ^ Trumbull, David (2007).

"Classical Sources, Greek and Roman Esthetics Reading: The Grand Tour Reader; Vitruvius Background: Life of Marcus Vitruvius Pollio (c. 90–20 BC)" .

An Epitome of Book III of Vitruvius . Retrieved 18 November 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ Flavius Vegetius Renatus (390 BC). John Clarke (tr. 1767).

The Military Institutions of the Romans Archived 21 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Works that pre-date 1900 – Firmness, Commodity, and Delight – The University of Chicago Library" .

www.lib.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 6 April 2022 .

^ Nichols, Marden Fitzpatrick (2024).

"Julius Caesar and the Larch: burning questions at Vitruvius' De Architectvra 2.9.15–16" (PDF) .

The Classical Quarterly .

74 (1): 135– 148.

doi : 10.1017/S0009838824000120 .

ISSN 0009-8388 . Retrieved 7 June 2025 .

^ Julius Caesar, De bello Gallico 7.29 Archived 8 July 2012 at archive.today ^ Vitruvius mentions Massilia several times, and the siege itself in Book X .

^ a b Liukkonen, Petri.

"Vitruvius" .

Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi) . Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on 13 January 2015.

^ The "Vitruvius Project" . Carnegie Mellon University, Computer Science Department. Retrieved 2008.

^ Vitruvius (1914).

The Ten Books on Architecture . Translated by Morgan, Morris Hicky. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-486-20645-5 . Retrieved 26 February 2021 – via Project Gutenberg.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ De Aquis , I.25 (in Latin) ebook of work also known as De aquaeductu , accessed August 2008 ^ Reed Business Information (21 November 1974).

"New Scientist" .

New Scientist Careers Guide: The Employer Contacts Book for Scientists . Reed Business Information: 552–.

ISSN 0262-4079 . Retrieved 6 May 2013 .

{{ cite journal }} : |author= has generic name ( help ) [ permanent dead link ] ^ De Arch.

, Book V.i.6) (in Latin) but with link to English translation, accessed August 2008 ^ Fausto Pugnaloni and Paolo Clini.

"Vitruvius Basilica in Fano, Italy, journey through the virtual space of the reconstructed memory" . GISdevelopment.net last accessed 3 August 2008 ^ Clini, P. (2002).

"Vitruvius' basilica at Fano: the drawings of a lost building from De architectura libri decem " (PDF) .

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences . vol. XXXIV, part 5/W12, pp. 121–126. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2012 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .

^ Charles Hutton (1795), Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Anderson, James A.M. (1734).

The Constitutions of the Free-Masons (1734). An Online Electronic Edition (25 ed.). Faculty Publications, UNL Libraries. p. 25.

^ a b c Vitruvius, Pollio (transl. Morris Hicky Morgan, 1960), The Ten Books on Architecture . Courier Dover Publications.

ISBN 0-486-20645-9 .

^ Lawrence, A. W.

, Greek Architecture , p. 169, 1957, Penguin, Pelican history of art ^ "Philosophy of Architecture" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2015.

^ "Vitruvius The Ten Books On Architecture" .

The Project Gutenberg .

^ a b c "LacusCurtius • Vitruvius on Architecture — Book I" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ Turner, A. J., in Folkrets, M., and Lorch, R., (Editors), "Sic itur ad astra", Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften – Festschrift für den Arabisten Paul Kunitzsch zum 70, Harrassowitz Verlag, 2000, p.563 ff.

^ Long, Pamela O., in Galison, Peter, and Thompson, Emily (Editors), The Architecture of Science , The MIT Press, 1999, p. 81 ^ Borys, Ann Marie, Vincenzo Scamozzi and the Chorography of Early Modern Architecture , Routledge, 2014, pp. 85, 179 ^ "LacusCurtius • Vitruvius on Architecture — Book III" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ Marc van den Broek (2019), Leonardo da Vinci Spirits of Invention. A Search for Traces , Hamburg: A.TE.M., ISBN 978-3-00-063700-1 ^ "Bibliographic reference" . The Whole Universe Book . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "CPSA Palladio's Literary Predecessors" .

www.palladiancenter.org . Archived from the original on 17 December 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ Architectura – Les livres d'Architecture Archived 18 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine (in French) ^ "Architectura – Les livres d'Architecture" .

architectura.cesr.univ-tours.fr . Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ "bibliotheca Augustana" .

www.hs-augsburg.de . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ "Vitruvius" .

www.thelatinlibrary.com . Archived from the original on 13 June 2017 . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ "LacusCurtius • Vitruvius de Architectura — Liber Primus" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 20 June 2017 .

^ http://homes.chass.utoronto.ca/~wulfric/vitruve/ Archived 15 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine http://homes.chass.utoronto.ca/~wulfric/vitruve/ Archived 15 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ Books on architecture by Claude Perrault Archived 7 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Architectura website. Retrieved on 18 January 2020.

^ Vitruvius, Pollio (1914).

The Ten Books on Architecture . Translated by Morgan, Morris Hicky. Illustrations prepared by Herbert Langford Warren. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

^ Granger, Frank (1931).

Vitruvius: On Architecture . Harvard University Press. p. 368.

ISBN 0674992776 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Rowland, Ingrid (2001).

Vitruvius: 'Ten Books on Architecture' . Cambridge University Press. p. 352.

ISBN 0521002923 .

^ Smith, Thoma Granger (2004).

Vitruvius on Architecture . The Monacelli Press. p. 224.

ISBN 1885254989 .

^ Hodge, Trevor, A. (October 1981). "Vitruvius, Lead Pipes and Lead Poisoning".

American Journal of Archaeology .

85 (4). Archaeological Institute of America: 486– 491.

doi : 10.2307/504874 .

JSTOR 504874 .

S2CID 193094209 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Den Danske Vitruvius" . AOK . Retrieved 23 June 2009 .

Sources [ edit ] Indra Kagis McEwen, Vitruvius: Writing the Body of Architecture . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-262-63306-X B. Baldwin, "The Date, Identity, and Career of Vitruvius". In Latomus 49 (1990), 425–34.

Kai Brodersen & Christiane Brodersen: Cetius Faventinus. Das römische Eigenheim / De architectura privata, Latin and German. Wiesbaden: Marix 2015, ISBN 978-3-7374-0998-8 Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Vitruvius Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Vitruvius Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Clarke, Georgia. 2002. "Vitruvian Paradigms".

Papers of the British School at Rome 70:319–346.

De Angelis, Francesco. 2015. "Greek and Roman Specialized Writing on Art and Architecture". In The Oxford Handbook of Greek and Roman Art and Architecture . Edited by Clemente Marconi, 41–69. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

König, Alice. 2009. "From Architect to Imperator: Vitruvius and his Addressee in the De Architectura". In Authorial Voices in Greco-Roman Technical Writing . Edited by Liba Chaia Taub and Aude Doody, 31–52. Trier, Germany: WVT Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Trier.

Milnor, Kristina L. 2005. "Other Men's Wives". In Gender, Domesticity and the Age of Augustus: Inventing Private Life . By Kristina Milnor , 94–139. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

Nichols, Marden Fitzpatrick. 2017".Author and Audience in Vitruvius’ De Architectura". Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Rowland, Ingrid D. 2014. "Vitruvius and His Influence". In A Companion to Roman Architecture . Edited by Roger B. Ulrich and Caroline K. Quenemoen, 412–425. Malden, MA, and Oxford: Blackwell.

Sear, Frank B. 1990. "Vitruvius and Roman Theater Design".

American Journal of Archaeology 94.2: 249–258.

Smith, Thomas Gordon. 2004.

Vitruvius on Architecture . New York: Monacelli Press.

Wallace-Hadrill, Andrew. 1994. "The Articulation of the House". In Houses and Society in Pompeii and Herculaneum . By Andrew Wallace-Hadrill, 38–61. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

Wallace-Hadrill, Andrew. 2008. "Vitruvius: Building Roman Identity". In Rome's Cultural Revolution . By Andrew Wallace-Hadrill, 144–210. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vitruvius .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Vitruvius Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article: Marcus Vitruvius Pollio Wikiquote has quotations related to Vitruvius .

Look up Vitruvius in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Works by Vitruvius at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Vitruvius at the Internet Archive Works by Vitruvius at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Vitruvius online Archived 18 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine Vitruvius' theories of beauty – a learning resource from the British Library Discussion of the inventions of Vitruvius v t e Ancient Rome topics Outline Timeline Index History Foundation Kingdom overthrow Republic Empire History Pax Romana Principate Dominate Western Empire fall historiography of the fall Byzantine Empire decline fall Later Roman Empire History Constitution History Kingdom Republic Empire Late Empire Senate Legislative assemblies Curiate Centuriate Tribal Plebeian Executive magistrates SPQR Law Twelve Tables Mos maiorum Citizenship Auctoritas Imperium Status Litigation Government Curia Forum Cursus honorum Collegiality Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Optimates and populares Province Magistrates Ordinary Consul Censor Praetor Tribune Tribune of the plebs Military tribune Quaestor Aedile Promagistrate Governor Extraordinary Rex Interrex Dictator Magister equitum Decemviri Consular tribune Triumvir Military History Borders Establishment Structure Campaigns Political control Strategy Engineering Frontiers and fortifications castra Technology Army Legion Infantry tactics Personal equipment Siege engines Siege in Ancient Rome Navy Auxiliaries Decorations and punishments Hippika gymnasia Economy Agriculture Deforestation Commerce Finance Currency Republican currency Imperial currency Culture Architecture Art Bathing Calendar Clothing Cosmetics Cuisine Education Family Pater familias Folklore Hairstyles Literature Music Mythology Religion Deities Romanization Romans Sexuality Spectacles Theatre Toys and games Wine Society Patricians Plebs Conflict of the Orders Secessio plebis Equites Gens Tribes Assembly Patronage Naming conventions Demography Women Marriage Adoption Slavery Bagaudae Technology Amphitheatres Aqueducts Bridges Circuses Civil engineering Concrete Domes Metallurgy Numerals Roads Sanitation Ships Temples Theatres Thermae Latin History Alphabet Versions Old Classical Vulgar Late Medieval Renaissance Neo-Latin Contemporary Ecclesiastical Romance languages Writers Latin Aelius Donatus Ammianus Marcellinus Appuleius Asconius Pedianus Augustine Aurelius Victor Ausonius Boëthius Caesar Catullus Cassiodorus Censorinus Cicero Claudian Columella Cornelius Nepos Ennius Eutropius Fabius Pictor Sextus Pompeius Festus Rufus Festus Florus Frontinus Fronto Fulgentius Gellius Horace Hydatius Hyginus Jerome Jordanes Julius Paulus Justin Juvenal Lactantius Livy Lucan Lucretius Macrobius Marcellus Empiricus Marcus Aurelius Manilius Martial Nicolaus Damascenus Nonius Marcellus Obsequens Orosius Ovid Petronius Phaedrus Plautus Pliny the Elder Pliny the Younger Pomponius Mela Priscian Propertius Quadrigarius Quintilian Quintus Curtius Rufus Sallust Seneca the Elder Seneca the Younger Servius Sidonius Apollinaris Silius Italicus Statius Suetonius Symmachus Tacitus Terence Tertullian Tibullus Valerius Antias Valerius Maximus Varro Velleius Paterculus Verrius Flaccus Vergil Vitruvius Greek Aelian Aëtius of Amida Appian Arrian Cassius Dio Diodorus Siculus Diogenes Laërtius Dionysius of Halicarnassus Dioscorides Eusebius of Caesaria Galen Herodian Josephus Julian Libanius Lucian Pausanias Philostratus Phlegon of Tralles Photius Plutarch Polyaenus Polybius Porphyrius Priscus Procopius Simplicius of Cilicia Sozomen Stephanus Byzantinus Strabo Themistius Theodoret Zonaras Zosimus Major cities Alexandria Antioch Aquileia Berytus Bononia Carthage Constantinopolis Eboracum Leptis Magna Londinium Lugdunum Lutetia Mediolanum Pompeii Ravenna Roma Smyrna Vindobona Volubilis Lists and other topics Cities and towns Climate Consuls Dictators Distinguished women Dynasties Emperors Empresses Fiction Film Generals Gentes Geographers Institutions Laws Legacy Legions Magistri equitum Nomina Pontifices maximi Praetors Quaestors Tribunes Roman–Iranian relations External wars and battles Civil wars and revolts Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH 2 Artists ULAN RKD Artists FID People Trove Structurae EUTA Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐w2wwj
Cached time: 20250817044847
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.009 seconds
Real time usage: 1.238 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8025/1000000
Revision size: 51822/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 190123/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12022/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 161355/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.579/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17263405/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1022.688      1 -total
 22.02%  225.161      1 Template:Reflist
 20.91%  213.879      1 Template:Infobox_person
 11.86%  121.315      9 Template:Cite_book
  9.94%  101.698     22 Template:Lang
  9.05%   92.557      6 Template:Side_box
  7.23%   73.965      5 Template:Sister_project
  6.64%   67.922      1 Template:Short_description
  6.57%   67.162      2 Template:Wikisource
  6.29%   64.322      2 Template:Wikisource/outer_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32794:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044847 and revision id 1302605704. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vitruvius&oldid=1302605704 " Categories : 1st-century BC births 1st-century BC Romans 1st-century deaths 1st-century BC architects 1st-century BC writers in Latin Ancient Roman architects Ancient Roman civil engineers Ancient Roman military engineers Ancient Roman military writers Roman Republican soldiers Architectural theoreticians Classical antiquarian architecture writers Golden Age Latin writers History of mining Military personnel of Julius Caesar Roman people of the Gallic Wars Technical writers Vitruvii Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with Latin-language sources (la) CS1 errors: generic name Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with hCards Pages with Latin IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2007 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 13:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vitruvius 77 languages Add topic

