Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Effects 2 Causes 3 Diagnosis Toggle Diagnosis subsection 3.1 Neonatal infants 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypocapnia 19 languages Беларуская Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State of reduced carbon dioxide in the blood Medical condition Hypocapnia Carbon dioxide Hypocapnia (from the Greek words ὑπό meaning below normal and καπνός kapnós meaning smoke ), also known as hypocarbia , sometimes incorrectly called acapnia , is a state of reduced carbon dioxide in the blood .

[ 1 ] Hypocapnia usually results from deep or rapid breathing, known as hyperventilation .

Hypocapnia is the opposite of hypercapnia .

Short term hypocapnia does not usually have any adverse effects.

[ 2 ] It is sometimes used as lifesaving treatment for conditions such as neonatal pulmonary-artery hypertension and for people with severe intracranial hypertension. If the state of hypocapnia persists or is prolonged, adverse outcomes may occur.

[ 2 ] Effects [ edit ] Even when marked, hypocapnia is normally well tolerated. Symptoms include tingling sensation (usually in the limbs), abnormal heartbeat, painful muscle cramps, and seizures. Acute hypocapnia causes hypocapnic alkalosis, which causes cerebral vasoconstriction leading to cerebral hypoxia , and this can cause transient dizziness, fainting, and anxiety .

[ 3 ] A low partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood also causes alkalosis (because CO 2 is acidic in solution), leading to lowered plasma calcium ions ( Hypocalcaemia ), causing increased nerve and muscle excitability. This explains the other common symptoms of hyperventilation— pins and needles , muscle cramps and tetany in the extremities, especially hands and feet.

[ citation needed ] Because the brain stem regulates breathing by monitoring the level of blood CO 2 instead of O 2 , hypocapnia can suppress breathing to the point of blackout from cerebral hypoxia, as exhibited in shallow water blackout .

Hypocapnia also results in bronchoconstriction [ 3 ] in order to decrease ventilation. This mechanism is meant to counteract hyperventilation, and decrease the amount of oxygen coming into the lungs. The body's "goal" is to have a relatively even ratio of the partial pressure of oxygen to the partial pressure of carbon dioxide. Chemoreceptors in the body sense a change in partial pressures and pH (hydrogen ion concentration) in the blood. Chemoreceptors are responsible for signaling vasoconstriction, vasodilation, bronchoconstriction, and bronchodilation.

[ citation needed ] Causes [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The main physiologic causes of hypocapnia are related to hyperventilation. Hypocapnia is sometimes induced in the treatment of medical emergencies such as intracranial hypertension [ 3 ] and hyperkalemia .

Self-induced hypocapnia through hyperventilation is the basis for the dangerous schoolyard fainting game .

[ citation needed ] Deliberate hyperventilation has been used by underwater breath-hold divers for the purpose of extending dive time as it effectively reduces respiratory drive due to low CO 2 levels. This allows one to break their standard limit of breath holding, at an increased risk of shallow water blackout (which is a significant cause of drownings). This risk is caused due to air hunger being reduced (due to low blood carbon dioxide levels) but oxygen levels not being increased. In fact hypocapnia reduces the oxygen levels available to the brain due to the elevated affinity of oxygen to hemoglobin ( Bohr effect ) hence highly increasing the chances of blackout.

[ citation needed ] Diagnosis [ edit ] Neonatal infants [ edit ] Monitoring the level of carbon dioxide in neonatal infants to ensure that the level is not too high ( hypercarbia ) or too low is important for improving outcomes for neonates in intensive care.

[ 4 ] Carbon dioxide can be monitored by taking a blood sample ( arterial blood gas ), through the breath ( exhalation ), and it can be measured continuously through the skin by using a minimally invasive transcutaneous device. The most effective and safest approach for measuring carbon dioxide in newborn infants is not clear.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Freediving blackout – Loss of consciousness caused by cerebral hypoxia towards the end of a breath-hold dive, where hyperventilation and the subsequent hypocapnia is a cause Hypercapnia – Abnormally high tissue carbon dioxide levels, increased level of carbon dioxide Hyperventilation syndrome – Medical condition involving hyperventilating, which is often associated with hypocapnia References [ edit ] ^ Sharma, S; Hashmi, MF (19 February 2023).

"Hypocarbia" .

StatPearls . StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 29630219 . Retrieved 13 December 2023 .

^ a b Laffey, John G.; Kavanagh, Brian P. (2002-07-04).

"Hypocapnia" .

New England Journal of Medicine .

347 (1): 43– 53.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMra012457 .

ISSN 0028-4793 .

^ a b c Laffey JG, Kavanagh BP (2002). "Hypocapnia".

N. Engl. J. Med .

347 (1): 43– 53.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMra012457 .

PMID 12097540 .

^ Hochwald, Ori; Borenstein-Levin, Liron; Dinur, Gil; Jubran, Huda; Ben-David, Shlomit; Kugelman, Amir (July 2019).

"Continuous Noninvasive Carbon Dioxide Monitoring in Neonates: From Theory to Standard of Care" .

Pediatrics .

144 (1).

doi : 10.1542/peds.2018-3640 .

ISSN 1098-4275 .

PMID 31248940 .

^ Bruschettini, Matteo; Romantsik, Olga; Zappettini, Simona; Ramenghi, Luca Antonio; Calevo, Maria Grazia (2016-02-13).

"Transcutaneous carbon dioxide monitoring for the prevention of neonatal morbidity and mortality" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2016 (2): CD011494.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD011494.pub2 .

ISSN 1469-493X .

PMC 8720274 .

PMID 26874180 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D MeSH : D016857 v t e Signs and symptoms relating to the respiratory system Auscultation Stethoscope Respiratory sounds Stridor Wheeze Crackles Rhonchi Stertor Squawk Pleural friction rub Fremitus Bronchophony Death rattle Elicited findings Percussion Pectoriloquy Whispered pectoriloquy Egophony Breathing Rate Apnea Prematurity Sleep Dyspnea Hyperventilation Hypoventilation Hyperpnea Tachypnea Hypopnea Bradypnea Pattern Agonal respiration Biot's respiration Cheyne–Stokes respiration Kussmaul breathing Ataxic respiration Other Respiratory distress Respiratory arrest Orthopnea / Platypnea Trepopnea Aerophagia Asphyxia Breath holding Mouth breathing Snoring Vocal fold Aphonia Muteness Selective Dysphonia Hypophonia Other Chest pain In children Precordial catch syndrome Pleurisy Nail clubbing Cyanosis Cough Sputum Hemoptysis Epistaxis Silhouette sign Post-nasal drip Hiccup COPD Hoover's sign asthma Curschmann's spirals Charcot–Leyden crystals chronic bronchitis Reid index sarcoidosis Kveim test pulmonary embolism Hampton hump Westermark sign pulmonary edema Kerley lines Hamman's sign Golden S sign Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypocapnia&oldid=1292035730 " Category : Symptoms and signs: Respiratory system Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Articles needing additional references from September 2011 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 21:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypocapnia 19 languages Add topic

