Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Varieties Toggle Varieties subsection 1.1 Causal 1.1.1 Nomological 1.1.2 Necessitarianism 1.2 Predeterminism 1.2.1 Biological 1.3 Fatalism 1.4 Theological 1.5 Adequate 1.6 Determined probability 1.7 Many-worlds interpretation 1.8 Philosophical varieties 1.8.1 Nature/nurture controversy 1.8.2 Determinism and prediction 2 Structural Toggle Structural subsection 2.1 With free will 2.2 With the soul 2.3 With ethics and morality 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Western tradition 3.1.1 Newtonian mechanics 3.2 Eastern tradition 3.3 Ājīvika 3.4 Buddhism 4 Modern scientific perspective Toggle Modern scientific perspective subsection 4.1 Generative processes 4.2 Compatibility with the existence of science 4.3 Mathematical models 4.4 Quantum and classical mechanics 4.4.1 Classical theories 4.4.2 Standard quantum mechanics 4.5 Other interpretations 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Notes 5.2 Bibliography 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Determinism 68 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Scientific determinism ) Philosophical view that events are determined by prior events This article is about the general notion of determinism in philosophy. For other uses, see Determinism (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Fatalism , Predeterminism , Predictability , or Theological determinism .

Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Part of a series on statistics Probability theory Probability Axioms Determinism System Indeterminism Randomness Probability space Sample space Event Collectively exhaustive events Elementary event Mutual exclusivity Outcome Singleton Experiment Bernoulli trial Probability distribution Bernoulli distribution Binomial distribution Exponential distribution Normal distribution Pareto distribution Poisson distribution Probability measure Random variable Bernoulli process Continuous or discrete Expected value Variance Markov chain Observed value Random walk Stochastic process Complementary event Joint probability Marginal probability Conditional probability Independence Conditional independence Law of total probability Law of large numbers Bayes' theorem Boole's inequality Venn diagram Tree diagram v t e Determinism is the metaphysical view that all events within the universe (or multiverse ) can occur only in one possible way.

[ 1 ] Deterministic theories throughout the history of philosophy have developed from diverse and sometimes overlapping motives and considerations. Like eternalism , determinism focuses on particular events rather than the future as a concept. Determinism is often contrasted with free will , although some philosophers argue that the two are compatible .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The antonym of determinism is indeterminism , the view that events are not deterministically caused.

Historically, debates about determinism have involved many philosophical positions and given rise to multiple varieties or interpretations of determinism. One topic of debate concerns the scope of determined systems. Some philosophers have maintained that the entire universe is a single determinate system, while others identify more limited determinate systems. Another common debate topic is whether determinism and free will can coexist; compatibilism and incompatibilism represent the opposing sides of this debate.

Determinism should not be confused with the self-determination of human actions by reasons, motives, and desires. Determinism is about interactions which affect cognitive processes in people's lives.

[ 4 ] It is about the cause and the result of what people have done. Cause and result are always bound together in cognitive processes. It assumes that if an observer has sufficient information about an object or human being, then such an observer might be able to predict every consequent move of that object or human being. Determinism rarely requires that perfect prediction be practically possible.

Varieties [ edit ] Determinism may commonly refer to any of the following viewpoints: Causal [ edit ] Causal determinism, sometimes synonymous with historical determinism (a sort of path dependence ), is "the idea that every event is necessitated by antecedent events and conditions together with the laws of nature." [ 5 ] However, it is a broad enough term to consider that: [ 6 ] ...One's deliberations, choices, and actions will often be necessary links in the causal chain that brings something about. In other words, even though our deliberations, choices, and actions are themselves determined like everything else, it is still the case, according to causal determinism, that the occurrence or existence of yet other things depends upon our deliberating, choosing and acting in a certain way.

Causal determinism proposes that there is an unbroken chain of prior occurrences stretching back to the origin of the universe. The relation between events and the origin of the universe may not be specified. Causal determinists believe that there is nothing in the universe that has no cause or is self-caused .
Causal determinism has also been considered more generally as the idea that everything that happens or exists is caused by antecedent conditions.

[ 7 ] In the case of nomological determinism, these conditions are considered events also, implying that the future is determined completely by preceding events—a combination of prior states of the universe and the laws of nature.

[ 5 ] These conditions can also be considered metaphysical in origin (such as in the case of theological determinism).

[ 6 ] Many philosophical theories of determinism frame themselves with the idea that reality follows a sort of predetermined path.

Nomological [ edit ] Nomological determinism is the most common form of causal determinism and is generally synonymous with physical determinism.

[ citation needed ] This is the notion that the past and the present dictate the future entirely and necessarily by rigid natural laws and that every occurrence inevitably results from prior events. Nomological determinism is sometimes illustrated by the thought experiment of Laplace's demon .

Laplace posited that an omniscient observer, knowing with infinite precision all the positions and velocities of every particle in the universe, could predict the future entirely.

[ 8 ] Ernest Nagel viewed determinism in terms of a physical state , declaring a theory to be deterministic if it predicts a state at other times uniquely from values at one given time.

[ 9 ] Necessitarianism [ edit ] Necessitarianism is a metaphysical principle that denies all mere possibility and maintains that there is only one possible way for the world to exist.

Leucippus claimed there are no uncaused events and that everything occurs for a reason and by necessity.

[ 10 ] Predeterminism [ edit ] Predeterminism is the idea that all events are determined in advance.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The concept is often argued by invoking causal determinism, implying that there is an unbroken chain of prior occurrences stretching back to the origin of the universe. In the case of predeterminism, this chain of events has been pre-established, and human actions cannot interfere with the outcomes of this pre-established chain.

Predeterminism can be categorized as a specific type of determinism when it is used to mean pre-established causal determinism.

[ 11 ] [ 13 ] [ better source needed ] It can also be used interchangeably with causal determinism—in the context of its capacity to determine future events.

[ 11 ] [ 14 ] However, predeterminism is often considered as independent of causal determinism.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Biological [ edit ] The term predeterminism is also frequently used in the context of biology and heredity, in which case it represents a form of biological determinism , sometimes called genetic determinism .

[ 17 ] Biological determinism is the idea that all human behaviors, beliefs, and desires are fixed by human genetic nature.

Friedrich Nietzsche explained that human beings are "determined" by their bodies and are subject to its passions, impulses, and instincts.

[ 18 ] Fatalism [ edit ] Fatalism is normally distinguished from determinism, [ 19 ] as a form of teleological determinism. Fatalism is the idea that everything is fated to happen, resulting in humans having no control over their future.

Fate has arbitrary power, and does not necessarily follow any causal or deterministic laws .

[ 7 ] Types of fatalism include hard theological determinism and the idea of predestination , where there is a God who determines all that humans will do. This may be accomplished through either foreknowledge of their actions, achieved through omniscience [ 20 ] or by predetermining their actions.

[ 21 ] Theological [ edit ] Theological determinism is a form of determinism that holds that all events that happen are either preordained (i.e., predestined ) to happen by a monotheistic deity , or are destined to occur given its omniscience. Two forms of theological determinism exist, referred to as strong and weak theological determinism.

[ 22 ] Strong theological determinism is based on the concept of a creator deity dictating all events in history: "everything that happens has been predestined to happen by an omniscient, omnipotent divinity." [ 23 ] Weak theological determinism is based on the concept of divine foreknowledge—"because God's omniscience is perfect, what God knows about the future will inevitably happen, which means, consequently, that the future is already fixed." [ 24 ] There exist slight variations on this categorization, however. Some claim either that theological determinism requires predestination of all events and outcomes by the divinity—i.e., they do not classify the weaker version as theological determinism unless libertarian free will is assumed to be denied as a consequence—or that the weaker version does not constitute theological determinism at all.

[ 25 ] With respect to free will, "theological determinism is the thesis that God exists and has infallible knowledge of all true propositions including propositions about our future actions", more minimal criteria designed to encapsulate all forms of theological determinism.

[ 7 ] Theological determinism can also be seen as a form of causal determinism, in which the antecedent conditions are the nature and will of God.

[ 6 ] Some have asserted that Augustine of Hippo introduced theological determinism into Christianity in 412 CE, whereas all prior Christian authors supported free will against Stoic and Gnostic determinism.

[ 26 ] However, there are many Biblical passages that seem to support the idea of some kind of theological determinism.

Adequate [ edit ] Adequate determinism is the idea, because of quantum decoherence , that quantum indeterminacy can be ignored for most macroscopic events. Random quantum events "average out" in the limit of large numbers of particles (where the laws of quantum mechanics asymptotically approach the laws of classical mechanics).

[ 27 ] Determined probability [ edit ] Stephen Hawking explained that the microscopic world of quantum mechanics is one of determined probabilities. That is, nature is not governed by laws that determine the future with certainty but by laws that determine the probability of various futures.

[ 28 ] : 32 Many-worlds interpretation [ edit ] The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics accepts the linear causal sets of sequential events with adequate consistency yet also suggests constant forking of causal chains that can in principle be globally deterministic.

[ 29 ] Meaning the causal set of events leading to the present are all valid yet appear as a singular linear time stream within a much broader unseen conic probability field of other outcomes that "split off" from the locally observed timeline. Under this model causal sets are still "consistent" yet not exclusive to singular iterated outcomes.

The interpretation sidesteps the exclusive retrospective causal chain problem of "could not have done otherwise" by suggesting "the other outcome does exist" in a set of parallel states of the universe that (in one version) split off in any interacting event. This interpretation is sometimes described with the example of agent-based choices.

[ 30 ] Philosophical varieties [ edit ] Nature/nurture controversy [ edit ] Although some of the above forms of determinism concern human behaviors and cognition , others frame themselves as an answer to the debate on nature and nurture . They will suggest that one factor will entirely determine behavior. As scientific understanding has grown, however, the strongest versions of these theories have been widely rejected as a single-cause fallacy .

[ 31 ] In other words, the modern deterministic theories attempt to explain how the interaction of both nature and nurture is entirely predictable. The concept of heritability has been helpful in making this distinction.

Biological determinism , sometimes called genetic determinism , is the idea that each of human behaviors, beliefs, and desires are fixed by human genetic nature.

Behaviorism involves the idea that all behavior can be traced to specific causes—either environmental or reflexive.

John B. Watson and B. F. Skinner developed this nurture-focused determinism.

Cultural materialism , contends that the physical world impacts and sets constraints on human behavior.

Cultural determinism , along with social determinism , is the nurture-focused theory that the culture in which we are raised determines who we are.

Environmental determinism , also known as climatic or geographical determinism, proposes that the physical environment, rather than social conditions, determines culture. Supporters of environmental determinism often [ quantify ] also support behavioral determinism . Key proponents of this notion have included Ellen Churchill Semple , Ellsworth Huntington , Thomas Griffith Taylor and possibly Jared Diamond , although his status as an environmental determinist is debated.

[ 32 ] Determinism and prediction [ edit ] Other "deterministic" [ opinion ] theories actually seek only to highlight the importance of a particular factor in predicting the future. These theories often use the factor as a sort of guide or constraint on the future. They need not suppose that complete knowledge of that one factor would allow the making of perfect predictions.

Psychological determinism can mean that humans must act according to reason, but it can also be synonymous with some sort of psychological egoism . The latter is the view that humans will always act according to their perceived best interest.

Linguistic determinism proposes that language determines (or at least limits) the things that humans can think and say and thus know. The Sapir–Whorf hypothesis argues that individuals experience the world based on the grammatical structures they habitually use.

Economic determinism attributes primacy to economic structure over politics in the development of human history. It is associated with the dialectical materialism of Karl Marx .

Technological determinism is the theory that a society's technology drives the development of its social structure and cultural values.

Structural [ edit ] Structural determinism is the philosophical view that actions, events, and processes are predicated on and determined by structural factors.

[ 33 ] Given any particular structure or set of estimable components, it is a concept that emphasizes rational and predictable outcomes. Chilean biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela popularized the notion, writing that a living system's general order is maintained via a circular process of ongoing self-referral, and thus its organization and structure defines the changes it undergoes.

[ 34 ] According to the authors, a system can undergo changes of state (alteration of structure without loss of identity) or disintegrations (alteration of structure with loss of identity). Such changes or disintegrations are not ascertained by the elements of the disturbing agent, as each disturbance will only trigger responses in the respective system, which in turn, are determined by each system's own structure.

On an individualistic level, what this means is that human beings as free and independent entities are triggered to react by external stimuli or change in circumstance. However, their own internal state and existing physical and mental capacities determine their responses to those triggers. On a much broader societal level, structural determinists believe that larger issues in the society—especially those pertaining to minorities and subjugated communities—are predominantly assessed through existing structural conditions, making change of prevailing conditions difficult, and sometimes outright impossible. For example, the concept has been applied to the politics of race in the United States of America and other Western countries such as the United Kingdom and Australia , with structural determinists lamenting structural factors for the prevalence of racism in these countries.

[ 35 ] Additionally, Marxists have conceptualized the writings of Karl Marx within the context of structural determinism as well. For example, Louis Althusser , a structural Marxist , argued that the state, in its political, economic, and legal structures, reproduces the discourse of capitalism, in turn, allowing for the burgeoning of capitalistic structures.

Proponents of the notion highlight the usefulness of structural determinism to study complicated issues related to race and gender, as it highlights often gilded structural conditions that block meaningful change.

[ 36 ] Critics call it too rigid, reductionist and inflexible. Additionally, they also criticize the notion for overemphasizing deterministic forces such as structure over the role of human agency and the ability of the people to act. These critics argue that politicians, academics, and social activists have the capability to bring about significant change despite stringent structural conditions.

With free will [ edit ] Main article: Free will Philosophers have debated both the truth of determinism, and the truth of free will. This creates the four possible positions in the figure.

Compatibilism refers to the view that free will is, in some sense, compatible with determinism. The three incompatibilist positions deny this possibility. The hard incompatibilists hold that free will is incompatible with both determinism and indeterminism, the libertarians that determinism does not hold, and free will might exist, and the hard determinists that determinism does hold and free will does not exist. The Dutch philosopher Baruch Spinoza was a determinist thinker, and argued that human freedom can be achieved through knowledge of the causes that determine desire and affections. He defined human servitude as the state of bondage of anyone who is aware of their own desires, but ignorant of the causes that determined them. However, the free or virtuous person becomes capable, through reason and knowledge, to be genuinely free, even as they are being "determined". For the Dutch philosopher, acting out of one's own internal necessity is genuine freedom while being driven by exterior determinations is akin to bondage. Spinoza's thoughts on human servitude and liberty are respectively detailed in the fourth [ 37 ] [ full citation needed ] and fifth [ 38 ] [ full citation needed ] volumes of his work Ethics .

The standard argument against free will, according to philosopher J. J. C. Smart , focuses on the implications of determinism for free will.

[ 39 ] He suggests free will is denied whether determinism is true or not. He says that if determinism is true, all actions are predicted and no one is assumed to be free; however, if determinism is false, all actions are presumed to be random and as such no one seems free because they have no part in controlling what happens.

With the soul [ edit ] Some determinists argue that materialism does not present a complete understanding of the universe, because while it can describe determinate interactions among material things, it ignores the minds or souls of conscious beings.

A number of positions can be delineated: Immaterial souls are all that exist ( idealism ).

Immaterial souls exist and exert a non-deterministic causal influence on bodies (traditional free-will, interactionist dualism ).

[ 40 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 41 ] Immaterial souls exist but are part of a deterministic framework.

Immaterial souls exist, but exert no causal influence, free or determined ( epiphenomenalism , occasionalism ) Immaterial souls do not exist – there is no mind–body dichotomy , and there is a materialistic explanation for intuitions to the contrary.

With ethics and morality [ edit ] Another topic of debate is the implication that determinism has on morality .

Philosopher and incompatibilist Peter van Inwagen introduced this thesis, when arguments that free will is required for moral judgments, as such: [ 42 ] The moral judgment that X should not have been done implies that something else should have been done instead.

That something else should have been done instead implies that there was something else to do.

That there was something else to do, implies that something else could have been done.

That something else could have been done implies that there is free will.

If there is no free will to have done other than X we cannot make the moral judgment that X should not have been done.

History [ edit ] Determinism was developed by the Greek philosophers during the 7th and 6th centuries BCE by the Pre-socratic philosophers Heraclitus and Leucippus , later Aristotle , and mainly by the Stoics . Some of the main philosophers who have dealt with this issue are Marcus Aurelius , Omar Khayyam , Thomas Hobbes , Baruch Spinoza , Gottfried Leibniz , David Hume , Baron d'Holbach (Paul Heinrich Dietrich), Pierre-Simon Laplace , Arthur Schopenhauer , William James , Friedrich Nietzsche , Albert Einstein , Niels Bohr , Ralph Waldo Emerson and, more recently, John Searle , Ted Honderich , and Daniel Dennett .

Mecca Chiesa notes that the probabilistic or selectionistic determinism of B. F. Skinner comprised a wholly separate conception of determinism that was not mechanistic at all. Mechanistic determinism assumes that every event has an unbroken chain of prior occurrences, but a selectionistic or probabilistic model does not.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Western tradition [ edit ] In the West, some elements of determinism have been expressed in Greece from the 6th century BCE by the Presocratics Heraclitus [ 45 ] [ full citation needed ] and Leucippus .

[ 46 ] [ full citation needed ] The first notions of determinism appears to originate with the Stoics , as part of their theory of universal causal determinism.

[ 47 ] The resulting philosophical debates, which involved the confluence of elements of Aristotelian Ethics with Stoic psychology, led in the 1st–3rd centuries CE in the works of Alexander of Aphrodisias to the first recorded Western debate over determinism and freedom, [ 48 ] an issue that is known in theology as the paradox of free will . The writings of Epictetus as well as middle Platonist and early Christian thought were instrumental in this development.

[ 49 ] Jewish philosopher Moses Maimonides said of the deterministic implications of an omniscient god: [ 50 ] "Does God know or does He not know that a certain individual will be good or bad? If thou sayest 'He knows', then it necessarily follows that [that] man is compelled to act as God knew beforehand he would act, otherwise God's knowledge would be imperfect." [ 51 ] Newtonian mechanics [ edit ] This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Determinism in the West is often associated with Newtonian mechanics/physics , which depicts the physical matter of the universe as operating according to a set of fixed laws. The "billiard ball" hypothesis, a product of Newtonian physics, argues that once the initial conditions of the universe have been established, the rest of the history of the universe follows inevitably. If it were actually possible to have complete knowledge of physical matter and all of the laws governing that matter at any one time, then it would be theoretically possible to compute the time and place of every event that will ever occur ( Laplace's demon ). In this sense, the basic particles of the universe operate in the same fashion as the rolling balls on a billiard table, moving and striking each other in predictable ways to produce predictable results.

Whether or not it is all-encompassing in so doing, Newtonian mechanics deals only with caused events; for example, if an object begins in a known position and is hit dead on by an object with some known velocity, then it will be pushed straight toward another predictable point. If it goes somewhere else, the Newtonians argue, one must question one's measurements of the original position of the object, the exact direction of the striking object, gravitational or other fields that were inadvertently ignored, etc. Then, they maintain, repeated experiments and improvements in accuracy will always bring one's observations closer to the theoretically predicted results. When dealing with situations on an ordinary human scale, Newtonian physics has been successful. But it fails as velocities become some substantial fraction of the speed of light and when interactions at the atomic scale are studied. Before the discovery of quantum effects and other challenges to Newtonian physics, "uncertainty" was always a term that applied to the accuracy of human knowledge about causes and effects, and not to the causes and effects themselves.

Newtonian mechanics, as well as any following physical theories, are results of observations and experiments, and so they describe "how it all works" within a tolerance. However, old western scientists believed if there are any logical connections found between an observed cause and effect, there must be also some absolute natural laws behind. Belief in perfect natural laws driving everything, instead of just describing what we should expect, led to searching for a set of universal simple laws that rule the world. This movement significantly encouraged deterministic views in Western philosophy, [ 52 ] as well as the related theological views of classical pantheism .

Eastern tradition [ edit ] Throughout history, the belief that the entire universe is a deterministic system subject to the will of fate or destiny has been articulated in both Eastern and Western religions, philosophy, music, and literature.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] The ancient Arabs that inhabited the Arabian Peninsula before the advent of Islam used to profess a widespread belief in fatalism ( ḳadar ) alongside a fearful consideration for the sky and the stars as divine beings , which they held to be ultimately responsible for every phenomena that occurs on Earth and for the destiny of humankind.

[ 58 ] Accordingly, they shaped their entire lives in accordance with their interpretations of astral configurations and phenomena .

[ 58 ] In the I Ching and philosophical Taoism , the ebb and flow of favorable and unfavorable conditions suggests the path of least resistance is effortless ( see : Wu wei ). In the philosophical schools of the Indian Subcontinent , the concept of karma deals with similar philosophical issues to the Western concept of determinism. Karma is understood as a spiritual mechanism which causes the eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth ( saṃsāra ).

[ 59 ] Karma, either positive or negative, accumulates according to an individual's actions throughout their life, and at their death determines the nature of their next life in the cycle of Saṃsāra.

[ 59 ] Most major religions originating in India hold this belief to some degree, most notably Hinduism , [ 59 ] Jainism , Sikhism , and Buddhism .

The views on the interaction of karma and free will are numerous, and diverge from each other. For example, in Sikhism , god's grace, gained through worship, can erase one's karmic debts, a belief which reconciles the principle of karma with a monotheistic god one must freely choose to worship.

[ 60 ] Jainists believe in compatibilism , in which the cycle of Saṃsara is a completely mechanistic process, occurring without any divine intervention. The Jains hold an atomic view of reality, in which particles of karma form the fundamental microscopic building material of the universe.

Ājīvika [ edit ] In ancient India , the Ājīvika school of philosophy founded by Makkhali Gosāla (around 500 BCE), otherwise referred to as "Ājīvikism" in Western scholarship , [ 61 ] upheld the Niyati (" Fate ") doctrine of absolute fatalism or determinism, [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] which negates the existence of free will and karma , and is therefore considered one of the nāstika or "heterodox" schools of Indian philosophy .

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] The oldest descriptions of the Ājīvika fatalists and their founder Gosāla can be found both in the Buddhist and Jaina scriptures of ancient India.

[ 61 ] [ 63 ] The predetermined fate of all sentient beings and the impossibility to achieve liberation ( mokṣa ) from the eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth ( saṃsāra ) was the major distinctive philosophical and metaphysical doctrine of this heterodox school of Indian philosophy, [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] annoverated among the other Śramaṇa movements that emerged in India during the Second urbanization (600–200 BCE).

[ 61 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Part of a series on Buddhist philosophy Traditions Vibhajyavāda Theravāda Vaibhāṣika Sautrāntika Pudgalavada Prajñaptivāda Lokottaravāda Mahayana Madhyamaka Yogachara Pramāṇavāda Vajrayana Tiāntāi Huayan Zen/Chán Dzogchen Themes Buddhist logico-epistemology Buddhist ethics Buddhism and psychology Buddhist vegetarianism Abhidharma Ahimsa Not-self Interdependent origination Emptiness Karma Middle Way Two truths doctrine Dharma theory Svabhava Buddhist atomism Suffering Buddha-nature Nirvana Buddhist modernism Pre-modern philosophers Moggaliputta-Tissa Katyāyāniputra Nagasena Nagarjuna Aryadeva Harivarman Vasubandhu Saṃghabhadra Asanga Buddhaghosa Buddhadatta Dhammapāla Dignāga Dharmakirti Buddhapālita Bhāviveka Dharmapala of Nalanda Chandrakirti Shantideva Sengzhao Jizang Xuanzang Zhiyi Fazang Guifeng Zongmi Wonhyo Jinul Kūkai Dōgen Jñānagarbha Śāntarakṣita Haribhadra Atiśa Jñanasrimitra Ratnakīrti Ratnākaraśānti Abhayakaragupta Sakya Pandita Rongzom Acariya Anuruddha Dolpopa Je Tsongkhapa Longchenpa Gorampa Sakya Chokden Mikyö Dorje Modern philosophers Anagarika Dharmapala Ledi Sayadaw B. R. Ambedkar Taixu Yin Shun Kitaro Nishida Keiji Nishitani Hajime Tanabe Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki Mahasi Sayadaw K. N. Jayatilleke David Kalupahana Ñāṇananda Buddhadasa P. A. Payutto Thích Nhất Hạnh Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo Jamgon Kongtrul Ju Mipham Gendün Chöphel 14th Dalai Lama Religion portal Philosophy portal v t e Main articles: Enlightenment in Buddhism and Two truths doctrine Further information: Four stages of enlightenment , Sotāpanna , and Three marks of existence Buddhist philosophy contains several concepts which some scholars describe as deterministic to various levels. However, the direct analysis of Buddhist metaphysics through the lens of determinism is difficult, due to the differences between European and Buddhist traditions of thought.

[ 64 ] One concept which is argued to support a hard determinism is the doctrine of dependent origination ( pratītyasamutpāda ) in the early Buddhist texts , which states that all phenomena ( dharma ) are necessarily caused by some other phenomenon, which it can be said to be dependent on, like links in a massive, never-ending chain; the basic principle is that all things (dharmas, phenomena, principles) arise in dependence upon other things, which means that they are fundamentally "empty" or devoid of any intrinsic, eternal essence and therefore are impermanent .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] In traditional Buddhist philosophy, this concept is used to explain the functioning of the eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth ( saṃsāra ); all thoughts and actions exert a karmic force that attaches to the individual's consciousness , which will manifest through reincarnation and results in future lives.

[ 64 ] In other words, righteous or unrighteous actions in one life will necessarily cause good or bad responses in another future life or more lives.

[ 66 ] The early Buddhist texts and later Tibetan Buddhist scriptures associate dependent arising with the fundamental Buddhist doctrines of emptiness ( śūnyatā ) and non-self ( anattā ).

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Another Buddhist concept which many scholars perceive to be deterministic is the doctrine of non-self ( anattā ).

[ 64 ] In Buddhism, attaining enlightenment involves one realizing that neither in humans nor any other sentient beings there is a fundamental core of permanent being, identity, or personality which can be called the "soul", and that all sentient beings (including humans) are instead made of several, constantly changing factors which bind them to the eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth ( saṃsāra ).

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Sentient beings are composed of the five aggregates of existence ( skandha ): matter, sensation, perception, mental formations , and consciousness.

[ 64 ] In the Saṃyutta Nikāya of the Pāli Canon , the historical Buddha is recorded as saying that "just as the word 'chariot' exists on the basis of the aggregation of parts, even so the concept of 'being' exists when the five aggregates are available." [ 67 ] The early Buddhist texts outline different ways in which dependent origination is a middle way between different sets of "extreme" views (such as " monist " and " pluralist " ontologies or materialist and dualist views of mind-body relation).

[ 68 ] In the Kaccānagotta Sutta of the Pāli Canon ( SN 12.15, parallel at SA 301), the historical Buddha stated that "this world mostly relies on the dual notions of existence and non-existence" and then explains the right view as follows: [ 69 ] But when you truly see the origin of the world with right understanding, you won't have the notion of non-existence regarding the world. And when you truly see the cessation of the world with right understanding, you won't have the notion of existence regarding the world.

[ 70 ] Some Western scholars argue that the concept of non-self necessarily disproves the ideas of free will and moral responsibility .

[ 64 ] [ 71 ] If there is no autonomous self, in this view, and all events are necessarily and unchangeably caused by others, then no type of autonomy can be said to exist, moral or otherwise.

[ 71 ] However, other scholars disagree, claiming that the Buddhist conception of the universe allows for a form of compatibilism .

[ 64 ] Buddhism perceives reality occurring on two different levels : the ultimate reality , which can only be truly understood by the enlightened ones , and the illusory or false reality of the material world , which is considered to be "real" or "true" by those who are ignorant about the nature of metaphysical reality ; i.e., those who still haven't achieved enlightenment.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Therefore, Buddhism perceives free will as a notion belonging to the illusory belief in the unchanging self or personhood that pertains to the false reality of the material world, while concepts like non-self and dependent origination belong to the ultimate reality; the transition between the two can be truly understood, Buddhists claim, by one who has attained enlightenment.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 71 ] Modern scientific perspective [ edit ] Generative processes [ edit ] Main article: Emergence Although it was once thought by scientists that any indeterminism in quantum mechanics occurred at too small a scale to influence biological or neurological systems, there is indication that nervous systems are influenced by quantum indeterminism due to chaos theory .

[ 72 ] It is unclear what implications this has for the problem of free will given various possible reactions to the problem in the first place.

[ 73 ] Many biologists do not grant determinism: Christof Koch , for instance, argues against it, and in favour of libertarian free will , by making arguments based on generative processes ( emergence ).

[ 74 ] Other proponents of emergentist or generative philosophy , cognitive sciences , and evolutionary psychology , argue that a certain form of determinism (not necessarily causal) is true.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] They suggest instead that an illusion of free will is experienced due to the generation of infinite behaviour from the interaction of finite-deterministic set of rules and parameters . Thus the unpredictability of the emerging behaviour from deterministic processes leads to a perception of free will, even though free will as an ontological entity does not exist.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] An animation of Conway's Game of Life , where the interaction of just four simple rules creates patterns that seem somehow "alive" As an illustration, the strategy board-games chess and Go have rigorous rules in which no information (such as cards' face-values) is hidden from either player and no random events (such as dice-rolling) happen within the game. Yet, chess and especially Go with its extremely simple deterministic rules, can still have an extremely large number of unpredictable moves. When chess is simplified to 7 or fewer pieces, however, endgame tables are available that dictate which moves to play to achieve a perfect game. This implies that, given a less complex environment (with the original 32 pieces reduced to 7 or fewer pieces), a perfectly predictable game of chess is possible. In this scenario, the winning player can announce that a checkmate will happen within a given number of moves, assuming a perfect defense by the losing player, or fewer moves if the defending player chooses sub-optimal moves as the game progresses into its inevitable, predicted conclusion. By this analogy, it is suggested, the experience of free will emerges from the interaction of finite rules and deterministic parameters that generate nearly infinite and practically unpredictable behavioural responses. In theory, if all these events could be accounted for, and there were a known way to evaluate these events, the seemingly unpredictable behaviour would become predictable.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] Another hands-on example of generative processes is John Horton Conway 's playable Game of Life .

[ 79 ] Nassim Taleb is wary of such models, and coined the term " ludic fallacy ." Compatibility with the existence of science [ edit ] Certain philosophers of science argue that, while causal determinism (in which everything including the brain/mind is subject to the laws of causality) is compatible with minds capable of science, fatalism and predestination is not. These philosophers make the distinction that causal determinism means that each step is determined by the step before and therefore allows sensory input from observational data to determine what conclusions the brain reaches, while fatalism in which the steps between do not connect an initial cause to the results would make it impossible for observational data to correct false hypotheses. This is often combined with the argument that if the brain had fixed views and the arguments were mere after-constructs with no causal effect on the conclusions, science would have been impossible and the use of arguments would have been a meaningless waste of energy with no persuasive effect on brains with fixed views.

[ 80 ] Mathematical models [ edit ] Many mathematical models of physical systems are deterministic. This is true of most models involving differential equations (notably, those measuring rate of change over time). Mathematical models that are not deterministic because they involve randomness are called stochastic . Because of sensitive dependence on initial conditions , some deterministic models may appear to behave non-deterministically; in such cases, a deterministic interpretation of the model may not be useful due to numerical instability and a finite amount of precision in measurement. Such considerations can motivate the consideration of a stochastic model even though the underlying system is governed by deterministic equations.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Quantum and classical mechanics [ edit ] Classical theories [ edit ] Further information: Macroscopic quantum phenomena Since the beginning of the 20th century, quantum mechanics—the physics of the extremely small—has revealed previously concealed aspects of events . Before that, Newtonian physics —the physics of everyday life—dominated. Taken in isolation (rather than as an approximation to quantum mechanics), Newtonian physics depicts a universe in which objects move in perfectly determined ways. At the scale where humans exist and interact with the universe, Newtonian mechanics remain useful, and make relatively accurate predictions (e.g. calculating the trajectory of a bullet). But whereas in theory, absolute knowledge of the forces accelerating a bullet would produce an absolutely accurate prediction of its path, modern quantum mechanics casts reasonable doubt on this main thesis of determinism.

This doubt takes radically different forms. The observed results of quantum mechanics are random but various interpretations of quantum mechanics make different assumptions about determinism which cannot be distinguished experimentally. The standard interpretation widely used by physicists is not deterministic, but the other interpretations have been devised which are deterministic.

[ 84 ] Standard quantum mechanics [ edit ] These are five of the infinitely many paths available for a particle to move from point A at time t to point B at time t’(>t).

Quantum mechanics is the product of a careful application of the scientific method , logic and empiricism . Through a large number of careful experiments physicists developed a rather unintuitive mental model: A particle's path cannot be specified in from its quantum description. "Path" is a classical, practical attribute in everyday life, but one that quantum particles do not possess. Quantum mechanics attributes probability to all possible paths and asserts the only one outcome will be observed.

The randomness in quantum mechanics derives from the quantum aspect of the model. Different experimental results are obtained for each individual quanta. Only the probability can predicted.

[ 85 ] : 7 As Stephen Hawking explains, the result is not traditional determinism, but rather determined probabilities.

[ 28 ] As far as the thesis of determinism is concerned, these probabilities, at least, are quite determined.

Although it is not possible to predict the arrival position or time for any particle, probabilities of arrival predict the final pattern of events.

On the topic of predictable probabilities, the double-slit experiments are a popular example.

Photons are fired one-by-one through a double-slit apparatus at a distant screen. They do not arrive at any single point, nor even the two points lined up with the slits (the way it might be expected of bullets fired by a fixed gun at a distant target). Instead, the photons arrive in varying concentrations and times across the screen, and only the final distribution of photons can be predicted. In that sense the behavior of light in this apparatus is predictable, but there is no way to predict where or when in the resulting interference pattern any single photon will make its contribution.

Some (including Albert Einstein ) have argued that the inability to predict any more than probabilities is simply due to ignorance.

[ 86 ] The idea is that, beyond the conditions and laws can be observed or deduced, there are also hidden factors or " hidden variables " that determine absolutely in which order photons reach the detector screen. They argue that the course of the universe is absolutely determined, but that humans are screened from knowledge of the determinative factors. So, they say, it only appears that things proceed in a probabilistically way.

John S. Bell analyzed Einstein's work in his famous Bell's theorem , which demonstrates that quantum mechanics can makes statistical predictions that would be violated if local hidden variables really existed. Many experiments have verified the quantum predictions.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Other interpretations [ edit ] Bell's theorem only applies to local hidden variables. Quantum mechanics can be formulated with non-local hidden variables to achieve a deterministic theory that is in agreement with experiment.

[ 89 ] An example is the Bohm interpretation of quantum mechanics. Bohm's Interpretation, though, violates special relativity and it is highly controversial whether or not it can be reconciled without giving up on determinism.

The Many worlds interpretation focuses on the deterministic nature of the Schrodinger's equation . For any closed system, including the entire universe, the wavefunction solutions to this equation evolve deterministically. The apparent randomness of observations corresponds to branching of the wavefunction, with one world for each possible outcome.

[ 90 ] Another foundational assumption to quantum mechanics is that of free will , [ 91 ] which has been argued to be foundational to the scientific method as a whole.

[ 92 ] Bell acknowledged that abandoning this assumption would both allow for the maintenance of determinism as well as locality.

[ 93 ] [ citation needed ] This perspective is known as superdeterminism , and is defended by some physicists such as Sabine Hossenfelder and Tim Palmer .

[ 94 ] More advanced variations on these arguments include quantum contextuality , by Bell, Simon B. Kochen and Ernst Specker , which argues that hidden variable theories cannot be "sensible", meaning that the values of the hidden variables inherently depend on the devices used to measure them.

This debate is relevant because there are possibly specific situations in which the arrival of an electron at a screen at a certain point and time would trigger one event, whereas its arrival at another point would trigger an entirely different event (e.g. see Schrödinger's cat —a thought experiment used as part of a deeper debate).

In his 1939 address "The Relation between Mathematics and Physics", [ 95 ] Paul Dirac pointed out that purely deterministic classical mechanics cannot explain the cosmological origins of the universe; today the early universe is modeled quantum mechanically.

[ 96 ] Nevertheless, the question of determinism in modern physics remains debated. On one hand, Albert Einstein 's theory of relativity , which represents an advancement over Newtonian mechanics, is based on a deterministic framework. On the other hand, Einstein himself resisted the indeterministic view of quantum mechanics, as evidenced by his famous debates with Niels Bohr , which continued until his death.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Moreover, chaos theory highlights that even within a deterministic framework, the ability to precisely predict the evolution of a system is often limited. A deterministic system may appear random: two apparently identical starting points can result in vastly different results. Such dynamical systems are sensitive to initial conditions .

[ 99 ] : 8 Even if the universe followed a strict deterministic order, the human capacity to predict every event and comprehend all underlying causes would still be constrained this kind of sensitivity.

[ 100 ] : 91 Adequate determinism (see Varieties , above) is the reason that Stephen Hawking called libertarian free will "just an illusion".

[ 28 ] References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Determinism | Definition, Philosophers, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 23 February 2024 .

^ Franklin, Richard Langdon (1968).

Freewill and Determinism: A Study of Rival Conceptions of Man . London, New York: Routledge & K. Paul.

ISBN 978-0710031570 .

OCLC 42756 .

^ Conceptually (20 January 2019).

"Determinism – Explanation and examples" .

conceptually.org .

Archived from the original on 7 February 2025 . Retrieved 20 January 2019 .

^ Ismael, Jenann (1 October 2019).

"Determinism, Counterpredictive Devices, and the Impossibility of Laplacean Intelligences" .

The Monist .

102 (4): 478– 498.

doi : 10.1093/monist/onz021 .

ISSN 0026-9662 .

^ a b Hoefer, Carl (2008).

"Causal Determinism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2009 ed.).

^ a b c Eshleman, Andrew (2009).

"Moral Responsibility" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2009 ed.).

^ a b c Vihvelin, Kadri (Spring 2011).

"Arguments for Incompatibilism" . In Edward, N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2015.

^ Robert C. Solomon; Kathleen M. Higgins (2009).

"Free will and determinism" .

The Big Questions: A Short Introduction to Philosophy (8th ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 232.

ISBN 978-0495595151 .

^ Ernest Nagel (1999).

"§V: Alternative descriptions of physical state" .

The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientific Explanation (2nd ed.). Hackett. pp.

285– 292.

ISBN 978-0915144716 .

A theory is deterministic if, and only if, given its state variables for some initial period, the theory logically determines a unique set of values for those variables for any other period.

^ Leucippus, Fragment 569 – from Fr. 2 Actius I, 25, 4.

^ a b c McKewan, Jaclyn (2009). "Evolution, Chemical". In H. James Birx" (ed.).

Predeterminism .

Encyclopedia of Time: Science, Philosophy, Theology, & Culture . Sage Publications, Inc. pp.

1035– 1036.

doi : 10.4135/9781412963961.n191 .

ISBN 978-1412941648 .

^ "Predeterminism" .

Oxford Dictionaries . 2010. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012 . Retrieved 20 December 2012 .

. See also "Predeterminism" .

Collins English Dictionary . Collins . Retrieved 20 December 2012 .

^ "Some Varieties of Free Will and Determinism" .

Philosophy 302: Ethics . philosophy.lander.edu . Retrieved 19 December 2012 .

Predeterminism: the philosophical and theological view that combines God with determinism. On this doctrine events throughout eternity have been foreordained by some supernatural power in a causal sequence.

^ See for example Hooft, G. (2001). "How does god play dice? (Pre-)determinism at the Planck scale".

arXiv : hep-th/0104219 .

Predeterminism is here defined by the assumption that the experimenter's 'free will' in deciding what to measure (such as his choice to measure the x- or the y-component of an electron's spin), is in fact limited by deterministic laws, hence not free at all , and Sukumar, C.V. (1996). "A new paradigm for science and architecture".

City .

1 ( 1– 2): 181– 183.

Bibcode : 1996City....1..181S .

doi : 10.1080/13604819608900044 .

Quantum Theory provided a beautiful description of the behaviour of isolated atoms and nuclei and small aggregates of elementary particles. Modern science recognized that predisposition rather than predeterminism is what is widely prevalent in nature.

^ Borst, C. (1992). "Leibniz and the Compatibilist Account of Free Will".

Studia Leibnitiana .

24 (1): 49– 58.

JSTOR 40694201 .

Leibniz presents a clear case of a philosopher who does not think that predeterminism requires universal causal determinism.

^ Far Western Philosophy of Education Society (1971).

Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Far Western Philosophy of Education Society . Far Western Philosophy of Education Society. p. 12.

'Determinism' is, in essence, the position which holds that all behavior is caused by prior behavior. "Predeterminism" is the position which holds that all behavior is caused by conditions which predate behavior altogether (such impersonal boundaries as "the human conditions", instincts, the will of God, inherent knowledge, fate, and such).

^ "Predeterminism" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Merriam-Webster, Inc . Retrieved 20 December 2012 .

See for example Ormond, A.T. (1894).

"Freedom and psycho-genesis" .

Psychological Review .

1 (3): 217– 229.

doi : 10.1037/h0065249 .

The problem of predeterminism is one that involves the factors of heredity and environment, and the point to be debated here is the relation of the present self that chooses to these predetermining agencies.

, and Garris, M.D.; et al. (1992). "A Platform for Evolving Genetic Automata for Text Segmentation (GNATS)".

Science of Artificial Neural Networks .

1710 : 714– 724.

Bibcode : 1992SPIE.1710..714G .

doi : 10.1117/12.140132 .

S2CID 62639035 .

However, predeterminism is not completely avoided. If the codes within the genotype are not designed properly, then the organisms being evolved will be fundamentally handicapped.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1974).

The Gay Science . Vintage. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0394719856 .

^ SEP, Causal Determinism . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2016.

^ Fischer, John Martin (1989) God, Foreknowledge and Freedom . Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 1-55786-857-3 .

^ Watt, W. Montgomery (1948).

Free will and Predestination in Early Islam . Londod: Luzac & Company Ltd.

OCLC 1813192 .

^ Anne Lockyer Jordan; Anne Lockyer Jordan Neil Lockyer Edwin Tate; Neil Lockyer; Edwin Tate (2004).

Philosophy of Religion for A Level (OCR ed.). Nelson Thornes. p. 211.

ISBN 978-0-7487-8078-5 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

^ Iannone, Abel Pablo (2001).

"Determinism" .

Dictionary of World Philosophy . Taylor & Francis. p. 194.

ISBN 978-0-415-17995-9 .

Theological determinism, or the doctrine of predestination: the view that everything which happens has been predestined to happen by an omniscient, omnipotent divinity. A weaker version holds that, though not predestined to happen, everything that happens has been eternally known by virtue of the divine foreknowledge of an omniscient divinity. If this divinity is also omnipotent, as in the case of the Judeo-Christian religions, this weaker version is hard to distinguish from the previous one because, though able to prevent what happens and knowing that it is going to happen, God lets it happen. To this, advocates of free will reply that God permits it to happen in order to make room for the free will of humans.

^ Wentzel Van Huyssteen (2003).

"Theological determinism" .

Encyclopedia of Science and Religion . Vol. 1. Macmillan Reference. p. 217.

ISBN 978-0-02-865705-9 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

Theological determinism constitutes a fifth kind of determinism. There are two types of theological determinism, both compatible with scientific and metaphysical determinism. In the first, God determines everything that happens, either in one all-determining single act at the initial creation of the universe or through continuous divine interactions with the world. Either way, the consequence is that everything that happens becomes God's action, and determinism is closely linked to divine action and God's omnipotence. According to the second type of theological determinism, God has perfect knowledge of everything in the universe because God is omniscient. And, as some say, because God is outside of time, God has the capacity of knowing past, present, and future in one instance. This means that God knows what will happen in the future. And because God's omniscience is perfect, what God knows about the future will inevitably happen, which means, consequently, that the future is already fixed.

^ Raymond J. VanArragon (2010).

Key Terms in Philosophy of Religion . Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 21.

ISBN 978-1-4411-3867-5 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

Theological determinism, on the other hand, claims that all events are determined by God. On this view, God decree that everything will go thus-and-so and ensure that everything goes that way, so that ultimately God is the cause of everything that happens and everything that happens is part of God's plan. We might think of God here as the all-powerful movie director who writes script and causes everything to go accord with it. We should note, as an aside, that there is some debate over what would be sufficient for theological determinism to be true. Some people claim that God's merely knowing what will happen determines that it will, while others believe that God must not only know but must also cause those events to occur in order for their occurrence to be determined.

^ Wilson, Kenneth (2018).

Augustine's Conversion from Traditional Free Choice to "Non-free Free Will": A Comprehensive Methodology in the series Studien und Texte zu Antike und Christentum 111 . Tübingen, Germany: Mohr Siebeck. pp.

273– 298.

ISBN 978-3161557538 .

^ "Adequate (or Statistical) Determinism" .

The Information Philosopher .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2025.

^ a b c Hawking, Stephen; Mlodinow, Leonard (2010).

The Grand Design . New York: Bantam Books . p. 32.

ISBN 978-0-553-80537-6 .

OCLC 654183639 .

^ Kent, Adrian (2010). "One World Versus Many: The Inadequacy of Everettian Accounts of Evolution, Probability, and Scientific Confirmation".

Many Worlds : 307– 354.

arXiv : 0905.0624 .

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199560561.003.0012 .

ISBN 978-0-19-956056-1 .

^ Vaidman, Lev , "Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics" , in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2021 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), accessed on 2 March 2025 ^ Inmaculada de Melo-Martín (2005).

"Firing up the nature/nurture controversy: Bioethics and genetic determinism" .

Journal of Medical Ethics .

31 (9): 526– 530.

doi : 10.1136/jme.2004.008417 .

PMC 1734214 .

PMID 16131554 .

^ Andrew, Sluyter (2003).

"Neo-Environmental Determinism, Intellectual Damage Control, and Nature/Society Science" .

Antipode .

35 (4): 813– 817.

Bibcode : 2003Antip..35..813S .

doi : 10.1046/j.1467-8330.2003.00354.x .

^ Proulx, J (2008).

"Structural determinism as hindrance to teachers' learning: Implications for teacher education" .

Proceedings of PME-33 and PME-NA-20 .

4 .

^ Leyland, M.L (1988).

"An introduction to some of the ideas of Humberto Maturana" .

Journal of Family Therapy .

10 (4): 357– 374.

doi : 10.1046/j..1988.00323.x .

^ Tate, W (1997).

"Critical Race Theory and Education: History, Theory, and Implications" (PDF) .

Review of Research in Education .

22 : 195– 247.

doi : 10.3102/0091732X022001195 .

S2CID 53626156 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 August 2020.

^ Pleasants, N (2019).

"Free Will, Determinism and the 'Problem' of Structure and Agency in the Social Sciences" .

Philosophy of the Social Sciences .

49 : 3– 30.

doi : 10.1177/0048393118814952 .

hdl : 10871/34537 .

S2CID 149735710 .

^ "Human infirmity in moderating and checking the emotions I name bondage: for, when a man is a prey to his emotions, he is not his own master, but lies at the mercy of fortune: so much so, that he is often compelled, while seeing that which is better for him, to follow that which is worse." – Ethics, Book IV, Preface ^ "At length I pass to the remaining portion of my Ethics, which is concerned with the way leading to freedom. I shall therefore treat therein of the power of the reason, showing how far the reason can control the emotions, and what is the nature of Mental Freedom or Blessedness; we shall then be able to see, how much more powerful the wise man is than the ignorant." Ethics, book V, Preface ^ Smart, J. J. C. (July 1967).

"Free-Will, Praise and Blame" .

Mind .

70 (279): 291– 306.

ISSN 0026-4423 .

JSTOR 2251619 .

OCLC 9964495257 .

^ By "soul" is meant an autonomous immaterial agent that has the power to control the body but not to be controlled by the body (this theory of determinism thus conceives of conscious agents in dualistic terms). Therefore the soul stands to the activities of the individual agent's body as does the creator of the universe to the universe. The creator of the universe put in motion a deterministic system of material entities that would, if left to themselves, carry out the chain of events determined by ordinary causation. But the creator also provided for souls that could exert a causal force analogous to the primordial causal force and alter outcomes in the physical universe via the acts of their bodies. Thus, it emerges that no events in the physical universe are uncaused. Some are caused entirely by the original creative act and the way it plays itself out through time, and some are caused by the acts of created souls. But those created souls were not created by means of physical processes involving ordinary causation. They are another order of being entirely, gifted with the power to modify the original creation. However, determinism is not necessarily limited to matter; it can encompass energy as well. The question of how these immaterial entities can act upon material entities is deeply involved in what is generally known as the " mind–body problem ". It is a significant problem which philosophers have not reached agreement about.

^ "Free Will" .

Free Will (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2022.

^ van Inwagen, Peter (2009).

The Powers of Rational Beings: Freedom of the Will . Oxford.

[ page needed ] ^ Chiesa, Mecca (1994).

Radical Behaviorism: The Philosophy and The Science . Boston: Authors Cooperative.

ISBN 9780962331145 .

OCLC 30655079 .

^ Ringen, J. D. (1993).

"Adaptation, Teleology, and Selection by Consequences" .

Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis .

60 (1): 3– 15.

doi : 10.1901/jeab.1993.60-3 .

ISSN 0022-5002 .

OCLC 5156682422 .

PMC 1322142 .

PMID 16812698 – via Wiley Online Library.

^ Stobaeus Eclogae I 5 ( Heraclitus ) ^ Stobaeus Eclogae I 4 ( Leucippus ) ^ Susanne Bobzien Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy (Oxford 1998) chapter 1.

^ Susanne Bobzien The Inadvertent Conception and Late Birth of the Free-Will Problem (Phronesis 43, 1998).

^ Michael Frede A Free Will: Origins of the Notion in Ancient Thought (Berkeley 2011).

^ Though Moses Maimonides was not arguing against the existence of God, but rather for the incompatibility between the full exercise by God of his omniscience and genuine human free will , his argument is considered by some as affected by modal fallacy.

^ The Eight Chapters of Maimonides on Ethics (Semonah Perakhim) , edited, annotated, and translated with an Introduction by Joseph I. Gorfinkle, pp. 99–100. (New York: AMS Press), 1966.

^ Swartz, Norman (2003) The Concept of Physical Law . Chapter 10: "Free Will and Determinism" https://www.sfu.ca/philosophy/physical-law/ ^ Durmaz, H.; Çapik, C. (March 2023).

"Are Health Fatalism and Styles of Coping with Stress Affected by Poverty? A Field Study" .

Iranian Journal of Public Health .

52 (3).

Tehran University of Medical Sciences : 575– 583.

doi : 10.18502/ijph.v52i3.12140 .

ISSN 2251-6093 .

PMC 10135518 .

PMID 37124894 .

S2CID 257501917 .

Fatalism is the belief that everything an individual may encounter in his life is determined against his will and that this destiny cannot be changed by effort. In a fatalistic attitude, individuals believe that they cannot control their lives and that there is no point in making choices. Fatalism is a response to overwhelming threats that seem uncontrollable.

^ Rice, Hugh (Winter 2018).

"Fatalism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Stanford University : Center for the Study of Language and Information . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ Solomon, Robert C.

(October 2003). "On Fate and Fatalism".

Philosophy East and West .

53 (4).

University of Hawaii Press : 435– 454.

doi : 10.1353/pew.2003.0047 .

JSTOR 1399977 .

S2CID 170753493 .

^ Stambaugh, Joan (1994).

" Amor dei and Amor fati : Spinoza and Nietzsche" .

The Other Nietzsche .

SUNY Press . pp.

79– 81.

ISBN 9781438420929 .

^ Taylor, Richard (January 1962). "Fatalism".

The Philosophical Review .

71 (1).

Duke University Press on behalf of the Sage School of Philosophy at Cornell University : 56– 66.

doi : 10.2307/2183681 .

ISSN 1558-1470 .

JSTOR 2183681 .

^ a b al-Abbasi, Abeer Abdullah (August 2020).

"The Arabsʾ Visions of the Upper Realm" .

Marburg Journal of Religion .

22 (2).

University of Marburg : 1– 28.

doi : 10.17192/mjr.2020.22.8301 .

ISSN 1612-2941 . Retrieved 23 May 2022 .

^ a b c Bodewitz, Henk (2019). "Chapter 1 – The Hindu Doctrine of Transmigration: Its Origin and Background". In Heilijgers, Dory H.; Houben, Jan E. M.; van Kooij, Karel (eds.).

Vedic Cosmology and Ethics: Selected Studies . Gonda Indological Studies. Vol. 19.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

3– 19.

doi : 10.1163/9789004400139_002 .

ISBN 978-90-04-40013-9 .

ISSN 1382-3442 .

^ House, H. Wayne. 1991. "Resurrection, Reincarnation, and Humanness." Bibliotheca Sacra 148 (590). Retrieved 29 November 2013.

^ a b c d e f Balcerowicz, Piotr (2016).

"Determinism, Ājīvikas, and Jainism" .

Early Asceticism in India: Ājīvikism and Jainism . Routledge Advances in Jaina Studies (1st ed.).

London and New York : Routledge . pp.

136– 174.

ISBN 9781317538530 .

The Ājīvikas' doctrinal signature was indubitably the idea of determinism and fate , which traditionally incorporated four elements: the doctrine of destiny ( niyati-vāda ), the doctrine of predetermined concurrence of factors ( saṅgati-vāda ), the doctrine of intrinsic nature ( svabhāva-vāda ), occasionally also linked to materialists , and the doctrine of fate ( daiva-vāda ), or simply fatalism. The Ājīvikas' emphasis on fate and determinism was so profound that later sources would consistently refer to them as niyati-vādins , or 'the propounders of the doctrine of destiny'.

^ a b c Leaman, Oliver , ed. (1999).

"Fatalism" .

Key Concepts in Eastern Philosophy . Routledge Key Guides (1st ed.).

London and New York : Routledge . pp.

80– 81.

ISBN 9780415173636 .

Fatalism.

Some of the teachings of Indian philosophy are fatalistic. For example, the Ajivika school argued that fate ( nyati ) governs both the cycle of birth and rebirth , and also individual lives. Suffering is not attributed to past actions, but just takes place without any cause or rationale, as does relief from suffering. There is nothing we can do to achieve moksha , we just have to hope that all will go well with us. [...] But the Ajivikas were committed to asceticism , and they justified this in terms of its practice being just as determined by fate as anything else.

^ a b c d Basham, Arthur L.

(1981) [1951].

"Chapter XII: Niyati" .

History and Doctrines of the Ājīvikas, a Vanished Indian Religion . Lala L. S. Jain Series (1st ed.).

Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass . pp.

224– 238.

ISBN 9788120812048 .

OCLC 633493794 .

The fundamental principle of Ājīvika philosophy was Fate, usually called Niyati .

Buddhist and Jaina sources agree that Gosāla was a rigid determinist, who exalted Niyati to the status of the motive factor of the universe and the sole agent of all phenomenal change. This is quite clear in our locus classicus , the Samaññaphala Sutta . Sin and suffering, attributed by other sects to the laws of karma , the result of evil committed in the previous lives or in the present one, were declared by Gosāla to be without cause or basis, other, presumably, than the force of destiny. Similarly, the escape from evil, the working off of accumulated evil karma , was likewise without cause or basis.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Garfield, Jay L. (2014).

"Just Another Word for Nothing Left to Lose: Freedom, Agency, and Ethics for Mādhyamikas" . In Dasti, Matthew R.; Bryant, Edwin F. (eds.).

Free Will, Agency, and Selfhood in Indian Philosophy . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

172– 185.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199922734.003.0008 .

ISBN 9780199395675 .

LCCN 2013017925 .

^ a b c d e Thakchoe, Sonam (Summer 2022).

"The Theory of Two Truths in Tibet" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . The Metaphysics Research Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford University .

ISSN 1095-5054 .

OCLC 643092515 .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2022 . Retrieved 5 July 2022 .

^ Goldstein, Joseph (4 June 2008).

"Dependent Origination: The Twelve Links Explained" .

Tricycle: The Buddhist Review . Retrieved 26 January 2020 .

^ David Kalupahana, Causality: The Central Philosophy of Buddhism.

The University Press of Hawaii, 1975, page 78.

^ Choong, Mun-keat (2000).

The Fundamental Teachings of Early Buddhism: A Comparative Study Based on the Sutranga Portion of the Pali Samyutta-Nikaya and the Chinese Samyuktagama , pp. 192-197. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag.

^ Choong, Mun-keat (2000).

The Fundamental Teachings of Early Buddhism: A Comparative Study Based on the Sutranga Portion of the Pali Samyutta-Nikaya and the Chinese Samyuktagama, p. 192. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag.

^ Kaccānagottasutta SN 12.15 SN ii 16, translated by Bhikkhu Sujato https://suttacentral.net/sn12.15/en/sujato ^ a b c Repetti, Ricardo (2012).

"Buddhist Hard Determinism: No Self, No Free Will, No Responsibility" (PDF) .

Journal of Buddhist Ethics .

19 : 136– 137, 143– 145.

^ Lewis, Edwin R.; Macgregor, Ronald J. (1 June 2006).

"On indeterminism, chaos, and small number particle systems in the brain" .

Journal of Integrative Neuroscience .

05 (2): 223– 247.

doi : 10.1142/S0219635206001112 .

ISSN 0219-6352 .

PMID 16783870 .

^ Lewis, E.R.; MacGregor, R.J. (2006).

"On Indeterminism, Chaos, and Small Number Particle Systems in the Brain" (PDF) .

Journal of Integrative Neuroscience .

5 (2): 223– 247.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.361.7065 .

doi : 10.1142/S0219635206001112 .

PMID 16783870 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 June 2011.

^ Koch, Christof (2009). "Free Will, Physics, Biology and the Brain". In Murphy, Nancy; Ellis, George; O'Connor, Timothy (eds.).

Downward Causation and the Neurobiology of Free Will . New York: Springer .

Bibcode : 2009dcnf.book.....M .

ISBN 978-3-642-03204-2 .

^ a b c Kenrick, D. T.; Li, N. P.; Butner, J. (2003).

"Dynamical evolutionary psychology: Individual decision rules and emergent social norms" (PDF) .

Psychological Review .

110 (1): 3– 28.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.526.5218 .

doi : 10.1037/0033-295x.110.1.3 .

PMID 12529056 .

S2CID 43306158 .

^ a b c Nowak A., Vallacher R.R., Tesser A., Borkowski W., (2000) "Society of Self: The emergence of collective properties in self-structure", Psychological Review 107.

^ a b c Epstein, Joshua M.; Axtell, Robert (1996).

Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

ISBN 9780262272360 .

OCLC 42854515 .

^ a b c Epstein J.M. (1999) "Agent Based Models and Generative Social Science".

Complexity , IV (5) ^ "John Conway's Game of Life" .

^ Karl Popper: Conjectures and rRefutations [ page needed ] ^ Werndl, Charlotte (2009). "Are Deterministic Descriptions and Indeterministic Descriptions Observationally Equivalent?".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics .

40 (3): 232– 242.

arXiv : 1310.1615 .

Bibcode : 2009SHPMP..40..232W .

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsb.2009.06.004 .

S2CID 11515304 .

^ Werndl, Charlotte (2009).

Deterministic Versus Indeterministic Descriptions: Not That Different After All?

. In: A. Hieke and H. Leitgeb (eds), "Reduction, Abstraction, Analysis", Proceedings of the 31st International Ludwig Wittgenstein-Symposium . Ontos, 63–78.

^ J. Glimm, D. Sharp, Stochastic Differential Equations: Selected Applications in Continuum Physics , in: R.A. Carmona, B. Rozovskii (ed.) Stochastic Partial Differential Equations: Six Perspectives , American Mathematical Society (1998) ISBN 0-8218-0806-0 [ page needed ] ^ Hoefer, Carl (2024). Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.).

"Causal Determinism" . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 3 March 2025 .

^ Asher, Peres (2002). Peres, Asher (ed.).

Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

Bibcode : 2002qtcm.book.....P .

doi : 10.1007/0-306-47120-5 .

ISBN 978-0-7923-3632-7 .

^ Albert Einstein insisted that, "I am convinced God does not play dice" in a private letter to Max Born , 4 December 1926, Albert Einstein Archives Archived 19 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine reel 8, item 180 ^ Markoff, Jack (21 October 2015).

"Sorry, Einstein. Quantum Study Suggests 'Spooky Action' Is Real" .

New York Times . Retrieved 21 October 2015 .

^ Hensen; et al. (2015). "Loophole-free Bell inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometres".

Nature .

526 (7575): 682– 686.

arXiv : 1508.05949 .

Bibcode : 2015Natur.526..682H .

doi : 10.1038/nature15759 .

PMID 26503041 .

S2CID 205246446 .

^ Jabs, Arthur (2016). "A conjecture concerning determinism, reduction, and measurement in quantum mechanics".

Quantum Studies: Mathematics and Foundations .

3 (4): 279– 292.

arXiv : 1204.0614 .

Bibcode : 2016QSMF....3..279J .

doi : 10.1007/s40509-016-0077-7 .

S2CID 32523066 .

^ Vaidman, Lev (2021). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

"Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics" . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 3 March 2025 .

^ Zeilinger, Anton (2010).

Dance of the Photons: From Einstein to Quantum Teleportation . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 261.

ISBN 978-0-374-23966-4 .

A new picture of the world must encompass three properties that evidently seem to play a significant role in quantum experiments[...]The second important property of the world that we always implicitly assume is the freedom of the individual experimentalist. This is the assumption of free will. It is a free decision what measurement one wants to perform.

^ Gisin, Nicolas (2014).

Quantum Chance: Nonlocality, Teleportation and Other Quantum Marvels . Switzerland: Sringer International Publishing. p. 90.

ISBN 978-3-319-05472-8 .

not only does free will exist, but it is a prerequisite for science, philosophy, and our very ability to think rationally in a meaningful way. Without free will, there could be no rational thought. As a consequence, it is quite simply impossible for science and philosophy to deny free will.

^ BBC Radio interview with Paul Davies, 1985: " There is a way to escape the inference of superluminal speeds and spooky action at a distance. But it involves absolute determinism in the universe, the complete absence of free will. Suppose the world is super-deterministic, with not just inanimate nature running on behind-the-scenes clockwork, but with our behavior, including our belief that we are free to choose to do one experiment rather than another, absolutely predetermined, including the 'decision' by the experimenter to carry out one set of measurements rather than another, the difficulty disappears." ^ Hossenfelder, Sabine; Palmer, Tim (2020).

"Rethinking Superdeterminism" .

Frontiers in Physics .

8 : 139.

arXiv : 1912.06462 .

Bibcode : 2020FrP.....8..139P .

doi : 10.3389/fphy.2020.00139 .

ISSN 2296-424X .

^ Dirac, P. A. M. (1940).

"XI.—The Relation between Mathematics and Physics" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh .

59 : 122– 129.

doi : 10.1017/S0370164600012207 .

ISSN 0370-1646 .

^ Lehners, Jean-Luc (June 2023).

"Review of the no-boundary wave function" .

Physics Reports .

1022 : 1– 82.

arXiv : 2303.08802 .

Bibcode : 2023PhR..1022....1L .

doi : 10.1016/j.physrep.2023.06.002 .

^ Bishop, Robert C. (2011).

"Chaos, Indeterminism, and Free Will" . In Kane, Robert (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Free Will (2nd ed.). Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press. p. 90.

ISBN 978-0195399691 .

OCLC 653483691 .

^ Baggott, Jim E. (2004).

"Complementarity and Entanglement" .

Beyond Measure: Modern Physics, Philosophy, and the Meaning of Quantum Theory . Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press. p. 203.

ISBN 978-0-19-852536-3 .

OCLC 52486237 .

^ Lorenz, Edward N. (2008).

The Essence of Chaos . The Jessie and John Danz Lectures (Nachdr. ed.). Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press.

ISBN 978-0-295-97514-6 .

^ Lorenzo, Edward (2000). "The butterfly effect". In Abraham, Ralph; Ueda, Yoshisuke (eds.).

The chaos avant-garde: memories of the early days of chaos theory . World Scientific series on nonlinear science. Series A. Singapore ; River Edge, NJ: World Scientific.

ISBN 978-981-02-4404-0 .

OCLC 46653646 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Dennett, Daniel C. (2003).

Freedom Evolves . New York: Viking.

ISBN 9780670031863 .

OCLC 50339840 .

Earman, John (2007). "Aspects of Determinism in Modern Physics". In Butterfield, Jeremy; Earman, John (eds.).

Philosophy of Physics . North Amsterdam, Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V. pp.

1369– 1434.

doi : 10.1016/B978-044451560-5/50017-8 .

ISBN 978-0-444-51560-5 .

OCLC 162695073 .

Ellis, George F. R. (2006).

"Physics and the Real World" .

Foundations of Physics .

36 (2): 227– 262.

Bibcode : 2006FoPh...36..227E .

doi : 10.1007/s10701-005-9016-x .

ISSN 0015-9018 .

OCLC 5649285161 .

Epstein, J.M. (1999). "Agent Based Models and Generative Social Science".

Complexity .

IV (5): 41– 60.

Bibcode : 1999Cmplx...4e..41E .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.118.546 .

doi : 10.1002/(sici)1099-0526(199905/06)4:5<41::aid-cplx9>3.0.co;2-f .

Epstein, Joshua M.; Axtell, Robert (1996).

Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science From the Bottom Up . Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

ISBN 9780262050531 .

OCLC 35068114 .

Harris, James A. (2005) Of Liberty and Necessity: The Free Will Debate in Eighteenth-Century British Philosophy.

Clarendon Press.

Kenrick, D. T.; Li, N. P.; Butner, J. (2003).

"Dynamical evolutionary psychology: Individual decision rules and emergent social norms" (PDF) .

Psychological Review .

110 (1): 3– 28.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.526.5218 .

doi : 10.1037/0033-295x.110.1.3 .

PMID 12529056 .

S2CID 43306158 .

Albert Messiah , Quantum Mechanics , English translation by G. M. Temmer of Mécanique Quantique , 1966, John Wiley and Sons, vol. I, chapter IV, section III.

Ernest Nagel (3 March 1960). "Determinism in history".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

20 (3): 291– 317.

doi : 10.2307/2105051 .

JSTOR 2105051 .

(Online version found here ) John T Roberts (2006).

"Determinism" . In Sahotra Sarkar; Jessica Pfeifer (eds.).

The Philosophy of Science: A–M . Taylor & Francis. pp. 197 ff .

ISBN 978-0415977098 .

Nowak A., Vallacher R.R., Tesser A., Borkowski W., (2000) "Society of Self: The emergence of collective properties in self-structure", Psychological Review 107.

Further reading [ edit ] George Musser , "Is the Cosmos Random?  ( Einstein 's assertion that God does not play dice with the universe has been misinterpreted)", Scientific American , vol. 313, no. 3 (September 2015), pp. 88–93.

Sapolsky, Robert M.

(2023).

Determined: A Science of Life Without Free Will . New York: Penguin Press .

ISBN 978-0-5255-6097-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Determinism .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Determinism .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Causal Determinism Determinism in History from the Dictionary of the History of Ideas Philosopher Ted Honderich's Determinism web resource Determinism on Information Philosopher The Society of Natural Science Archived 26 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine Determinism and Free Will in Judaism Snooker, Pool, and Determinism v t e Determinism Types Architectural Biological Cultural Economic Environmental Genetic Historical Linguistic Nominative Psychic Psychological Reciprocal Social Technological Theological Related topics Causality Proximate and ultimate causation Correlation does not imply causation Contingency (philosophy) Etiology Cause (medicine) Falliblism Illusionism Destiny Deterministic system Essentialism and non-essentialism Fatalism Free will Compatibilism Hard determinism Indeterminism Predeterminism Metaphysical necessity Necessitarianism Superdeterminism Uncertainty principle Libertarianism (metaphysics) Links to related articles v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Belief systems Abrahamism Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Deism Dharmism Dualism Esotericism Feminist theology Gnosticism Henotheism Immanence Monism Monolatry Monotheism Mysticism Neoplatonism New Age New Thought Nondualism Pandeism Pantheism Panentheism Polytheism Process theology Religious naturalism Shamanism Shramanism Taoic Theism Transcendence v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time v t e Time travel General concepts Chronology protection conjecture Closed timelike curve Novikov self-consistency principle Self-fulfilling prophecy Quantum mechanics of time travel Philosophy Philosophy of space and time Butterfly effect Determinism Eternalism Fatalism Free will Predestination Causality Causal loop Causality (physics) Causal structure Chronology protection conjecture Cosmic censorship hypothesis The chicken or the egg Many-worlds interpretation Grandfather paradox Quantum mechanics of time travel Time viewer Temporal paradox Grandfather paradox Time loop Time travel in fiction Timelines in fiction Time travel in fiction Time loops in film Major works: The Time Machine Parallel timelines Alternative future Alternate history Many-worlds interpretation Multiverse Parallel universes in fiction Circular spacetime in general relativity Alcubierre metric BTZ black hole Closed timelike curves Gödel metric Kerr metric Krasnikov tube Misner space Tipler cylinder van Stockum dust Traversable wormholes Theoretical physics Wormhole Orientability Cauchy horizon Quantum mechanics of time travel Quantum gravity Chronology protection conjecture Retrocausality Time reversal symmetry Wheeler–Feynman time-symmetric theory Minkowski spacetime Time in physics Four-dimensionalism Tipler time machine Related Science fiction Time machine Games: List of four-dimensional games 5D Chess with Multiverse Time Travel v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cdqmm
Cached time: 20250816102720
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.650 seconds
Real time usage: 2.006 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11429/1000000
Revision size: 93935/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 681792/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 133663/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 474037/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.921/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9687984/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1526.902      1 -total
 42.43%  647.835      1 Template:Reflist
 14.77%  225.449     36 Template:Cite_book
 12.49%  190.755     32 Template:Cite_journal
  9.04%  138.054      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.63%  131.822     19 Template:Navbox
  7.47%  114.022      2 Template:Sister_project
  7.34%  112.087      2 Template:Side_box
  6.99%  106.745     13 Template:Fix
  6.97%  106.357      8 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47922:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816102720 and revision id 1304518315. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Determinism&oldid=1304518315 " Categories : Determinism Causality Metaphysical theories Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2021 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014 All articles with minor POV problems Articles with minor POV problems from December 2022 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from March 2025 Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2022 All articles with style issues Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 14:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Determinism 68 languages Add topic

