Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 In contemporary society 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gynocentrism 25 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Kapampangan Kiswahili Lietuvių Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dominant or exclusive focus on women in theory or practice Gynocentrism is a dominant or exclusive focus on women in theory or practice.

[ 1 ] Anything can be gynocentric when it is considered exclusively with a female or feminist point of view in mind.

[ 2 ] The opposite practice, placing the masculine point of view at the centre, is androcentrism .

Etymology [ edit ] The term gynocentrism is derived from ancient Greek , γυνή and κέντρον. Γυνή can be translated as woman or female , but also as wife .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In ancient Greek compounds with γυνή, the stem γυναικ- is normally used.

[ 4 ] This stem can be spotted in the genitive case γυναικός, [ 3 ] and in the older form of the nominative case γύναιξ.

[ 3 ] In ancient Greek, no compounds are known to exist with γυνή that start with γυνο- or γυνω-.

[ 4 ] The ancient Greek word κέντρον can be translated as sharp point , [ 4 ] sting (of bees and wasps) , [ 4 ] point of a spear [ 4 ] and stationary point of a pair of compasses , [ 4 ] with the meaning centre of a circle related to the latter.

[ 4 ] The meaning centre/middle point (of a circle) is preserved in the Latin word centrum , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] a loanword from ancient Greek.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The English word centre is derived from the Latin centrum .

[ 7 ] The word κέντρον is derived from the verb κεντεῖν, [ 4 ] [ 6 ] meaning to sting (of bees) , [ 4 ] to prick , [ 4 ] to goad , [ 4 ] and to spur .

[ 4 ] When trying to explain etymologically the term gynocentrism , it is important to consider the ancient Greek κέντρον, with the signification middle point/centre , and not the more obvious ancient Greek word κεντρισμός (mirroring -centrism ).

History [ edit ] The term gynocentrism has been in use since at least 1897 when it appeared in The Open Court stating that Continental Europeans view Americans "as suffering rather from gynocentrism than anthropocentrism." [ 8 ] In 1914, author George A. Birmingham found American social life to be "gynocentric"; it was "arranged with a view to the convenience and delight of women." [ 9 ] Beginning with second-wave feminism in the 1970s, the term gynocentrism has been used to describe difference feminism , which displayed a shift towards understanding and accepting gender differences, in contrast to equality feminism .

[ 10 ] In contemporary society [ edit ] The Men Going Their Own Way (MGTOW) community describes themselves as a backlash against the "misandry of gynocentrism".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] According to University of Massachusetts philosopher Christa Hodapp, in modern men's movements gynocentrism is described as a continuation of the courtly love conventions of medieval times, wherein women were valued as a quasi- aristocratic class , and males were seen as a lower serving class. This viewpoint describes feminism as the perpetuation of oppressive medieval conventions such as devotional chivalry and romanticized relationships , rather than as a movement towards liberation.

[ 13 ] J. Lasky has characterized gynocentrism as a potential response to androcentrism, [ 14 ] and that gynocentrism has been used as an argument by anti-feminists, who believe that gynocentrism is anti-male.

[ 14 ] In a 2019 study of Trinidad society published in the Justice Policy Journal , researchers concluded that "gynocentrism pervades all aspects of the criminal justice system." [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Criticism [ edit ] Christina Hoff Sommers has argued that gynocentrism is anti-intellectual and holds an antagonistic view of traditional scientific and creative disciplines, dismissing many important discoveries and artistic works as masculine. Sommers also writes that the presumption of objectivity ascribed to many gynocentrist theories has stifled feminist discourse and interpretation.

[ 17 ] Feminist writer Lynda Burns alleges that gynocentrism is a magnification of celebration of women's positive differences—of women's history, myths, arts and music—as opposed to an assimilationist model privileging similarity to men.

[ 18 ] However observed in practice, the preeminence of women associated with gynocentric narratives is often seen as absolute: interpersonally, culturally, historically, politically, or in broader social contexts such as popular entertainment. As such, it can shade into what Rosalind Coward called "womanism... a sort of popularized version of feminism which acclaims everything women do and disparages men".

[ 19 ] In the 2006 book Legalizing Misandry religious studies professors Paul Nathanson and Katherine K. Young claim that feminist calls for equality or equity are a subterfuge for gynocentrism.

[ 20 ] Nathanson and Young state that ideologically, the overriding focus of gynocentrism is to prioritize women hierarchically, and as a result may be interpreted as misandry (hatred of and prejudice towards men).

[ 20 ] They claim that gynocentrism as a worldview has become de rigueur in law courts and government bureaucracies, resulting in systemic discrimination against men.

[ 20 ] They define gynocentrism as a form of essentialism as it focuses on the innate virtues of women and the innate vices of men.

[ 20 ] According to Margrit Eichler gynocentrism can be seen as sexist bias in social science research.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Androcentrism Gynocriticism Herstory Matriarchy Anthropocentrism References [ edit ] ^ Staff writer (2009), " Gynocentrism ", in OED (ed.).

Oxford English Dictionary - Vers.4.0 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199563838 .

^ Staff writer (2010), " Gynocentric ", in OED, ed. (2006).

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198614241 .

^ a b c Kraus, Ludwig A. (1844).

Kritisch-etymologisches medicinisches Lexikon (Dritte Auflage) . Göttingen, Germany: Deuerlich & Dieterich.

OCLC 491993305 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Liddell, Henry G.

; Scott, Robert (1940).

A Greek-English lexicon / a new edition revised and augmented throughout / by Sir Henry Stuart Jones; with the assistance of Roderick McKenzie and with the co-operation of many scholars . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

OCLC 630078019 .

^ a b Lewis, Charlton T.

; Short, Charles (1879).

A Latin dictionary founded on Andrews' edition of Freund's Latin dictionary . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

OCLC 223667500 .

^ a b c Saalfeld, Günther Alexander Ernst Adolf (1884).

Tensaurus Italograecus : ausführliches historisch-kritisches Wörterbuch der Griechischen Lehn- und Fremdwörter im Lateinischen . Wien: Druck und Verlag von Carl Gerold's Sohn, Buchhändler der Kaiserl. Akademie der Wissenschaften.

OCLC 46301119 .

^ Klein, Ernest (1971).

A comprehensive etymological dictionary of the English language: Dealing with the origin of words and their sense development thus illustration the history of civilization and culture . Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.

OCLC 802030047 .

^ The Open Court , Volume 11 (Open Court Publishing Company, 1897) ^ George A. Birmingham, From Dublin to Chicago: Some Notes on a Tour in America (George H. Doran Company, 1914) ^ Nicholson, Linda J. (1997), " Gynocentrism: women's oppression, women's identity, and women's standpoint ", in Nicholson, Linda J., ed. (1997).

The second wave: a reader in feminist theory (Volume 1) . New York: Routledge. pp.

147– 151.

ISBN 9780415917612 .

^ Daubney, Martin (November 24, 2015).

"George Lawlor's story shows how universities have become hostile towards men" .

The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on April 15, 2016 . Retrieved January 14, 2016 .

^ Smith, C. Brian (September 28, 2016).

"The straight men who want nothing to do with women" .

MEL Magazine . Archived from the original on February 14, 2017.

^ Christa Hodapp, Men's Rights, Gender, and Social Media , Lexington Books (September 5, 2017) ISBN 1498526160 ^ a b Lasky, J. (2023). Gynocentrism.

Salem Press Encyclopedia .

^ Wallace, W. C., Gibson, C., Gordon, N. A., Lakhan, R., Mahabir, J., & Seetahal, C.

Domestic Violence: Intimate Partner Violence Victimization Non-Reporting to the Police in Trinidad and Tobago.

(2019) ^ Joseph-Edwards, Avis; Wallace, Wendell C. (2020-09-13).

"Suffering in Silence, Shame, Seclusion, and Invisibility: Men as Victims of Female Perpetrated Domestic Violence in Trinidad and Tobago" .

Journal of Family Issues .

42 (8): 1805– 1830.

doi : 10.1177/0192513x20957047 .

ISSN 0192-513X .

^ Hoff Sommers, Christina (1995), " Transforming the academy ", in Hoff Sommers, Christina , ed. (May 1995).

Who stole feminism?: How women have betrayed women . New York: Simon & Schuster. pp.

64–73 .

ISBN 9780684801568 .

^ La Caze, Marguerite (2006), " Splitting the difference: between Young and Fraser on identity politics ", in Burns, Lynda, ed. (2006).

Feminist alliances . Amsterdam New York: Rodopi. p.

153 .

ISBN 9789042017283 .

^ Coward, Rosalind (2000), " Introduction ", in Coward, Rosalind , ed. (2000).

Sacred cows: is feminism relevant to the new millennium . London: HarperCollins. p. 11.

ISBN 9780006548201 .

^ a b c d Nathanson, Paul; Young, Katherine K.

(2006).

Legalizing misandry: from public shame to systemic discrimination against men . Montreal Ithaca: McGill-Queen's University Press. pp. 58, 116, 209.

ISBN 9780773559998 .

^ Eichler, Margrit (1988).

Non-sexist research methods. A practical guide .

Allen and Unwin . p. 107.

External links [ edit ] Peter Wright, 'Gynocentrism As A Narcissistic Pathology' Peter Wright, 'Gynocentrism As A Narcissistic Pathology' (Part 2) Iris M. Young, 'Humanism, Gynocentrism and Feminist Politics' Gynocentrism and its Cultural Origins Gynocentric Eco-Logics International Academy HAGIA: Matriarchy Archived 2015-10-03 at the Wayback Machine v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gynocentrism&oldid=1297735197 " Categories : Feminist criticism Matriarchy Feminism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 05:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gynocentrism 25 languages Add topic

