Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Influencing factors Toggle Influencing factors subsection 1.1 Sex ratio 1.1.1 Reproductive dominance and infanticide under local mate competition 1.2 Resource value and social ranking 1.3 Winner–loser effects 2 Effect on female fitness 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Male intrasexual competition Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Competition between males to mate with a female In ethology , male-male intrasexual competition occurs when two males of the same species compete for the opportunity to mate with a female .

Sexually dimorphic traits, size, sex ratio , [ 1 ] and the social situation [ 2 ] may all play a role in the effects male-male competition has on the reproductive success of a male and the mate choice of a female. Larger males tend to win male-male conflicts due to their sheer strength and ability to ward off other males from taking over their females. For instance, in the fly Dryomyza anilis , size shows the strongest correlation to the outcome of male-male conflicts over resources like territory and females.

[ 3 ] Influencing factors [ edit ] Sex ratio [ edit ] Japanese medaka, Oryzias latipes Multiple types of male-male competition may occur in a population at different times depending on the conditions. Competition variation occurs based on the frequency of various mating behaviours present in the population.

[ 1 ] One factor that can influence the type of competition observed is the population density of males.

[ 1 ] When there is a high density of males present in the population, competition tends to be less aggressive and therefore sneak tactics and disruptions techniques are more often employed.

[ 1 ] These techniques often indicate a type of competition referred to as scramble competition.

[ 1 ] In Japanese medaka, Oryzias latipes , sneaking behaviours refer to when a male interrupts a mating pair during copulation by grasping on to either the male or the female and releasing their own sperm in the hopes of being the one to fertilize the female.

[ 1 ] Disruption is a technique which involves one male bumping the male that is copulating with the female away just before his sperm is released and the eggs are fertilized.

[ 1 ] However, all techniques are not equally successful when in competition for reproductive success. Disruption results in a shorter copulation period and can therefore disrupt the fertilization of the eggs by the sperm, which frequently results in lower rates of fertilization and smaller clutch size.

[ 1 ] Reproductive dominance and infanticide under local mate competition [ edit ] A female Sclerodermus wasp .

In this genus, dominant females may kill or suppress the sons of subordinate females, a form of reproductive competition that results in extremely female-biased sex ratios despite shared parental care .

[ 4 ] In some species, particularly parasitoid wasps like those in the genus Sclerodermus , females lay eggs communally and their offspring mate locally, creating strong local mate competition (LMC). Under classical LMC theory, the sex ratio is expected to become less biased as more females (foundress) contribute offspring, since their sons compete with a wider pool of males, not just their brothers.

[ 5 ] However, empirical studies have found persistently extreme female-biased sex ratios in Sclerodermus , even in large multi-foundress groups. Recent models propose that dominant foundresses suppress male production by subordinates, either by infanticide or by social dominance that prevents them from producing sons at all.

[ 5 ] This behavior skews the offspring sex ratio and alters the evolutionarily stable strategy predicted by classical models.

Resource value and social ranking [ edit ] Another factor that can influence male-male competition is the value of the resource to competitors. Male-male competition can pose many risks to a male's fitness, such as high energy expenditure, physical injury, lower sperm quality and lost paternity.

[ 6 ] The risk of competition must therefore be worth the value of the resource. A male is more likely to engage in competition for a resource that improves their reproductive success if the resource value is higher. While male-male competition can occur in the presence or absence of a female, competition occurs more frequently in the presence of a female.

[ 2 ] The presence of a female directly increases the resource value of a territory or shelter and so the males are more likely to accept the risk of competition when a female is present.

[ 2 ] The smaller males of a species are also more likely to engage in competition with larger males in the presence of a female.

[ 2 ] Due to the higher level of risk for subordinate males, they tend to engage in competition less frequently than larger, more dominant males and therefore breed less frequently than dominant males.

[ 6 ] This is seen in many species, such as the Omei treefrog, Rhacophorus omeimontis , where larger males obtain more mating opportunities and mate with larger females.

[ 7 ] Winner–loser effects [ edit ] A third factor that can impact the success of a male in competition is winner-loser effects .

[ 8 ] Burrowing crickets, Velarifictorus aspersus , compete for burrows to attract females using their large mandibles for fighting.

[ 8 ] Female burrowing crickets are more likely to choose winner of a competition in the 2 hours after the fight.

[ 8 ] The presence of a winning male suppresses mating behaviours of the losing males because the winning male tends to produce more frequent and enhanced mating calls in this period of time.

[ 8 ] Effect on female fitness [ edit ] Male-male competition can both positively and negatively affect female fitness. When there is a high density of males in a population and a large number of males attempting to mate with the female, she is more likely to resist mating attempts, resulting in lower fertilization rates.

[ 1 ] High levels of male-male competition can also result in a reduction in female investment in mating.

[ 6 ] Many forms of competition can also cause significant distress for the female negatively impacting her ability to reproduce.

[ 1 ] An increase in male-male competition can affect a female's ability to select the best mates, and therefore decrease the likelihood of successful reproduction.

[ 9 ] However, group mating in Japanese medaka increases the fitness of females due to an increase in genetic variation, a higher likelihood of paternal care, and a higher likelihood of successful fertilization.

[ 1 ] Exposure to environmental estrogens, such as some herbicides, can confuse female choice of males.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Female intrasexual competition References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Weir, Laura K. (2012-11-22). "Male–male competition and alternative male mating tactics influence female behavior and fertility in Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes)".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

67 (2): 193– 203.

doi : 10.1007/s00265-012-1438-9 .

S2CID 15410498 .

^ a b c d Proctor, D. S.; Moore, A. J.; Miller, C. W. (2012-03-09). "The form of sexual selection arising from male-male competition depends on the presence of females in the social environment".

Journal of Evolutionary Biology .

25 (5): 803– 812.

doi : 10.1111/j.1420-9101.2012.02485.x .

PMID 22404372 .

S2CID 594384 .

^ Otronen, Merja (1984-08-01). "Male contesis for territories and females in the fly Dryomyza Anilis".

Animal Behaviour .

32 (3): 891– 898.

doi : 10.1016/S0003-3472(84)80167-0 .

S2CID 53188298 .

^ Lehtonen, Jussi; Malabusini, Serena; Guo, Xiaomeng; Hardy, Ian C W (2023-02-01).

"Individual- and group-level sex ratios under local mate competition: consequences of infanticide and reproductive dominance" .

Evolution Letters .

7 (1): 13– 23.

doi : 10.1093/evlett/qrac005 .

ISSN 2056-3744 .

PMC 10091503 .

^ a b Lehtonen, Jussi; Malabusini, Serena; Guo, Xiaomeng; Hardy, Ian C W (2023-02-01).

"Individual- and group-level sex ratios under local mate competition: consequences of infanticide and reproductive dominance" .

Evolution Letters .

7 (1): 13– 23.

doi : 10.1093/evlett/qrac005 .

ISSN 2056-3744 .

PMC 10091503 .

^ a b c Nelson-Flower, Martha J.; Ridley, Amanda R. (2015-09-24). "Male-male competition is not costly to dominant males in a cooperatively breeding bird".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

69 (12): 1997– 2004.

Bibcode : 2015BEcoS..69.1997N .

doi : 10.1007/s00265-015-2011-0 .

ISSN 0340-5443 .

S2CID 15032582 .

^ Luo, Zhenhua; Li, Chenliang; Wang, Hui; Shen, Hang; Zhao, Mian; Gu, Qi; Liao, Chunlin; Gu, Zhirong; Wu, Hua (2016-02-23). "Male-male competition drives sexual selection and group spawning in the Omei treefrog, Rhacophorus omeimontis".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

70 (4): 593– 605.

Bibcode : 2016BEcoS..70..593L .

doi : 10.1007/s00265-016-2078-2 .

ISSN 0340-5443 .

S2CID 13912038 .

^ a b c d Zeng, Yang; Zhou, Feng-Hao; Zhu, Dao-Hong (2018-06-26).

"Fight outcome briefly affects the reproductive fitness of male crickets" .

Scientific Reports .

8 (1): 9695.

Bibcode : 2018NatSR...8.9695Z .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-018-27866-4 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 6018733 .

PMID 29946077 .

^ Cayuela, Hugo; Lengagne, Thierry; Kaufmann, Bernard; Joly, Pierre; Léna, Jean-Paul (2016-06-24).

"Larval competition risk shapes male–male competition and mating behavior in an anuran" .

Behavioral Ecology .

27 (6): arw100.

doi : 10.1093/beheco/arw100 .

^ McCallum, M.L., M. Matlock, J. Treas, B. Safi, W. Sanson, J.L. McCallum. (2013). Endocrine disruption of sexual selection by an estrogenic herbicide in Tenebrio molitor. Ecotoxicology 22:1461-1466.

v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Male_intrasexual_competition&oldid=1304786317 " Categories : Evolutionary biology Sexual selection Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 04:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Male intrasexual competition Add languages Add topic

