Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Christian laity Toggle Christian laity subsection 2.1 Catholic Church 2.1.1 Second Vatican Council 2.1.2 Later developments 2.2 Orthodox 2.3 Protestantism 2.3.1 Anglicanism 2.3.2 Methodism 2.3.2.1 Lay ministry 2.3.2.2 Ministry of the laity 2.3.2.3 Worship leader 2.3.3 Presbyterianism 2.4 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 3 Lay Buddhists 4 Faith at work Toggle Faith at work subsection 4.1 Social Gospel 4.2 Ministry of the Laity 4.3 Faith at Work 4.4 Workplace as a mission field 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 7.1 Roman Catholic theology of the laity 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Laity 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Esperanto Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Members of a religious organization who are not part of the clergy "Layman" redirects here. For the community, see Layman, Ohio . For the surname, see Layman (surname) . For "layman's terms", see Plain English . For the butterfly, see Amauris albimaculata .

In religious organizations , the laity ( / ˈ l eɪ ə t i / ) — individually a layperson , layman or laywoman — consists of all members who are not part of the clergy , usually including any non- ordained members of religious orders , e.g. a nun or a lay brother .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In secular usage, by extension, a layperson is a person who is not qualified in a given profession or is not an expert in a particular field.

[ 3 ] The phrase " layman's terms " is used to refer to plain language that is understandable to the everyday person, as opposed to specialised terminology understood only by a professional.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Terms such as lay priest , lay clergy and lay nun were once used in certain Buddhist cultures, especially Japanese, to indicate ordained persons who continued to live in the wider community instead of retiring to a monastery . Some Christian churches utilise lay preachers , who preach but are not clergy. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints uses the term lay priesthood to emphasise that its local congregational leaders are unpaid.

[ 6 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word laity means "common people" and comes from the Greek : λαϊκός , romanized : laikos , meaning "of the people", from λαός , laos , meaning "people" at large.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The word lay (part of layperson , etc.) derives from the Greek word via Anglo-French lai , from Late Latin laicus .

[ 2 ] Christian laity [ edit ] The person standing in the pulpit wearing vestments is a cleric, whereas the people seated below are of the laity.

In many Christian denominations , including the Catholic and the Anglican churches, anyone who is not ordained as a deacon , priest ( elder ), or bishop is referred to as a layman or a laywoman.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Catholic Church [ edit ] Main article: Catholic laity Second Vatican Council [ edit ] The Second Vatican Council (1962–1965) devoted its decree on the apostolate of the laity Apostolicam actuositatem [ 9 ] and chapter IV of its dogmatic constitution Lumen gentium to the laity in a sense narrower than that which is normal in the Catholic Church . The normal definition of laity is that given in the Code of Canon Law : By divine institution, there are among the Christian faithful in the Church sacred ministers who in law are also called clerics; the other members of the Christian faithful are called lay persons.
There are members of the Christian faithful from both these groups who, through the profession of the evangelical counsels by means of vows or other sacred bonds recognized and sanctioned by the Church, are consecrated to God in their own special way and contribute to the salvific mission of the Church; although their state does not belong to the hierarchical structure of the Church, it nevertheless belongs to its life and holiness.

[ 11 ] The narrower sense in which the Second Vatican Council gave instruction concerning the laity is as follows: The term laity is here understood to mean all the faithful except those in holy orders and those in the state of religious life specially approved by the Church. These faithful are by baptism made one body with Christ and are constituted among the People of God; they are in their own way made sharers in the priestly, prophetical, and kingly functions of Christ; and they carry out for their own part the mission of the whole Christian people in the Church and in the world.

[ 12 ] In this narrower sense, the Council taught that the laity's specific character is secularity: they are Christians who live the life of Christ in the world. Their role is to sanctify the created world by directing it to become more Christian in its structures and systems: "the laity, by their very vocation, seek the kingdom of God by engaging in temporal affairs and by ordering them according to the plan of God".

[ 12 ] The laity are full members of the Church, fully share in Church's purpose of sanctification, of "inner union of men with God", [ 13 ] acting with freedom and personal responsibility and not as mere agents of the hierarchy. Due to their baptism , they are members of God's family, the Church, and they grow in intimate union with God, "in" and "by means" of the world. It is not a matter of departing from the world as the monks and the nuns do that they sanctify themselves; it is precisely through the material world sanctified by the coming of the God made flesh, i.e. made material, that they reach God. Doctors, mothers of a family, farmers, bank tellers, drivers, by doing their jobs in the world with a Christian spirit are already extending the Kingdom of God. According to the repeated statements of Popes and lay Catholic leaders, the laity should say "we are the Church", in the same way that the saints said that "Christ lives in me." [ 14 ] The first official document issued by the Council, Sacrosanctum Concilium or the Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy , also referred to a role to be played by "qualified lay persons" ( Latin : laicis congruis qualitatibus ).

[ 15 ] Lay involvement takes diverse forms, including participation in the life of the parish, confraternities , lay apostolates , secular institutes , and lay ecclesial movements . There are also lay ecclesiastical ministries , and where there is a priest shortage , lay people have to take on some functions previously performed by priests.

Later developments [ edit ] See also: Theology of Pope Francis § Clericalism In December 1977, "A Chicago Declaration of Christian Concern" was published. The declaration looked back a decade to the Vatican Council II with appreciation for its "compelling vision of lay Christians in society." As the Declaration interpreted it, the Council viewed the laity's "special vocation" as being the "leaven" for the "sanctification of the world" in their "secular professions and occupations". However, lamented the Declaration, the council's vision has "all but vanished" from the church.

The Declaration was signed by forty-seven clergy, religious, and laity that included men and women in many occupations, and it served as the charter for the National Center for the Laity (NCL).

[ 16 ] The NCL helps lay Catholics respond to their call to change the world through their daily activities and regular responsibilities, [ 17 ] and it publishes a monthly online newsletter Initiatives: In Support of Christians in the World.

[ 18 ] Initiatives: In Support of Christians in the World (January 2015) rejoiced that "50 Years since Vatican II" the increased lay ministry in parishes has "brought fresh vitality". However, the newsletter lamented "the neglect of formation for the lay apostolate in the world".

Pope Francis is quoted as confirming this lament. Priests tend to "clericalize the laity" and view their ministry as only "within the Church," discounting their "workaday" ministry.

[ 19 ] From the start of his papacy Francis called for structural change in the Church which will foster the responsibility of the laity now held "at the edge of the decisions" by  "excessive clericalism", and to "create still broader opportunities for a more incisive female presence in the Church". The "missionary transformation of the Church" is seen by some as "the goal of this pontificate", [ 20 ] with all the baptized becoming "missionary disciples", [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Orthodox [ edit ] The Orthodox Church in America 's web site has eleven articles regarding its Theology of Lay Ministries.

[ 23 ] The term "lay ministries" refers to all the "people of God" (from the Greek laos tou Theou ) including the ordained.

[ 24 ] Thus, every Christian has a vocation to ministry. A minority are called to ecclesiastical ministries. The majority are called to serve God and their fellow human beings in some way in the "everyday secular world".

[ 25 ] The Orthodox Church's assertion that all Christians are "appointed" as ministers is based on Scripture (1 Peter 2:9 [ 26 ] ) and the Church Fathers . The ministry of the laity complements the ministry of the priest in their daily lives in their families, their communities, their work: "in whatever circumstances they find themselves". The most important "lay ministry" can be done anonymously. What one's ministry is depends on the abilities of the person: "landscaping, carpentry, writing, counseling, child care, sports, music, teaching, or just being a good listener".

[ 27 ] The relation within the laity as the "people of God" between those who are ordained priests and those not ordained is one of cooperation in three areas: (1) in the Liturgy , (2) Church administration, and (3) service (ministry) to others.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In spite of the church's teaching about the ministry of the laity in the world, the church gives more recognition to ministry within the institutional church. The "daily ministry" of the laity in their work, in their homes, and in their recreation remains hidden. Priests may intend to support their parishioners' daily ministry, but their priority tends to be recruiting volunteers for the church's programs.

[ 30 ] Protestantism [ edit ] Anglicanism [ edit ] In the Anglican tradition, all baptized persons are expected to minister in Christ's name. The orders of ministry are thus laypersons, licensed lay ministers (or readers), deacons, priests, and bishops.

[ 31 ] The ministry of the laity is "to represent Christ and his Church; to bear witness to him wherever they may be; and, according to the gifts given them, to carry on Christ's work of reconciliation in the world; and to take their place in the life, worship, and governance of the Church".

[ 32 ] Much of the ministry of the laity thus takes place outside official church structures in homes, workplaces, schools, and elsewhere. It is "through their continuous participation in political, economic, educational, and kinship institutions" that the laity "powerfully influence the character of these institutions".

[ 33 ] Laymen also play important roles in the structures of the church. There are elected lay representatives on the various governing bodies of churches in the Anglican communion. In the Church of England , these governing bodies range from a local parochial church council , through Deanery Synods and Diocesan Synods . At the topmost level, the General Synod includes a house of Laity. Likewise, in the Episcopal Church in the USA, the General Convention includes four lay persons from each diocese in the House of Deputies, and each diocesan convention includes lay delegates from the parishes.

[ 34 ] On the local parish level, lay persons are elected to a church council called a vestry which manages church finances and elects the parish rector .

Parish musicians, bookkeepers, administrative assistants, sextons , sacristans , etc., are all roles normally filled by lay persons. At higher levels, diocesan and national offices rely on lay persons in many important areas of responsibility. Often specialized ministries as campus ministers, youth ministers, or hospital chaplains are performed by lay persons.

Lay persons serve in worship services in a number of important positions, including vergers , acolytes , lectors , intercessors , ushers . Acolytes include torch bearers, crucifers , thurifers , and boat bearers . Lectors read the lessons from the Bible appointed for the day (except for the Gospel reading, which is read by a Deacon), and may also lead the Prayers of the People.

Some specialized lay ministries require special licensing by the bishop: the ministries which require a license vary from province to province. In the Episcopal Church, there are six specialized lay ministries requiring a license: Pastoral Leader, Worship Leader, Preacher, Eucharistic Minister, Eucharistic Visitor, and Catechist.

[ 35 ] Methodism [ edit ] Lay ministry [ edit ] Main article: Methodist local preacher See also: Circuit rider (religious) An early tradition of preaching in the Methodist churches was for a lay preacher to be appointed to lead services of worship and preach in a group (called a circuit ) of preaching houses or churches. The lay preacher walked or rode on horseback in a prescribed circuit of the preaching places according to an agreed pattern and timing, and people came to the meetings. After the appointment of ministers and pastors, this lay preaching tradition continued with local preachers being appointed by individual churches, and in turn approved and invited by nearby churches, as an adjunct to the minister or during their planned absences.

[ 36 ] The United Methodist Church recognizes two types of lay ministries. One is a "lay servant ministry" of (a) assisting or leading local church meetings and worship or of (b) serving as lay missioners to begin new work within the church that requires special training.

[ 37 ] The other type is the "ministry of the laity" in their daily lives.

[ 38 ] In addition to being appointed by members of their local churches, local and certified lay speakers of the United Methodist Church (more commonly in the United States) attend a series of training sessions. These training sessions prepare the individual to become a leader within the church.

[ 39 ] All individuals who are full members of the church are laity, but some go on to become Lay Speakers. Some preachers get their start as Lay Speakers.

[ 40 ] Local preachers lead the majority of church services in the Methodist Church of Great Britain . The comparable term in the Anglican and Episcopal churches is lay reader .

[ 41 ] In the Uniting Church in Australia , that was constituted in part from the Methodist Church, persons can be appointed by the congregation as a lay preacher or by the regional presbytery to preside at Communion .

[ citation needed ] Ministry of the laity [ edit ] The Methodist Book of Discipline describes the "Ministry of the Laity" in their daily lives as being "Christ-like examples of everyday living" and "sharing their own faith experiences".

[ 42 ] Worship leader [ edit ] In the Methodist Church of Great Britain , a "worship leader" is a trained lay person appointed by a Church Council to "take a leading and significant role in the conduct of worship within the life of a Local Church".

[ 43 ] Presbyterianism [ edit ] Presbyterians do not use the term "lay". Thus the Church of Scotland has "Readers", men and women set apart by presbyteries to conduct public worship.  This arises out of the belief in the priesthood of all believers .  Ministers are officially 'teaching elders' alongside the 'ruling elders' of the Kirk Session and have equivalent status, regardless of any other office.  In the Church of Scotland, as the Established church in Scotland, this gives ruling elders in congregations the same status as Queen's chaplains, professors of theology and other highly qualified ministers.  All are humble servants of the people in the congregation and parish.
Ministers are simply men and women whose gift is for their role in teaching and possibly pastoral work. They are thus selected for advanced theological education.  All elders (teaching and ruling) in meetings of Session, Presbytery, or Assembly are subject to the Moderator, who may or may not be a minister but is always an elder.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [ edit ] Main article: Priesthood (LDS Church) Many leaders in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are lay ministers.  Essentially all male members above the age of 12 who are judged by church leaders to be in good standing are ordained to an office of the priesthood and hold various positions in the church. Most church positions at the local level are unpaid, but the LDS church helps with the living expenses of top church leaders and some others (e.g.

mission presidents ). Many top church leaders serve in these positions after long secular careers. With the exception of members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles , the First Quorum of the Seventy who are at the top of the church hierarchy, and patriarchs , all leadership positions are temporary.

Lay Buddhists [ edit ] Main article: Householder (Buddhism) In Buddhism , a lay Buddhist is known as an upasakā (masc.) or upasikā (fem.). Buddhist laypeople take refuge in the Triple Gem the Buddha , Dhamma (His Teachings ), and Sangha (His community of Noble Disciples ) and accept the Five Precepts (or the Eight Precepts during Uposatha Days ) as discipline for ethical conduct.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Laymen and laywomen are two of the "Four-fold Assembly". The Buddha referred to his disciples as the "Four-fold Assembly" – the gatherings of 'bhikkhū' (monks), 'bhikkhunī' (nuns), 'upasakā' (laymen), and 'upasikā' (laywomen).  In the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta , the Buddha famously said that "He would not pass away until the "Four-fold Assembly" is well-established in the learning and practice of Dhamma, and proficient in propagating His Sublime Teachings." [ 46 ] Faith at work [ edit ] It has been suggested that this section be split out  into another article. ( Discuss ) (November 2024) The movement to help laity apply their faith to daily life has been divided into three eras by David W. Miller in God at Work .

[ 47 ] The Social Gospel Era (c. 1890s—1945) The Ministry of the Laity Era (c.1946—1985) The Faith at Work Era (c. 1985—Present) Social Gospel [ edit ] The Social Gospel sought to reform society by the application of biblical principles. Its major proponents were all clergy: Washington Gladden , Charles Monroe Sheldon , and Walter Rauschenbusch . They were better in diagnosing society's ills than finding remedies.

[ 48 ] The Social Gospel reached its peak just prior to World War I, a war that contradicted its optimism about Christianizing society.

[ 49 ] The Social Gospel was promulgated by the preaching, writing, and other efforts of clergy on behalf of the laity rather than by the laity themselves.

[ 50 ] In the early 1930s, the Social Gospel was described as "a preacher's gospel.  It has not been the church's gospel. The laity have little share in it." Many were not aware what their clergy believed.

[ 51 ] Most scholars hold that the Social Gospel movement peaked between 1900 and World War I. There is less agreement about when and why the decline happened.

[ 52 ] Ministry of the Laity [ edit ] The Ministry of the Laity in daily life premise was stated by Howard Grimes [ 53 ] in his The Rebirth of the Laity .
"Although it is not alone through our daily work that we exercise our call, there is a special sense in which we do so in that area, since so much of our lives are spent in our occupations as lawyer, doctor, manual laborer, skilled craftsmen, housewife, domestic servant, student, serviceman." [ 54 ] In 1988, Dean Reber of the Auburn Theological Seminary wrote a retrospective of the Ministry of the Laity era based on research and survey. His research participants were women and men in equal numbers, aged 20 to 60, from six denominations. Reber found that "all were really interested to link faith with their daily life and work". However, in his survey, Reber found that little had been done in the six denominations to enable laity to make this link. He observed a "preoccupation with activities inside the church", as well as a lack of literature and programs on the subject. For these reasons, attempts to link faith and daily life "fizzled out".

[ 55 ] For Miller, "hindsight suggests that the institutional church and its leaders never fully embraced or understood lay ministry". Therefore, they stopped promoting the "ministry of the laity" concept to their members.

[ 56 ] Faith at Work [ edit ] Miller deems "Faith at Work" to be "a bona fide social movement and here to stay".

[ 57 ] Unlike earlier movements, business people (from evangelical and mainline Protestant denominations, Roman Catholics, Jews, Buddhists, and unaffiliated) initiated the faith at work movement and support it because they want to connect their work and their faith. Management training often includes a faith dimension.

[ 58 ] Examples of various kinds of faith at work initiatives follow: The Theology of Work Project is an independent international organization that produces materials for "workplace Christians" to teach them what the Bible and the Christian faith can contribute to ordinary work.

[ 59 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The National Center for the Laity (NCL) grew out of the 1977 "A Chicago Declaration of Christian Concern." [ 16 ] It propagates the Second Vatican Council 's teaching about laity's vocation as "daily work".

[ 60 ] The NCL's primary voice is Initiatives: In Support of Christians in the World . In its January 2015 issue, Initiatives listed worldwide initiatives taken by laity in connecting faith and work.

[ 19 ] C12 Group offers training laced with Christian principles for CEO/Owners by monthly all-day meetings led by former CEOs. In its name, "C" stands for Christ, "12" stands for its ideal training group size. Group membership costs up to $1,450 per month. Some 1,500 Christian CEO/Owners belong to C12.

[ 61 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Denver Institute for Faith & Work is a regional, nonprofit organization dedicated to forming men and women to serve God, neighbor and society through their daily work.

[ 62 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The Princeton University Faith & Work Initiative develops resources regarding ethics and vocation at work. It disseminates its learnings by programs for students, academics, and leaders in the marketplace.

[ 63 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The Industrial Christian Fellowship helps its "members and others to live out their faith at their work" by research and publications.

[ 64 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The Christian Association of Business Executives (CABE) "exists to Inform, Inspire and Influence Christian business people from all church backgrounds and all types of business, as they seek to live out their faith day to day." [ 65 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Workplace as a mission field [ edit ] Some faith at work initiatives focus not on work itself but on the workplace as a "mission field". In this "business as missions" concept, faith at work means "reaching people for Christ in the marketplace", people that career missionaries could not reach.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] For example, Member Mission "teaches the baptized to see themselves as missionaries out in the world in each of their daily places".

[ 68 ] See also [ edit ] Laicism Lay brother Laypeople (disambiguation) References [ edit ] ^ Laity Archived 2020-10-13 at the Wayback Machine at the Catholic Encyclopedia ^ a b "lay person — definition of lay person by the Free Online Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia" . Thefreedictionary.com.

Archived from the original on 1 January 2019 . Retrieved 24 June 2014 .

^ "Definition of LAYPERSON" .

www.merriam-webster.com .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2020 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

^ Baum, Caroline (8 September 2011).

"A Layman's Guide to the President's Jobs Speech: Caroline Baum" . Bloomberg.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2015 . Retrieved 3 April 2015 .

^ Murphy, Martin (February 2013).

Theological Terms in Layman Language . Martin Murphy.

ISBN 978-0-9856181-5-5 .

...simple words like faith or not so simple words like aseity are explained in plain language.

^ "How do Mormon congregations work?" .

news-nz.churchofjesuschrist.org . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ "laity - Dictionary Definition" .

Vocabulary.com .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2020 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

^ "Laity | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2020 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

^ a b "Apostolicam actuositatem" Archived 2015-06-25 at the Wayback Machine . Vatican.va. Retrieved on 2013-12-15.

^ "Don S. Armentrout and Robert Boak Slocum, editors, "An Episcopal Dictionary of the Church, A User Friendly Reference for Episcopalians" (Church Publishing Incorporated, 2000), s.v. "Lay Order" Online at" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Code of Canon Law, canon 207 Archived 2020-03-12 at the Wayback Machine . Vatican.va. Retrieved on 2013-12-15.

^ a b "Lumen gentium", 31 Archived 2014-09-06 at the Wayback Machine . Vatican.va. Retrieved on 2013-12-15.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church, 775 Archived 2020-03-08 at the Wayback Machine . Vatican.va.

^ "THE ROLE OF LAITY" .

blessedsacramentregina.ca . 4 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 7 January 2015 .

^ Second Vatican Council, Sacrosanctum Concilium , paragraph 79, published on 4 December 1963, accessed on 17 July 2025 ^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 February 2016 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Catholic Review - Archdiocese of Baltimore" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Initiatives: In Support of Christians in the World" .

www.catholiclabor.org . Archived from the original on 9 January 2015.

^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 January 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Pisano, Franco (26 November 2013).

"Pope: "A missionary and pastoral conversion" for a Church open to changing its structures" .

www.asianews.it .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ Francis, Pope (26 June 2019).

Go Forth: Toward a Community of Missionary Disciples . Orbis Books.

ISBN 978-1-60833-787-3 .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2020 .

^ Mannion, Gerard (24 April 2017).

Pope Francis and the Future of Catholicism: Evangelii Gaudium and the Papal Agenda . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-108-13274-9 .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 October 2020 .

^ "Accessed January 4, 2015" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Parish Ministry Resources - Ministry of People" .

oca.org .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2015 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ "Parish Ministry Resources - Finding One's Vocation in Life" .

oca.org .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2015 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ "1 Peter 2:9 but you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God's special possession, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light" .

biblehub.com . Archived from the original on 8 February 2015.

^ "Parish Ministry Resources - An Orthodox Vision of Lay Ministries" .

oca.org .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2015 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ "Parish Ministry Resources - Lay Ministry - A Shared Responsibility" .

oca.org .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2015 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ "the definition of ministry" .

www.dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2018 . Retrieved 27 October 2018 .

^ "Parish Ministry Resources - Ministry of Laity in Daily Life" .

oca.org .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2015 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ " The Book of Common Prayer according to the use of The Episcopal Church, 1979 edition , 855. Online at episcopalchurch.org" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 February 2015 . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ The Book of Common Prayer according to the use of The Episcopal Church , 1979 edition 855. Online at episcopalchurch.org Archived 2015-02-18 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gerhard Lenski, The Religious Factor: A Sociological Study of Religion's Impact on Politics, Economics, and Family Life (Anchor Books, 1963, rev. ed.), Section on "Religions Impact on Secular Institutions," 342-344.

^ "Governance Documents of the Church - The Archives of the Episcopal Church" (PDF) .

www.episcopalarchives.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 May 2015 . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ Canon 4, Title III, Constitution & Canons Together with the Rules of Order for the Government of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America , Adopted and Revised in General Convention, 2006 ^ Communications, United Methodist.

"Roots (1736–1816) – The United Methodist Church" .

The United Methodist Church .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2015 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ " "Lay Servant Ministry," Part VI, Ch 1, Sec XI, ¶¶ 266-271 of The Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church, 2012 (The United Methodist Publishing House, 2012). Online at cokesbury.com" .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2015 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ " "The Ministry of All Christians," Part IV, Sec II, ¶ 127, "The Ministry of the Laity," 95 of The Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church, 2012 (The United Methodist Publishing House, 2012). Online at cokesbury.com" .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2018 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 .

^ "Certified Lay Minister" .

unyumc.org .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ "Methodist e-Academy - Training" .

www.methodist-e-academy.org .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2014 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ Cole, John; The Co-Chairs of the Joint Implementation Commission for the Anglican-Methodist Covenant (April 2008).

"Local Preachers and Readers: Sharing Two Ministries" (PDF) . Anglican Methodist Covenant . Retrieved 29 April 2021 .

^ " "The Ministry of All Christians," Part IV, Sec II, ¶ 127, "The Ministry of the Laity," 95 of The Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church, 2012 (The United Methodist Publishing House, 2012). Online at cokesbury.com" .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2015 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ Constitutional Practice and Discipline of the Methodist Church, Book III: Standing Orders, section 68: Worship Leaders ^ 7. The Five Precepts . buddhanet.net ^ Five Precepts Dictionary | Global Oneness Archived 2013-12-15 at the Wayback Machine . Experiencefestival.com. Retrieved on 2013-12-15.

^ "Maha-parinibbana Sutta: Last Days of the Buddha" .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Donald W. Miller, God at Work: The History and Promise of the Faith at Work Movement (Oxford, 2006), Contents.

^ Ronald Cedric White, Charles Howard Hopkins, The Social Gospel: Religion and Reform in Changing America (Temple University, 1976). xviii.

^ "WorldViewEyes -> strauss-docs" .

www.worldvieweyes.org .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ ushistory.org.

"Religious Revival: The "Social Gospel" [ushistory.org]" .

www.ushistory.org .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ Charles C. Morrison The Social Gospel and The Christian Cultus, (Harper & Brothers, 1933), 42.

^ "Boundless. "The Social Gospel." Boundless U.S. History . Boundless, 14 Nov. 2014. Retrieved 16 Jan. 2015 from boundless.com" .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ "Lewis Howard Grimes" .

Biola University .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ Howard Grimes, The Rebirth of the Laity (Abingdon, 1962), 95.

^ Robert E. Reber, "Vocation and Vision: a New Look at the Ministry of the Laity" in Religious Education: the official journal of the Religious Education Association , 83:3, 1988. 402-411.

^ Donald W. Miller, God at Work: The History and Promise of the Faith at Work Movement (Oxford University Press, USA, 2006), 47.

^ results, search (14 December 2006).

"God at Work: The History and Promise of the Faith at Work Movement" . Oxford University Press.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 2 September 2017 – via Amazon.

^ Laura Nash and Scott McLennan, Church on Sunday, Work on Monday (Jossey-Bass, 2001), xxi-xxiv.

^ Work, Theology of.

"About - Theology of Work" .

www.theologyofwork.org .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Home - C12 Group" .

www.c12group.com .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ "Home - Denver Institute for Faith & Work" .

denverinstitute.org/ .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 .

^ "www.princeton.edu/faithandwork/" .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 17 January 2015 .

^ "www.icf-online.org" .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved 16 December 2015 .

^ "Home - Christian Association of Business Executives" .

Christian Association of Business Executives .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2015 . Retrieved 16 December 2015 .

^ "Business professionals advance God's kingdom - Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary" . Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ "Businessmen view marketplace as mission field - Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary" .

swbts.edu .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ "About Member Mission" .

Member Mission . 6 May 2013.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 17 December 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] Roman Catholic theology of the laity [ edit ] Burkhart, Ernst and López Díaz, Javier (2010, 2011, 2013), Vida cotidiana y santidad en la enseñanza de san Josemaría , 3 vols., Madrid: Rialp Congar, Yves Marie-Joseph (1957), Lay people in the Church: a study for a theology of laity , Westminster: Christian Classics Daniélou, Jean Guenolé-Marie (1955), Sainteté et action temporelle (in French), Paris-Tournai: Desclée Philips, G. (1954), Le rôle du laïcat dans l'Église (in French), Paris-Tournai {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Spiazzi, Raimondo (1951), La Missione dei Laici (in Italian), Rome {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Thils, G. (1946), Théologie des réalités terrestres, Paris.

Brown, Warren; Costambeys, Marios; Innes, Matthew; Kosto, Adam (2013).

Documentary Culture and the Laity in the Early Middle Ages . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-02529-5 .

Brown, D. Catherine (1987).

Pastor and Laity in the Theology of Jean Gerson . New York: Cambridge University Press 1987.

ISBN 0-521-33029-7 .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

Reinbold, Emmanuel (2015).

The Effects of Laity Ministry Involvement on Transformational Discipleship . Illinois: Bourbonnais . Retrieved 16 April 2025 .

External links [ edit ] The Code of Canon Law (Roman Catholic Church) The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact: V.

Buddhism in Vietnam (Section E. Definitions and Explanation of Buddhist Terms) Tanner, S., Do Mormon Leaders Receive Financial Support?

Gibbs, M., "The Development of a Strong and Committed Laity" v t e Catholic laity Organizations of lay members of the Catholic Church who are neither in holy orders nor members of religious institutes Personal ordinariates , prelatures , and apostolic administrations Military ordinariates Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Opus Dei Anglican Use : Chair of Saint Peter , Our Lady of the Southern Cross , Our Lady of Walsingham Saint John Mary Vianney Third orders Order of Augustinian Recollects Order of Saint Augustine Oblates of Saint Benedict Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites Order of Saint Dominic Order of Saint Francis Secular Franciscan Order Order of Mercy Order of Minims Order Secular of the Most Holy Trinity Order of Saint Norbert Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel Association of Salesian Cooperators Order of Servites Confraternities Archconfraternities Archconfraternity of the Holy Family Archconfraternity of the Most Precious Blood Types Confraternities of the Cord Confraternity of Penitents Flagellant confraternities Purgatorial society Individual Confraternity of Christian Doctrine Confraternity of Catholic Saints Confraternity of the Rosary Bona Mors Confraternity Children of Mary of the Sacred Heart Hospitalité Notre Dame de Lourdes Illustrious Brotherhood of Our Blessed Lady Penitentes Penitential Brotherhood of the Holy Eucharist Society of the Holy Name Ven. Arc. Misericordia di Florence RVISSM International associations of the faithful Catenian Association Chemin Neuf Community Christian Life Community Christian Life Movement Cooperators of Opus Dei Couples for Christ Cursillo Communion and Liberation Emmanuel Community FIMCAP Focolare Movement Heralds of the Gospel International Alliance of Catholic Knights International Catholic Conference of Scouting International Federation of Catholic Universities International Kolping Society International Union of Catholic Esperantists Lay Claretian Movement L'Arche Legion of Mary Militia Christi Militia of the Immaculata Neocatechumenal Way Pax Romana Priests for Life Regnum Christi Sant'Egidio Community SIGNIS Schoenstatt Movement Teams of Our Lady Teresian Association UIGSE Union of Catholic Apostolate Other associations of the faithful Apostolate for Family Consecration Association of Vatican Lay Workers Catholic Charismatic Renewal ( Canção Nova ) ( Shalom Catholic Community ) Catholic Christian Outreach Catholic Worker Movement Fellowship of Catholic University Students Madonna House Maryknoll Lay Missioners NET Ministries Pope's Worldwide Prayer Network Queen of Angels Foundation Saint Paul's Outreach Society of Saint Vincent de Paul Movements Catholic Marian movements and societies Catholic Action Azione Cattolica Catholic Women's League Catholic Worker Movement World Movement of Christian Workers Young Christian Workers Christian Family Movement Courage International El Shaddai Family Rosary Crusade Fidesco International Notre-Dame de Chrétienté Theology on Tap Voice of the Faithful Young Men's Institute We Are Church See also Catholic catechesis Catholic Congress Catholic Extension Catholic higher education Catholic youth work Catholic campus ministry Dicastery for the Laity, Family and Life Lay Centre at Foyer Unitas Lists of Catholics Pontifical Council for the Laity Taizé Community Universal call to holiness Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities Home Missions CNEWA Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul Catholic Church portal Index v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐mr6zg
Cached time: 20250814224132
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.773 seconds
Real time usage: 0.925 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5598/1000000
Revision size: 49086/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 209616/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9357/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 221455/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.485/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25605917/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  763.960      1 -total
 42.55%  325.079      1 Template:Reflist
 31.42%  240.054     45 Template:Cite_web
 10.71%   81.848      3 Template:Navbox
 10.65%   81.353      1 Template:Catholic_laity
 10.27%   78.459      1 Template:Langx
  7.63%   58.278      1 Template:Short_description
  5.69%   43.501     10 Template:Fix
  4.24%   32.367      2 Template:Pagetype
  3.93%   30.048      6 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:353930:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224132 and revision id 1302493267. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Laity&oldid=1302493267 " Category : Religious terminology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2024 Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles to be split from November 2024 All articles to be split All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2020 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2021 CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 19:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Laity 33 languages Add topic

