Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Marxism 1.1.1 Early history 1.1.2 LGBTQ people and communist party membership 1.1.3 Association of communism with homosexuality by anti-communists 1.1.4 Association of fascism with homosexuality by communists 1.1.5 Events leading to the association of communism with homosexuality 1.1.6 Cold War 1.1.7 Modern day 2 LGBTQ rights by communist parties Toggle LGBTQ rights by communist parties subsection 2.1 Austria 2.2 Canada 2.3 Eswatini 2.4 France 2.5 Greece 2.6 India 2.7 Ireland 2.8 Japan 2.9 Nepal 2.10 Norway 2.11 Russia 2.12 South Africa 2.13 The Philippines 2.14 Turkey 2.15 United Kingdom 2.16 United States 2.17 Elsewhere 3 LGBTQ rights by communist states Toggle LGBTQ rights by communist states subsection 3.1 LGBTQ rights by current communist states 3.1.1 Cuba 3.1.2 Laos 3.1.3 North Korea 3.1.4 People's Republic of China 3.1.5 Vietnam 3.2 LGBTQ rights in former communist states 3.2.1 Afghanistan 3.2.2 Albania 3.2.3 Angola 3.2.4 Benin 3.2.5 Bulgaria 3.2.6 Byelorussia (Byelorussian SSR) 3.2.7 Cambodia 3.2.8 Congo 3.2.9 Czechoslovakia 3.2.10 East Germany 3.2.11 Ethiopia 3.2.12 Grenada 3.2.13 Hungary 3.2.14 Mongolia 3.2.15 Mozambique 3.2.16 Poland 3.2.17 Romania 3.2.18 Somalia 3.2.19 South Yemen 3.2.20 Soviet Union 3.2.21 Ukraine (Ukrainian SSR) 3.2.22 Yugoslavia 4 Notable LGBTQ communists Toggle Notable LGBTQ communists subsection 4.1 LGBTQ communists 4.1.1 LGBTQ former communists 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Communism and LGBTQ rights 12 languages العربية Asturianu Čeština Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on LGBTQ rights Lesbian ∙ Gay ∙ Bisexual ∙ Transgender ∙ Queer Overview Rights Movements Student Germany (pre-1933) United States Intersex rights Social attitudes Transgender rights Legal status Movement Aspects Decriminalization Gender self-identification Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Legal status Timeline Migration Military service Organizations List Parenting Adoption Pinkwashing Relationship Recognition Right to sexuality Union Opposition Censorship Conversion therapy Corrective rape Discrimination Criminalization of homosexuality Execution Opposition Propaganda Rhetoric Violence Organizations LGBTQ Bisexual Intersex Community centre Medical Military and Veteran Rights Transgender United States Religious Christian Jewish Muslim Politics Anarchism Bisexual politics Communism Conservatism Ecology Homonationalism Liberation Libertarianism Nationalism Radicalism Sexual revolution Socialism Transfeminism Political parties affiliates Political ideologies regarding LGBTQ Timeline Years List Category Related Discrimination Freedom Index Human rights Minority rights Legality of conversion therapy LGBTQ people in prison Right to privacy LGBTQ portal v t e Communist attitudes towards LGBTQ rights have evolved radically in the 21st century. In the 19th and 20th century, communist parties and Marxist–Leninist states varied on LGBTQ rights; some Western and Eastern parties were among the first political parties to support LGBTQ rights, while others, especially the Soviet Union , some of its Eastern Bloc members, and the Communist East Asian nations harshly persecuted people of the LGBTQ community (especially gay men ).

History [ edit ] Marxism [ edit ] Early history [ edit ] Communist leaders and intellectuals took many different positions on LGBTQ-rights issues.

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels said very little about sexuality.

[ 1 ] The Encyclopedia of Homosexuality , volume two, is unequivocal on Marx and Engels view of homosexuality, stating: "There can be little doubt that, as far as they thought of the matter at all, Marx and Engels were personally homophobic , as shown by an acerbic 1869 exchange of letter on Jean Baptista von Schweitzer , a German socialist rival. Schweitzer had been arrested in a park on a morals charge and not only did Marx and Engels refuse to join a committee defending him, they resorted to the cheapest form of bathroom humor in their private comments about the affair." [ 2 ] While Marx praised Schweitzer's strength and energy, both Marx and Engels considered him to be overly ambitious.

[ 3 ] One of the first important politicians to speak out in favour of gay rights in public debates was the German Marxist and co-founder of the Social Democratic Party of Germany , August Bebel . Although Bebel personally considered same sex relationships to be "against nature", he was among the signatories of Magnus Hirschfeld 's petition from the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee to overturn Paragraph 175 from the German penal code.

[ 4 ] The bill brought before the Reichstag in 1898 was supported only by a minority from the Social Democratic Party of Germany led by Bebel. Among other signatories was the Marxist theoretician Karl Kautsky .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 1895, Marxist theorist Eduard Bernstein of the Social Democratic Party of Germany wrote a defense of Oscar Wilde (who had been on trial for homosexual behavior) in Die Neue Zeit , a materialist critique of social attitudes concerning the subject of sexuality. Among other arguments he made, he stated that the characterization of homosexuality as "unnatural" was inappropriate, preferring "not the norm" instead.

[ 7 ] During the Weimar Republic , the Communist Party of Germany joined with the Social Democrats in support of efforts to legalize private homosexual relations between consenting adults.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 7 ] The situation for LGBTQ rights in the early Russian communist government was somewhat mixed. The Communist Party of Soviet Russia abolished all pre-1917 laws, including those related to sexuality. In 1917, the Soviet government also decriminalised homosexuality, and the subsequent Soviet criminal code in the 1920s left out the criminalization of non-commercial same-sex sexuality between consenting adults in private.

The Sexual Revolution in Russia , a 1923 four-page pamphlet written by Grigorii Batkis [ ru ] , noted that Soviet law post-1917 regarded gay sexual practices to be part of normal human sexual behaviour , and did not criminalize them as all matters of sex were a private matter.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] However, outside the Russian SFSR and Ukrainian SSR , homosexuality remained a criminal offense in certain Soviet republics in the 1920s (particularly the Muslim -dominated Soviet Republics in Central Asia ) and Soviet policy was often inconsistent in terms of pursuing homosexual rights and wider legal/social equality for homosexual people. Official Soviet policy on homosexuality in the 1920s also fluctuated: between legal and social tolerance of homosexuals and homosexuality to state attempts to classify homosexuality as a mental disorder. In 1933, Article 121 was added to the criminal code of the Soviet Union, which made male homosexuality a crime punishable by up to five years in prison with hard labor . The precise reason for Article 121 is in some dispute among historians. The few official government statements made about the law tended to confuse homosexuality with pedophilia and were tied up with a belief that homosexuality was practiced only among fascists or the aristocracy.

[ 13 ] The law remained intact until after the dissolution of the Soviet Union; it was repealed in 1993 by the Russian Federation .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] LGBTQ people and communist party membership [ edit ] Gay men were sometimes denied membership or expelled from communist parties [ 16 ] across the globe during the 20th century, as most communist parties followed the social precedents set by the USSR . However, this was not always the case in the West .

Notable LGBT+ members of communist parties include: Karl-Günther Heimsoth (German politician) – member of both the Nazi Party and later the Communist Party of Germany (KPD).

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Continued feeding information to KPD's secret service after the Nazis seized power.

[ 19 ] Purged during the Night of the Long Knives .

[ 20 ] Harry Whyte (British Marxist and open critic of the criminalization of homosexuality in the Soviet Union in 1934, [ 21 ] infamously dismissed as "an idiot and a degenerate" by Joseph Stalin in response to his letter arguing for the repeal of the law in question [ 22 ] [ 23 ] ) – member of the Communist Party of Great Britain .

[ 23 ] Frida Kahlo (Mexican painter and political and social activist) – member of the Mexican Communist Party .

Harry Hay ( gay rights activist, labor advocate , [ 24 ] Native American civil rights campaigner, [ 25 ] Mattachine Society founder, [ 26 ] co-founder of LA Gay Liberation Front [ 27 ] and supporter of the North American Man/Boy Love Association a pederasty advocacy group [ 28 ] ) – member of the Communist Party USA .

[ 29 ] Leslie Feinberg (Transgender and lesbian rights activist, self described " anti-racist white, working-class, secular Jewish , transgender, lesbian, female, revolutionary communist." [ 30 ] ) – Member of Workers World Party Mark Ashton (founder of Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners [ 31 ] and LGBTQ rights advocate) – member of the Communist Party of Great Britain .

[ 32 ] Georgy Chicherin - First People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the USSR and member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Association of communism with homosexuality by anti-communists [ edit ] See also: Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany The phrase " Sexual bolschevism " originated in Weimar Germany in the 1920s by Pastor Ludwig Hoppe of Berlin as a more general term of approbation at licentiousness.

[ 33 ] When Nazi Germany came into being after the failures of the Weimar government, the Nazis used the term "sexual Bolshevism" to refer to perceived sexual degeneracy, in particular homosexuality .

[ 34 ] Association of fascism with homosexuality by communists [ edit ] Main article: Gay Nazis myth In the early 1920s, Western communist party leaders propagated the view that the increase in homosexuality and the open discussion of homosexuality were caused by capitalism "in its death throes". In their view, homosexuality would vanish.

[ 35 ] After Hitler's seizure of power (the Machtergreifung ), Marxist intellectuals correlated fascism with homosexuality.

[ 35 ] Events leading to the association of communism with homosexuality [ edit ] The advance of doctors, psychologists and social workers into the arena of human sexuality during the Weimar era (as well as the feminist movement) threw up a variety of conspiracy theories , especially amongst more conservative aspects of society, regarding communism and homosexuality. Any form of sexual revolution was derided as promiscuity and leading to a rise in sexually transmitted infections. The response of those who opposed "sexual Bolshevism" was to promote eugenics and family values .

[ 33 ] There are specific events which glbtq.com ("an encyclopedia of gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender and queer culture") claims to have contributed to the linkage of communism with homosexuality in the United States as well: For example, in 1948, Whittaker Chambers , an editor and writer at Time magazine and a former Communist Party member and courier in a Soviet spy ring infiltrating the American government, accused Alger Hiss , head of the Carnegie Endowment , of perjury and, implicitly, of Soviet espionage. The vast media coverage of the scandal hinted that Chambers had a crush on Hiss, establishing a link between Communism and homosexuality. Chambers was only too eager to strengthen this link, declaring to the FBI that his homosexual activities had stopped once he had left the Communist Party. In addition, the 1951 flight to the Soviet Union of gay British spies Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean also helped fuel the association of homosexuality and treason in the public imagination.

[ 36 ] Cold War [ edit ] See also: Lavender scare During the height of the McCarthy era (in the late 1940s and early 1950s), American senator Joseph McCarthy viewed homosexuality and communism as threatening the "American way of life"; in both cases, "association with sickness and disease provided means of legitimating isolation from impressionable young people." [ 37 ] Homosexuality was directly linked to security concerns, and more government employees were dismissed because of their sexual orientation than because they were left-winged or communist politically. George Chauncey noted that, "The specter of the invisible homosexual, like that of the invisible communist, haunted Cold War America," and homosexuality (and homosexuals) were constantly referred to not only as a disease, but also as an invasion, like the perceived danger of communism.

[ 38 ] McCarthy often used accusations of homosexuality as a smear tactic in his anti-communist crusade , often combining the Second Red Scare with the lavender scare . On one occasion, he went so far as to announce to reporters, "If you want to be against McCarthy, boys, you've got to be either a Communist or a cocksucker ." [ 39 ] Some historians have argued that, in linking communism and homosexuality and psychological imbalance, McCarthy was employing guilt-by-association if evidence for communist activity was lacking.

[ 40 ] Senator Kenneth Wherry similarly attempted to invoke a connection between homosexuality and anti-nationalism . He said in an interview with Max Lerner that "You can't hardly separate homosexuals from subversives." Later in that same interview he drew the line between patriotic Americans and gay men: "But look Lerner, we're both Americans, aren't we? I say, let's get these fellows [closeted gay men in government positions] out of the government." [ 41 ] Connections between gay rights groups and radical leftists were not merely a figment of the imaginations of demagogues . The Mattachine Society , one of the earliest gay rights groups in the United States, was founded by Harry Hay , a former member of the Communist Party USA, who was kicked out of the gay rights group he'd founded for his ties to the party.

[ 42 ] Famous ex-communist former Soviet agent Whittaker Chambers notably spent his time in the left-wing underground pursuing both homosexual and heterosexual affairs, but he kept his liaisons quiet since his communist associates despised homosexuality.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Chambers later monogamously married the pacifist painter Esther Shemitz , working as a journalist and editor.

Modern day [ edit ] See also: Old Left and New Left Since the mid-1970s, most communist parties in the Western world have begun to adopt homosexual rights as part of their platform. Some communist parties such as the Communist Party of Greece and the Communist Party of the Russian Federation have rejected this move and continue to promote homophobic policies.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] The Communist Party of Greece voted against the Civil Partnerships Bill proposed by Syriza , responding that "with the formation of a socialist-communist society, a new type of partnership will undoubtedly be formed—a relatively stable heterosexual relationship and reproduction".

[ 48 ] Furthermore, The Communist Party of the Russian Federation and its Leader Gennady Zyuganov supported the Russian gay propaganda law .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] LGBTQ rights by communist parties [ edit ] Austria [ edit ] The Communist Party of Austria (KPÖ) supports protections for LGBTQ+ people against discrimination, more rights for those in a registered partnership, greater public funds to tackle domestic violence towards LGBTQ+ people, better healthcare and healthcare access for LGBTQ+ people, placing protection categories for sexual orientation and gender identity in Austria's constitution, "unbureaucratic and free access" for a person changing their civil status and name, and non-discriminatory education and public administration systems.

[ 51 ] Canada [ edit ] The Communist Party of Canada has called to strengthen hate crime legislation against homophobia and transphobia, explicit protection of LGBTQ people from discrimination, the continued prohibition of conversion therapy , protection of intersex children from non-consensual surgery, and equality in blood donation .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] It has claimed that while the Liberal Party of Canada and Justin Trudeau talk in favor of LGBTQ rights, they have done little to improve the life of the LGBTQ community.

[ 54 ] Eswatini [ edit ] In June 2022, International Secretary of the Communist Party of Swaziland , Pius Vilakati, spoke out in favor of LGBTQ rights and the end of "colonial laws" used to repress LGBTQ people.

[ 55 ] In April 2023, the party protested in favor of LGBTQ rights.

[ 56 ] France [ edit ] Initially, the French Communist Party vilified homosexuality as "the rubbish of capitalism" in the 1970s, but it has since changed its stance to be in favor of LGBTQ rights.

[ 57 ] By the 1980s, it supported lowering the age of consent for same-sex relationships, and opposed attempts to re-penalize homosexuality. In 1998, the PCF voted in favour of the civil solidarity pact (PACS), civil unions, including for homosexual couples. The PCF supports both same-sex marriage and same-sex adoption . On 12 February 2013, PCF deputies voted in favour of same-sex marriage and adoption rights in the National Assembly, [ 58 ] though PCF deputy Patrice Carvalho voted against.

[ 59 ] Greece [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Communist Party of Greece § LGBT rights .

[ edit ] In December 2015, KKE voted against the Civil Partnerships Bill proposed by Syriza that would extend cohabitation agreements to same-sex couples, responding, among other things: The family is a social relationship, it is an institution for the protection of children, as it was formed in the context of today's society, capitalism. We also believe that civil marriage should be the only, obligatory form of marriage. And whoever wants, let him have the right to the corresponding religious ceremony. But you do not touch upon this urban modernization that has taken place in other countries for years.

If the government wanted to introduce a less "bureaucratic" civil marriage, it could propose the necessary amendments to the Civil Code. There is no need for two legal regulations (civil marriage and cohabitation agreement) on the rights and obligations between spouses, the core of which is the potential reproduction, upbringing and upbringing of children.

Today, this is confirmed by the fact that the Cohabitation Agreement is extended in terms of obligations and rights of both parties, which essentially resembles marriage and especially by the fact that it extends to same-sex couples. Greece's condemnation by the European Court of Justice, cited by the government and the Report, was not a breach of any positive obligation imposed by the European Convention on Human Rights. But it was a negative discrimination against homosexual scales, but in the context of the institutionalization of the Cohabitation Pact. If there was no Cohabitation Pact for heterosexual couples, there would be no question of condemning Greece.

The aim of the bill is essentially the institutional recognition of same-sex couples, including – in a process – the acquisition of children by them. And there, is our disagreement.

Rights and obligations arise within marriage, which is the legal expression of the social relations of the family. It includes social protection of children, who are biologically the result of sexual relations between a man and a woman.

With the formation of a socialist-communist society, a new type of partnership will undoubtedly be formed—a relatively stable heterosexual relationship and reproduction.

[ 60 ] One of the party's MPs, Giannis Gkiokas, made a speech further explaining the party's opposition to the Co-habitation Agreement. Gkiokas argued that homosexuality is a personal choice rooted in "chronic social problems arising out of capitalist development", and that same-sex cohabitation agreement would open the way to child adoption by same-sex couples which would "damage children and the reproductive process". He also affirmed KKE's support for the nuclear, heterosexual family as a stable institution of reproduction and raising children that cannot be undermined.

[ 61 ] Many democratic socialist parties, including Syriza, denounced the KKE's stance as bigotry .

[ 60 ] However, the KKE also supports strengthening legislation to punish homophobic behavior, and has spoken against such discrimination, stating that "unacceptable and condemnable discrimination and violence against our fellow human beings, based on their sexual orientation and other personal characteristics, are not addressed by cheap declarations of equality and words of sympathy, but by strengthening legislation against perpetrators of sexism, racism and homophobia, with the full social support of those who suffer from such behaviors. A real shield against such discrimination is collectivism, the struggle for modern social rights for all people." [ 62 ] In 2024, the party voted against legalising gay marriage and same-sex adoption, claiming that "same-sex marriage means abolishing paternity-maternity".

[ 63 ] India [ edit ] In India, the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)) and the Communist Party of India have supported LGBTQ rights. The Students' Federation of India , [ 64 ] Democratic Youth Federation of India , [ 65 ] and All India Democratic Women's Association [ 66 ] have actively supported LGBTQ rights. CPI(M) had called for amending Article 377 in 2009 [ 67 ] and 2014, [ 68 ] and supported an anti-discrimination bill covering LGBTQ [ 69 ] in 2019, [ 67 ] becoming one of the first major political party in India to do so.

[ 70 ] In 2024, the CPI(M) came out in favor of same-sex civil unions , [ 71 ] as well as comprehensive anti-discrimination protections for LGBTQ people, reservation in educational institutions and employment, and measures against bullying, harassment, and violence against LGBTQ and gender non-conforming students, staff, and teachers in educational spaces.

[ 72 ] Ireland [ edit ] In Ireland and Northern Ireland , the Trotskyist People Before Profit party is in favor of LGBTQ+ equality, stating that they are in favor of equality in marriage and blood donation , as well as laws against homophobic and transphobic hate crimes , anti-bullying initiatives in school to protect LGBTQ+ students, LGBTQ+ awareness training at workplaces, and free gender care through an "Irish NHS " which would include psychotherapy , counselling , speech and language therapy , hormone therapy , hair removal , and gender reassignment surgery . It also supports extension of the Gender Recognition Act to those aged 16–18, and the addition of a third gender option in official forms.

[ 73 ] Japan [ edit ] The Japanese Communist Party (JCP) supports LGBTQ rights in Japan.

[ 74 ] This includes the party supporting the legalisation of same-sex marriage in Japan and backing anti-discrimination laws in regards to LGBTQ people.

[ 74 ] Nepal [ edit ] In January 2007, Nepalese minister Hisila Yami , a member of the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) , stated that the party adopted a platform to not "encourage homosexual behavior but not punish homosexuals either". Despite this, Maoists in Nepal have been accused of discriminatory attacks against members of the LGBTQ community . One such instance is the abduction and detention of two women accused of being lesbians . The women had previously been abducted earlier in 2006 by Maoists, who ordered them to join as Maoist soldiers to get a "straight life".

Dev Gurung , another Maoist minister in Nepal, has also said that "under Soviet rule and when China was still very much a communist state, there were no homosexuals in the Soviet Union or China...Homosexuality is a production of capitalism. Under socialism this kind of problem doesn’t exist." Furthermore, the party has run a campaign against "social pollutants", including attacks against homosexuals.

Amrita Thapa has openly stated that homosexuals are "polluting" society.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Other strands of communists, like Sunil Babu Pant of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist) , are openly out LGBTQ politicians, who have led LGBTQ activism in the country. Pant's campaigning for LGBTQ rights led to the Supreme Court of Nepal giving legal recognition to Nepal's third gender in addition to decriminalising homosexuality and permitting same-sex marriage.

Norway [ edit ] The Red Party supports the continuation of same-sex marriage in Norway as well as same-sex adoption . It also supports laws against discrimination towards LGBTQ people, the prohibition of conversion therapy , the strengthening of treatment for transgender people, and the addition of a third gender category in official documents. Furthermore, it supports counseling services for questions about sexual orientation or gender identity , the production of literature and films that represent queer people, and insight about LGBTQ people in education. It also supports the acceptance of queer refugees from countries where LGBTQ activity remains punishable.

[ 77 ] Russia [ edit ] The Communist Party of the Russian Federation remains socially conservative on LGBTQ rights, voting in favor of the anti-gay propaganda law [ 50 ] and introduced legislation in 2016 to prohibit coming out as LGBT .

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] South Africa [ edit ] The Economic Freedom Fighters protested against Uganda's Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2023 , warning that President Yoweri Museveni would use it against political opponents.

[ 80 ] However, in July 2023, the party would invite Patrick Lumumba , a Kenyan professor, who spoke out in favor of Uganda's anti-LGBTQ laws to the party's 10-year anniversary celebrations, sparking outrage from members of the LGBTQ community.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] The Philippines [ edit ] The New People's Army , a communist insurgency within the Philippines , has also made several statements supporting equal rights of same-sex couples and gay individuals, performing the first same-sex marriage in the country and officially endorsing such legislation if they were to come to power. They also went further to express their support for same-sex relationships, and gays and lesbians were allowed to serve in their forces before those of the Philippines.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Turkey [ edit ] The Communist Party of Turkey has come out in favor of LGBTQ rights, promising LGBTQ people "equal citizenship is in socialism!".

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Ekin Sönmez, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Turkey, in an interview with Liberation News, the newspaper of the Party for Socialism and Liberation , criticized the ruling AKP party for describing LGBTQ people as "perverted", and that it must be opposed.

[ 87 ] The communist-led municipality of Tunceli in 2021 decided to grant one extra day of leave to LGBTQ people on Pride Week .

[ 88 ] In 2023, the party made a statement denouncing the Turkish government's targeting and violence against LGBTQ people, stating that "this discrimination manifests itself as mobbing in the workplace, threats in the neighborhood, and brutal force in the hands of law enforcement".

[ 85 ] The Workers' Party of Turkey made a similar statement, claiming that the AKP wants to turn Turkey into a police state .

[ 89 ] In 2023, the Workers' Party also nominated three trans women for parliamentary seats: activists Esmeray Özadikti , Talya Aydin, and Niler Albayrak.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] The Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) viewed the working-class as male and heterosexually masculine. The accounts of gay party members show that homosexuality was widely seen as incompatible with a working-class identity during this era, [ 92 ] despite Mark Ashton (founder of Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners ) being General Secretary of the Young Communist League [ 31 ] (the youth wing of the CPGB) [ 93 ] "without compromising the politics of their sexuality".

[ 94 ] An unofficial successor of the CPGB, the Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) (CPGB-ML), has claimed that " LGBT ideology " is a "reactionary and anti-working class distraction", and stated that any member of the party which promotes it is liable to expulsion.

[ 95 ] It has claimed that gay rights is not a class issue, despite stating that racism and sexism were class issues, that the Western imperialist bourgeosie use LGBTQ rights to oppress the Third World , and that supporters of "LGBT ideology" want "more than equal rights".

[ 96 ] Furthermore, it has called gender fluidity a "reactionary nightmare", and claimed that the terms " sex " and " gender " are synonyms.

[ 97 ] On the party's Twitter account, it has claimed the LGBTQ rights movement has become a "mainstay of monopoly capitalist assault on the working class" and almost a "NATO front".

[ 98 ] United States [ edit ] Part of a series on Communist parties Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Egypt Eswatini Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Namibia Morocco Réunion Senegal South Africa EFF SACP South Sudan Sudan Togo Tunisia Americas Argentina PCA PCCE PCRA Bolivia Brazil PCdoB PCB PCR Canada CPC CPC-ML Chile PCCh PC(AP) Colombia PCC PC de C (M–L) Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador PCE PCMLE Mexico PC PPS PPSM PCMML Panama MLN-29 PPP Paraguay Peru PCP PCP-SL MPCP PCdelP–PR Uruguay United States ACP CPUSA FRSO FSP PSL PLP RCPUSA SEP SL/US WWP WSPUS Venezuela Asia Bahrain Bangladesh CPB WPB RWPB Bhutan Burma China India CPI CPI(M) CPI-ML(L) CPI(Maoist) SUCI(C) Iran CPI Tudeh Toufan Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Nepal CPN (UML) CPN (MC) CPN (US) NWPP North Korea Pakistan Palestine Philippines CPP PKP-1930 Sri Lanka CPSL JVP FLSP Syria SCP (Bakdash) SCP (Unified) Tajikistan Vietnam Former parties Cambodia KPRP CPK Indonesia Korea Malaya and Singapore CPM CPM/ML CPM/RF Saudi Arabia Sarawak Taiwan Thailand Europe Albania Armenia Austria KPÖ PdA Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium KP PC Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria KPB SKB Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark DKP KP APK Estonia Finland France PCF PCOF PRCF PCRF Georgia Germany KPD DKP MLPD Greece ΚΚΕ ΚΟΕ Anasintaxi Hungary Munkáspárt Munkáspárt 2006 Ireland CPI WPI Italy PC PRC Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal PCP PCTP Romania Russia KR CPRF PDP RCWP-CPSU Serbia Slovakia Spain PCE FO CC PCPE PCE (M–L) PCTE Sweden KP SKP Switzerland Communist Party PdA Turkey DHKP/C EMEP HTKP KDH/L KKP TKP MKP MLKP TDKP TKEP TKEP/L TKIP TKP/ML Ukraine KPU SKU United Kingdom CPB CPB-ML CPGB-ML CPGB-PCC CPS NCPB RCG RCP RCPB-ML Former parties Albania Czechoslovakia East Germany Italy Netherlands Poland Romania San Marino Soviet Union Turkey United Kingdom West Germany Yugoslavia Oceania Australia CPA CPA(ML) Socialist Alliance Socialist Alternative Victorian Socialists New Zealand CL OMU SPA Former parties Australia Communist Alliance CPA DSP RSP Victorian Socialist Party New Zealand CPNZ SUP CL International organizations IMCWP Comintern Cominform INITIATIVE ICS ILPS ICP FI Trotskyist internationals Related topics Central committee Communism history Criticism of rule Democratic centralism General Secretary List of communist parties Politburo Secretariat Communism portal v t e The Revolutionary Communist Party USA 's previous policy that "struggle will be waged to eliminate [homosexuality] and reform homosexuals" [ 99 ] was ended in 2001. The RCP has since then strongly supported LGBTQ rights.

[ 100 ] Meanwhile, the American Socialist Workers Party (SWP) in the US released a memo stating that gay oppression had less "social weight" than black and women's struggles, and prohibited members from being involved in gay political organizations.

[ 101 ] They also believed that too close an association with gay liberation would give the SWP an "exotic image" and alienate it from the masses.

[ 102 ] Several non-governing communist parties have made statements supporting LGBTQ rights, such as the Communist Party USA , which supports extending marriage to same-sex couples and passing laws against discrimination based on one's sexual orientation. The League for the Revolutionary Party , a communist party based in New York City , issued a statement shortly after the passage of California's Proposition 8 condemning the amendment, reaffirming their support for same-sex marriage and expressing their views on how gay liberation is essential to the communist philosophy.

[ 103 ] Elsewhere [ edit ] Other communist parties present in Germany and other European countries have also officially endorsed LGBTQ rights, including the right to same-sex marriage, and some even have extensive LGBTQ platforms in their parties, such as the German Communist Party 's "DKP Queer ".

[ 104 ] The chairman of the Communist Party of Finland is openly homosexual and the party also participates in the LGBTQ working group of the European Left Party .

[ 105 ] LGBTQ rights by communist states [ edit ] LGBTQ rights by current communist states [ edit ] As of 2023 [update] , Cuba is the only country ruled by a Marxist–Leninist government that legalized same-sex marriage , civil unions and same-sex adoption .

Cuba [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Cuba Before the Cuban Revolution , Cuba had laws that criminalized homosexual men.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] Even so, male homosexuality was an important part of the prostitution industry for tourists and the US military, but associated with gambling and criminal activity.

[ 109 ] [ 108 ] [ 110 ] After the Revolution, the position regarding homosexuality continued to be primarily negative, and some LGBTQ people chose to emigrate, [ 108 ] [ 109 ] since homosexuality was associated with US imperialism and perceived as " bourgeoisie ".

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] However, the law that criminalized homosexuality was repealed in 1979.

[ 114 ] Since the late 1990s, public antipathy towards LGBTQ people eased, having implemented several educational campaigns on LGBTQ issues, including the National Center for Sex Education (CENESEX), organization of pride parades every May to coincide with the International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia and Transphobia [ 115 ] and marking the LGBTQ History Month .

[ 116 ] The Communist Party of Cuba included the defense of LGBTQ rights in its regulations in 2013 [ 117 ] [ 118 ] and legalized same-sex marriage , civil unions , same-sex adoption and altruistic surrogacy , among other things, through amendments to the Cuban Constitution following the 2022 Cuban Family Code referendum .

[ 119 ] Laos [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Laos North Korea [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in North Korea People's Republic of China [ edit ] Main articles: LGBT rights in China , LGBT rights in Hong Kong , and LGBT rights in Macau Vietnam [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Vietnam LGBTQ rights in former communist states [ edit ] Afghanistan [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Afghanistan Albania [ edit ] The People's Socialist Republic of Albania penalized same-sex sexual intercourse with long prison terms, bullying and ostracism. Article 137 of the Crimes against Societal Moral of the Penal Code stated that: " Pederasty is punishable for up to ten years of freedom privation". The word "pederasty" was used as a code word for sex between two consenting adults or sex between an adult and a child of any gender.

[ 120 ] Angola [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Angola Benin [ edit ] Same-sex sexual intercourse was always legal in the People's Republic of Benin . The People's Republic of Benin adopted a 1947 amendment to the Penal Code of 1877 under the Republic of Dahomey that fixed a general age limit of 13 for sex with a child of either gender, but penalized any act that is indecent or against nature if committed with a person of the same sex under 21: "Without prejudice to more severe penalties prescribed by the paragraphs that precede or by Articles 332 and 333 of this Code, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine of 200 to 50,000 francs anyone who commits an indecent act or [an act] against nature with a minor ... of the same sex under 21 years old." [ 121 ] [ 122 ] Bulgaria [ edit ] The People's Republic of Bulgaria retained the penal code of the Kingdom of Bulgaria , that criminalized male same-sex sexual intercourse over 16 years of age with at least six months of imprisonment. The Penal Code of 13 March 1951 increased the penalty to up to three years in jail .

[ 123 ] The revised Penal Code of 1 May 1968 legalized male same-sex intercourse.

Byelorussia (Byelorussian SSR) [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Belarus Cambodia [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Cambodia Congo [ edit ] Same-sex sexual intercourse was always legal in the People's Republic of the Congo .

Czechoslovakia [ edit ] Main articles: LGBT history in the Czech Republic and LGBT history in Slovakia In 1962, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic decriminalized same-sex sexual intercourse after scientific research from Kurt Freund led to the conclusion that homosexual orientation cannot be changed.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] East Germany [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in the German Democratic Republic In the Soviet occupation zone of Germany , the development of law was not uniform. The government of Thuringia moderated Paragraphs 175 and 175a in a manner similar to that contemplated in the draft criminal code of 1925, while in the other states ( Länder ) the 1935 version of the statute remained in effect without changes. Although in 1946 the Committee for Law Examination of East Berlin specifically advised not to include § 175 StGB in a new criminal code, this recommendation had no consequences. The Provincial High Court in Halle ( Oberlandesgericht Halle , or OLG Halle ) decided for Saxony-Anhalt in 1948 that Paragraphs 175 and 175a were to be seen as injustice perpetrated by the Nazis, because a progressive juridical development had been broken off and even been reversed. Homosexual acts were to be tried only according to the laws of the Weimar Republic .

In 1950, one year after being reconstituted as the German Democratic Republic (GDR), the Berlin Appeal Court ( Kammergericht Berlin ) decided for all of East Germany to reinstate the validity of the old, pre-1935 form of Paragraph 175. However, in contrast to the earlier action of the OLG Halle , the new Paragraph 175a remained unchanged, because it was said to protect society against "socially harmful homosexual acts of qualified character". From 1953 to 1957, following Uprising of 1953 in East Germany , the GDR government instituted a program of "moral reform" to build a solid foundation for the new socialist republic , in which masculinity and the traditional family were championed while homosexuality, seen to contravene "healthy mores of the working people", continued to be prosecuted under Paragraph 175. Same-sex sexual intercourse was "alternatively viewed as a remnant of bourgeois decadence, a sign of moral weakness, and a threat to the social and political health of the nation." [1] In 1954, the same court decided that Paragraph 175a in contrast to Paragraph 175 did not presuppose acts tantamount to sexual intercourse. Lewdness ( Unzucht ) was defined as any act that is performed to arouse sexual excitement and "violates the moral sentiment of our workers". A revision of the criminal code in 1957 made it possible to put aside prosecution of an illegal action that represented no danger to socialist society because of lack of consequence. This removed Paragraph 175 from the effective body of the law, because at the same time the East Berlin Court of Appeal ( Kammergericht ) decided that all punishments deriving from the old form of Paragraph 175 should be suspended due to the insignificance of the acts to which it had been applied. On this basis, homosexual acts between consenting adults ceased to be punished, beginning in the late 1950s.

In 1968, homosexuality was officially decriminalised in East Germany.

Gay social clubs and groups were allowed to organize themselves freely, so long as they made tenuous links with Protestant Churches. This was because the official position of the ruling Socialist Unity Party of Germany was to outlaw discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, but to otherwise ignore that LGBTQ relationships existed. On 1 July 1968, the GDR adopted its own code of criminal law. In it § 151 StGB-DDR provided for a sentence up to three years' imprisonment or probation for an adult (18 and over) who engaged in sexual acts with a youth (under 18) of the same sex. This law applied not only to men who have sex with boys but equally to women who have sex with girls. According to historian Heidi Minning, attempts by lesbians and gay men in East Germany to establish a visible community were "thwarted at every turn by the G.D.R. government and SED party ." She writes: Police force was used on numerous occasions to break up or prevent public gay and lesbian events. Centralized censorship prevented the presentation of homosexuality in print and electronic media, as well as the import of such materials.

[2] In the late 1980s, the East German government opened a state-owned gay disco in Berlin. In 1987, the age of consent was equalized for same-sex intercourse in East Germany. On 11 August 1987 the Supreme Court of East Germany struck down a conviction under Paragraph 151 on the basis that "homosexuality, just like heterosexuality, represents a variant of sexual behavior. Homosexual people do therefore not stand outside socialist society, and the civil rights are warranted to them exactly as to all other citizens." One year later, the Volkskammer (the parliament of the GDR), in its fifth revision of the criminal code, brought the written law in line with what the court had ruled, striking Paragraph 151 without replacement. The act passed into law 30 May 1989. This removed all specific reference to homosexuality from East German criminal law . In 1989, the German film titled Coming Out directed by Heiner Carow was exhibited on the night that the Berlin wall came down, and tells a story of an East German man coming to accept his own homosexuality, with much of it shot in the local gay bars. This was the only East German LGBTQ rights film.

Ethiopia [ edit ] The Provisional Military Government of Socialist Ethiopia and People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia adopted the previous Penal Code of 1957 of the Ethiopian Empire , which criminalizes anyone who "performs with another person of the same sex an act corresponding to the sexual act, or any other indecent act, is punishable with simple imprisonment." [ 126 ] Grenada [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Grenada Hungary [ edit ] The Hungarian People's Republic adopted the penal code of the Kingdom of Hungary which punished male same-sex sexual intercourse with prison up to one year. In 1961, male same-sex sexual intercourse above the age of 20 was decriminalized. In 1978, a new penal code lowered the age of consent to the age of 18 years old.

Mongolia [ edit ] In 1961, same-sex sexual intercourse was criminalized in the Mongolian People's Republic .

Mozambique [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Mozambique Poland [ edit ] Same-sex sexual intercourse was always legal during the existence of the Republic of Poland and the Polish People's Republic . Nevertheless, Michel Foucault recounted that after his arrival in Poland in 1959 as the director of the French Cultural Center, the Polish secret police "trapped him by using a young [male] translator" and then "demanded his departure" from Poland, an example of a honey trapping .

[ 127 ] In the 1980s, the government used homosexuality to blackmail homosexuals, and the police harassed gay men and lesbians. Many homosexual men were arrested in 1985 in Operation Hyacinth .

[ 128 ] The 2020 novel Swimming in the Dark by Tomasz Jedrowski presents a fictionalized depiction of LGBTQ life in the Polish People's Republic.

[ 129 ] Romania [ edit ] The Romanian People's Republic and the Socialist Republic of Romania adopted the Romanian Penal Code of 1937 from the Kingdom of Romania , which banned public "acts of sexual inversion committed between men or between women, if provoking public scandal". In 1948, this "public" homosexuality was considered by the courts to include all situations whatever public or private if "provoking scandal", thus homosexuality became de facto illegal. In the new Penal Code of the Romanian People's Republic , the old Article 431 was toughened with penalties up to a minimum of two years and a maximum of five years.

[ 130 ] In 1957 the "public scandal" provision was repealed and any consenting sexual intercourse between persons of the same sex is criminalized.

[ 131 ] After Nicolae Ceaușescu 's rise to power, in 1968, the basic code was again revised, introducing Article 200 and moving the infraction from the public domain into the private: [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Sexual relations between persons of the same sex shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 5 years.

Act stipulated in paragraph 1, committed against a minor, against a person unable to defend himself or to express his will, or by coercion, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 7 years.

If the act stipulated in paragraph 2 and 3 results in serious injury of physical integrity or health, the penalty is imprisonment from 3 to 10 years, and if results in the death or suicide of the victim, the penalty is imprisonment from 7 to 15 years.

Inciting or encouraging a person to practice the act stipulated in paragraph 1 shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 5 years.

Article 200 was useful to the Ceaușescu regime in that, since 1970, it could strengthen social control.

[ 133 ] These restrictions under the Penal Code were strictly unique to Romania among European countries.

[ 134 ] The restrictions only included relationships and those who considered themselves homosexual were not punished but were instead considered as mentally ill.

[ 135 ] Somalia [ edit ] Under Article 409 of the Somali Penal Code introduced in 1973, sexual intercourse with a person of the same sex is punishable by imprisonment from three months to three years in the Somali Democratic Republic . An "act of lust" other than sexual intercourse is punishable by a prison term of two months to two years. Under Article 410 of the Somali Penal Code, an additional security measure may accompany sentences for homosexual acts, usually coming in the form of police surveillance to prevent "re-offending".

[ 136 ] Threats have been made that indicate that Somalia tolerates executions of homosexuals.

[ 137 ] South Yemen [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Yemen Soviet Union [ edit ] See also: LGBT history in the Soviet Union In November 1917, after the October Revolution , the Tsarist criminal code was abrogated by the Bolsheviks , thus legalizing same-sex sexual intercourse between consenting adults in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic and the later Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR). The Bolsheviks took an official position at this time that homosexuality was not of harm and was more a scientific concern than a legal concern.

[ 7 ] However this policy was not uniform across all the Soviet Republics which emerged after 1922. The Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic , Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic , Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, and Ukrainian SSR were all created with no laws criminalising same-sex sexual intercourse. In 1923, sexual intercourse between men became a criminal offense in the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic , [ 138 ] punishable by up to five years in prison for consenting adults, or up to eight years if it involved force or threat.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] In 1926, Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic criminalized male same-sex intercourse. In 1927, Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic criminalized male same-sex intercourse. Male same-sex intercourse was also illegal in Bukharan People's Soviet Republic , Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic , Nakhichevan ASSR , and Socialist Soviet Republic of Abkhazia .

[ 141 ] The Soviet Union sent delegates to the German Institute for Sexual Science , as well as to some international conferences on human sexuality including the World League for Sexual Reform , who expressed support for the legalization of adult, private, and consensual homosexual relations. According to the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee , which was affiliated with the institute, the Ministry of Health delegation was positively receptive to a film concerning the topic and considered it unworthy of scandal.

[ 7 ] Soviet social policy in the 1920s regarding homosexuality and homosexual rights was mixed. On the one hand homosexuality was legal in the Russian and Ukrainian Soviet Republics and certain political and civil rights in the Soviet Union were extended to homosexuals. On the other hand, there was increasing pressure from both within and outside the Soviet government to recriminalise homosexuality and to reinstate bans on homosexual intercourse. In the late 1920s Soviet medical research increasingly came to classify homosexuality as a mental disease or as a remnant of bourgeois society.

Relative Soviet tolerance for homosexuality and homosexual rights ended in the late 1920s – as Soviet society came increasingly under Stalinist control. In the 1930s, along with increased repression of political dissidents and non-Russian nationalities under Stalin, LGBTQ themes faced official government censorship, and a uniformly harsher policy across the entire Soviet Union. Homosexuality was officially labelled a disease.

[ 142 ] The official stance could be summarized in the article of the Great Soviet Encyclopedia of 1930 written by medical expert Sereisky: Soviet legislation does not recognize so-called crimes against morality. Our laws proceed from the principle of protection of society and therefore countenance punishment only in those instances when juveniles and minors are the objects of homosexual interest ... while recognizing the incorrectness of homosexual development ... our society combines prophylactic and other therapeutic measures with all the necessary conditions for making the conflicts that afflict homosexuals as painless as possible and for resolving their typical estrangement from society within the collective —Sereisky, Great Soviet Encyclopedia , 1930, p. 593 In 1934, the Soviet government recriminalised homosexuality in the Soviet Union. Mass arrests occurred in several cities in Russia, including Moscow, and many artists were arrested. On 7 March 1934, Article 121 was added to the criminal code, throughout the entire Soviet Union , that expressly prohibited only male same-sex sexual intercourse with up to five years of hard labor in prison. There were no criminal statutes regarding same-sex female sexual intercourse.

[ 7 ] During the Soviet period, Western observers believed that between 800 and 1,000 men were imprisoned each year under Article 121.

[ 143 ] Some historians have noted that it was during this time that Soviet propaganda began to depict homosexuality as a sign of fascism, and that Article 121 may have a simple political tool to use against dissidents, irrespective of their true sexual orientation , and to solidify Russian opposition to Nazi Germany, who had broken its treaty with Russia.

[ 144 ] More recently, a third possible reason for the anti-gay law has emerged from declassified Soviet documents and transcripts. Beyond expressed fears of a vast "counterrevolutionary" or fascist homosexual conspiracy, there were several high-profile arrests of Russian men accused of being pederasts .

[ 145 ] In 1933, 130 men "were accused of being 'pederasts' – adult males who have sex with boys. Since no records of men having sex with boys at that time are available, it is possible this term was used broadly and crudely to label homosexuality." [ 145 ] Whatever the precise reason, homosexuality remained a serious criminal offense until it was repealed in 1993.

[ 145 ] The Soviet government itself said very little publicly about the change in the law, and few people seemed to be aware that it existed. In 1934, the British Communist Harry Whyte wrote a long letter to Stalin condemning the law, and its prejudicial motivations. He laid out a Marxist position against the oppression of homosexuals, as a social minority, and compared homophobia to racism, xenophobia and sexism.

[ 146 ] While the letter was not formally replied to, Soviet cultural writer Maxim Gorky authored an article, published in both Pravda and Izvestia titled "Proletarian Humanism", that seemed to reject Whyte's arguments point by point. He rejected the notion that homosexuals were a social minority, and argued that the Soviet Union, governed by "manly proletariat", is obliged to persecute homosexuals to protect the youth from their corrupting effect. It is often said that he equated homosexuality with fascism, stating that "exterminate all homosexuals and fascism will vanish".

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] He was actually quoting a popular saying, Gorky in fact said: "There is already a sarcastic saying: Destroy homosexuality and fascism will disappear." [ 149 ] [ 150 ] In 1936, Justice Commissar Nikolai Krylenko publicly stated that the anti-gay criminal law was aimed at the decadent and effete old ruling classes.

[ 145 ] During Nikita Khrushchev 's regime, the Khrushchev government believed that absent a criminal law against same-sex sexual intercourse, the sex between men that occurred in the prison environment would spread into the general population as they released many Stalin-era prisoners. Whereas the Stalin government conflated homosexuality with pedophilia , the Khrushchev government conflated homosexuality with the situational , sometimes forced , sex acts between male prisoners.

[ 151 ] In 1958, the Interior Ministry sent a secret memo to law enforcement ordering them to step up enforcement of the anti-gay criminal law. Yet, during the late 1950s – early 1960s, Aline Mosby, a foreign reporter in Russia at the time, attributed to the more liberal attitude of the Khrushchev government the fact that she saw some gay couples in public and that it was not uncommon to see men waiting outside of certain theaters looking for dates with male performers.

[ 152 ] A 1964 Soviet sex manual instructed: "With all the tricks at their disposal, homosexuals seek out and win the confidence of youngsters. Then they proceed to act. Do not under any circumstances allow them to touch you. Such people should be immediately reported to the administrative organs so that they can be removed from society." [ 153 ] Imprisonment for male same-sex sexual intercourse and government censorship of homosexuality and LGBTQ rights did not begin to slowly relax until the early 1970s.

Venedikt Yerofeyev was permitted to include a brief interior monologue about homosexuality in Moscow to the End of the Line (1973). Perhaps the first public endorsement of LGBTQ rights since Stalin was a brief statement, critical of Article 121 and calling for its repeal, made in the Textbook of Soviet Criminal Law (1973).

[ 144 ] These references were characterized as being brief statements in a novel or textbook and were made by heterosexuals. Victor Sosnora was allowed to write about witnessing an elderly gay actor being brutally murdered in a Leningrad bar in The Flying Dutchman (1979), but the book was only allowed to be published in East Germany. When the author was gay and, in particular, if they were seen as supporting gay rights, the censors tended to be much harsher.

Russian gay author Yevgeny Kharitonov illegally circulated some gay fiction before he died of heart failure in 1981. Author Gennady Trifonov served four years of hard labor for circulating his gay poems and, upon his release, was allowed to write and publish only if he avoided depicting or making reference to homosexuality.

[ 154 ] In 1984, a group of Russian gay men met and attempted to organize an official gay rights organization, only to be quickly shut down by the KGB . It was not until later in the Glasnost period that public discussion was permitted about re-legalizing private, consensual adult same-sex sexual intercourse.

A poll conducted in 1989 reported that homosexuals were the most hated group in Russian society and that 30 percent of those polled felt that homosexuals should be liquidated.

[ 143 ] In a 1991 public opinion poll conducted in Chelyabinsk 30 percent of the respondents aged 16 to 30 years old felt that homosexuals should be "isolated from society", 5 percent felt they should be "liquidated", 60 percent had a "negative" attitude toward gay people and 5 percent labeled their sexual orientation "unfortunate".

[ 153 ] In 1989–1990 a Moscow gay rights organization led by Yevgeniya Debryanskaya was permitted to exist, with Roman Kalinin given permission to publish a gay newspaper, Tema .

[ 155 ] The precise number of persons prosecuted under Article 121 is unknown, with the first official information was released only in 1988, but it is believed to be about 1000 prosecuted a year. According to official data, the number of men convicted under Article 121 had been steadily decreasing during the Glasnost period. In 1987, 831 men were sentenced under Article 121; in 1989, 539; in 1990, 497; and in 1991, 462.

[ 156 ] Ukraine (Ukrainian SSR) [ edit ] Main article: LGBT rights in Ukraine Yugoslavia [ edit ] See also: LGBT history in Yugoslavia During World War II , Yugoslav Partisans whose homosexuality was revealed were subject to regular expulsion from their detachments, and in one known case a death sentence.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] Repression of LGBTQ people in Yugoslavia continued after World War II; LGBTQ people were labeled by communists as "enemies of the system" and "a product of insatiable capitalism" and were also prohibited from joining the Communist Party of Yugoslavia . When the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was formed, it adopted the Yugoslav Criminal Code of 1929, a previous law of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia which forbade "lewdness against the order of nature" ( anal intercourse ) between people. The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia later restricted the offense in 1959 to only apply to male same-sex anal intercourse, but with the maximum sentence reduced from two years to one year imprisonment.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] Around five hundred male homosexuals have been imprisoned between 1951 and 1977, about half of which served probation, and some others served shorter sentences. For comparison, many Western European countries (such as West Germany and the United Kingdom ) convicted several tens of thousands homosexuals during the same period.

[ 161 ] In the 1970s, following the sexual revolution in much of Western Europe, the legal and social sphere of Yugoslavia started to liberalize towards LGBTQ rights. In 1973, the Croatian Medical Chamber removed homosexuality from its list of mental disorders. In 1974, Yugoslavia adopted a new federal constitution which resulted in the abolition of the federal penal code, allowing each socialist republic to create their own.

SR Slovenia was the first republic to hold discussions in favor of decriminalizing homosexuality. The League of Communists of Yugoslavia held debates on the topic at least three times until 1976, when it requested decriminalization in all republics. In 1977, the Socialist Autonomous Province of Vojvodina , Socialist Republic of Croatia , Socialist Republic of Montenegro and Socialist Republic of Slovenia enacted their own individual penal codes and decriminalized male same-sex anal intercourse. Male same-sex anal intercourse remained illegal in the Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina , Socialist Republic of Macedonia and the Socialist Republic of Serbia , excluding the Socialist Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (so including Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo ).

[ 162 ] In 1985, Toni Marošević became the first openly gay media person, and briefly hosted a radio show on Omladinski radio that dealt with marginal socio-political issues, before it was removed at request of right-wing newspapers Večernji list and Večernje novosti .

[ 163 ] He later revealed that he had been asked on several occasions by the League of Communists of Croatia to form an LGBTQ faction of the party. The first lesbian association (Lila initiative) in Croatia was formed in 1989, but ceased to exist a year later.

[ 158 ] In 1990, Vojvodina was reincorporated into the legal system of Serbia, and male same-sex anal intercourse once again become a criminal offense, until 1994.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] Notable LGBTQ communists [ edit ] LGBTQ communists [ edit ] Name Lifetime Nationality Political affiliation(s) Career Sexual orientation Gender identity Mark Ashton 1960–1987 British Communist Party of Great Britain British activist Gay Male Georgy Chicherin 1872–1936 Soviet (formally Russian) Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Soviet politician Gay Male Leslie Feinberg 1949–2014 American Workers World Party American activist Lesbian Female (transgender) Harry Hay 1912–2002 American Communist Party, USA American activist Gay Male Júlio Fogaça 1907–1980 Portuguese Portuguese Communist Party Portuguese activist Gay Male Torstein Dahle b. 1947 Norwegian Rød Valgallianse , Rødt Norwegian political and Economist Gay Male Vladimir Luxuria b. 1965 Italian Communist Refoundation Party Italian politician ?

Female (transgender) Sunil Pant b. 1972 Nepalese Communist Party of Nepal (United) Nepalese politician Gay Male Angela Davis b. 1944 American Communist Party USA American activist Lesbian Female LGBTQ former communists [ edit ] Name Lifetime Nationality Previous political affiliation(s) Later political affiliation(s) Career Sexual orientation Gender identity Rosario Crocetta b. 1951 Italian Communist Refoundation Party Italian Communist Party (until 1991) Social democrat Italian politician Gay Male Tom Driberg 1905–1976 British Communist Party of Great Britain Social democrat British politician Gay Male Franco Grillini b. 1955 Italian Italian Communist Party Social democrat Italian politician Gay Male Bayard Rustin 1912–1987 American Social Democrats, USA Neoconservative American activist Gay Male See also [ edit ] Communism portal LGBTQ portal Gay Left History of communism LGBT rights New Left Pink capitalism Queer anarchism Socialism and LGBT rights References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Huneke, Samuel (22 March 2022).

"Communist states have sometimes been havens for LGBTQ rights" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 12 April 2022 .

^ Dynes, Wayne (22 February 2016).

Encyclopedia of Homosexuality Volume II . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-36812-0 – via Google Books .

^ Hekma, Gert; Oosterhuis, Harry (1995).

Gay Men and the Sexual Revolution . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-1-56024-724-1 .

^ Bauer, Heike (2017).

The Hirschfeld Archives: Violence, Death, and Modern Queer Culture .

Temple University Press .

doi : 10.26530/oapen_628406 .

ISBN 978-1-4399-1432-8 .

^ Neuman, R. P. (1974). "The Sexual Question and Social Democracy in Imperial Germany".

Journal of Social History .

7 (3): 271– 286.

doi : 10.1353/jsh/7.3.271 .

ISSN 0022-4529 .

JSTOR 3786307 .

^ "Famous LGBTI Lawyers" .

www.unil.ch . Retrieved 10 January 2022 .

^ a b c d e Lauritsen, John; Thorstad, David (1974).

The Early Homosexual Rights Movement (1864–1935) . New York: Times Change Press . pp.

28– 29, 58– 59, 62– 69.

ISBN 0-87810-027-X .

. Revised edition published 1995, ISBN 0-87810-041-5 .

^ Storer, Colin (28 May 2013).

A Short History of the Weimar Republic (illustrated ed.).

I. B. Tauris . p. 156.

ISBN 9781780761763 . Retrieved 22 March 2015 – via Google Books .

^ Steakley, James D. (1995).

Hekma, Gert ; Oosterhuis, Harry (eds.).

Gay Men and the Sexual History of the Political Left, Volume 29, Issues 2–3 .

Psychology Press . p. 197.

ISBN 9781560247241 . Retrieved 22 March 2015 – via Google Books .

^ Healey, Dan (15 October 2001).

Homosexual Desire in Revolutionary Russia: The Regulation of Sexual and Gender Dissent . University of Chicago Press. p. 133.

ISBN 978-0-226-32233-9 – via Google Books .

^ Dollimore, Jonathan (19 September 2018).

Sexual Dissidence .

Oxford University Press . p. 167.

ISBN 978-0-19-256191-6 – via Google Books .

^ Solomon, Susan Gross (2014).

"Soviet Social Hygienists and Sexology after the Revolution: Dynamics of 'Capture' at Home and Abroad" .

Ab Imperio .

2014 (4): 107– 135.

doi : 10.1353/imp.2014.0118 .

ISSN 2164-9731 .

S2CID 72670505 .

^ Healey, Dan (2001).

Homosexual Desire in Revolutionary Russia .

University of Chicago Press .

doi : 10.7208/chicago/9780226922546.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-226-32234-6 .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .

"Russia: Update to RUS13194 of 16 February 1993 on the treatment of homosexuals" .

Refworld . Retrieved 12 September 2015 .

^ "Anne Buetikofer — Homosexuality in the Soviet Union and in today's Russia" . Savanne.ch. 11 April 1999. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 September 2015 .

^ "Doug Ireland: Turns out Norman Thomas's Socialist Party Came Close to Breaking the Gay Taboo in 1952" . Archived from the original on 1 July 2009 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ Jellonnek, Burkhard (1990).

Homosexuelle unter dem Hakenkreuz. Die Verfolgung von Homosexuellen im Dritten Reich [ Homosexuals under the swastika. The persecution of homosexuals in the Third Reich ] (in German). Paderborn: Verlag Ferdinand Schöningh . p. 64.

ISBN 3-506-77482-4 .

. In Hergemöller, Mann , p. 332, the entry date of 1 May 1933 is most likely incorrect.

^ Kaufmann, Bernhard; Reisener, Eckhard; Schwips, Dieter; Walther, Henri (1993).

Der Nachrichtendienst der KPD 1919−1937 [ The KPD's intelligence service 1919-1937 ] (in German). Berlin: Dietz Verlag. p. 234.

ISBN 3-320-01817-5 .

^ Kaufmann, Bernhard; Reisener, Eckhard; Schwips, Dieter; Walther, Henri (1993).

Der Nachrichtendienst der KPD 1919−1937 [ The KPD's intelligence service 1919-1937 ] (in German). Berlin: Dietz Verlag. p. 291.

ISBN 3-320-01817-5 .

^ In connection with a note on an index of the NSDAP: Hergemöller, Mann , p. 332.

^ Alexander, Rustam (Spring 2018).

"Soviet Legal and Criminological Debates on the Decriminalization of Homosexuality (1965–75)" (PDF) .

Slavic Review .

77 (1): 31– 32.

doi : 10.1017/slr.2018.9 .

S2CID 156053170 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2019 – via Cambridge Core .

^ Healey, Dan (29 March 2012).

"A Russian History of Homophobia" .

The Moscow Times .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2020 . Retrieved 12 October 2020 .

^ a b Whyte, Harry (May 1934).

" "Can a Homosexual be a Member of the Communist Party?" " .

HOMINTERN . Translated by Thomas Campbell.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2020 . Retrieved 12 October 2020 .

^ Timmons 1990 , pp. 64–65.

^ Timmons 1990 , pp. 193–197.

^ Timmons 1990 , pp. 143–145.

^ Timmons 1990 , p. 230.

^ Bronski, Michael (7 July 2002).

"The real Harry Hay" .

The Phoenix .

Archived from the original on 2 March 2012 . Retrieved 5 September 2020 .

He was, at times, a serious political embarrassment, as when he consistently advocated the inclusion of the North American Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA) in gay-pride parades.

^ Markowitz, Norman (6 August 2013).

"The Communist movement and gay rights: The hidden history" . Political Affairs. Archived from the original on 16 August 2013 . Retrieved 27 January 2015 .

^ Pratt, Minnie Bruce (18 November 2014).

"Leslie Feinberg - A communist who revolutionized transgender rights" .

Workers World . Retrieved 5 September 2020 .

^ a b Kelliher 2014 .

^ Skeates 2007 .

^ a b Weindling, Paul (22 July 1993).

Health, Race and German Politics Between National Unification and Nazism, 1870-1945 .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521423977 – via Google Books .

^ Hekma, Gert ; Oosterhuis, Harry; Steakley, James D. (1995).

Gay Men and the Sexual History of the Political Left . Vol. 29.

Psychology Press .

ISBN 9781560247241 – via Google Books .

^ a b "Marxism".

Encyclopedia of Homosexuality . Vol. 2.

^ Luca Prono (2004).

"McCarthyism" .

glbtq.com . Archived from the original on 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 9 March 2015 .

^ Carlson, Dennis (1997).

"Gayness, multicultural education, and community" .

Beyond black and white: New faces and voices in the U.S. Schools . SUNY Press. pp.

233– 256.

ISBN 9780791433676 – via Google Books .

^ Field, Douglas, ed. (2005).

American cold war culture .

Edinburgh University Press .

ISBN 9780748619238 – via Google Books .

^ Cuordileone, K.A. (2000). " 'Politics in an Age of Anxiety': Cold War Political Culture and the Crisis in American Masculinity, 1949–1960".

The Journal of American History .

87 (2): 515– 545.

doi : 10.2307/2568762 .

JSTOR 2568762 .

^ Damousi, Joy; Plotkin, Mariano Ben (5 January 2012).

Psychoanalysis and Politics: Histories of Psychoanalysis Under Conditions of Restricted Political Freedom .

Oxford University Press . p. 221.

ISBN 978-0-19-992316-8 – via Google Books .

^ Lerner, Max (1959).

The Unfinished Country: A Book of American Symbols .

Simon and Schuster . pp.

313– 316.

^ Faderman, Lillian; Timmons, Stuart (2006).

Gay L.A.: A History of Sexual Outlaws, Power Politics, and Lipstick Lesbians .

Basic Books . p. 113.

ISBN 978-0-465-02288-5 . Retrieved 16 January 2025 – via Internet Archive .

^ Charles, Douglas M. (5 April 2012). "Communist and Homosexual: The FBI, Harry Hay, and the Secret Side of the Lavender Scare, 1943–1961".

American Communist History .

11 (1): 101– 124.

doi : 10.1080/14743892.2012.666097 .

ISSN 1474-3906 .

S2CID 159995629 .

^ Kimmage, Michael (2009).

The Conservative Turn: Lionel Trilling, Whittaker Chambers, and the Lessons of Anti-Communism .

Harvard University Press . pp.

52– 54.

ISBN 978-0-674-03258-3 .

^ "Greece passes bill allowing civil partnerships for same-sex couples" .

The Guardian .

Reuters . 23 December 2015.

^ "Κουτσούμπας: Όχι στο σύμφωνο συμβίωσης και στο δικαίωμα υιοθεσίας για ομοφυλόφιλους" [Koutsoubas: Not in the cohabitation agreement and in the right to adoption for homosexuals] (in Greek). mao.gr. 28 August 2014.

^ Patsiouris, Nikos (4 September 2014).

"After all, homophobia is a Greek word" .

GBTimes.com . Archived from the original on 17 June 2018 . Retrieved 12 August 2017 .

^ "Greek Communist Party Pushes Anti-Gay Bigotry" .

Workers Vanguard . International Communist League (Fourth International). 6 May 2016.

^ "Russian State Duma: 'Possessed printer' or executor of the people's will?" .

themoscownews.com . 29 January 2014. Archived from the original on 1 March 2014.

^ a b "Russian MPs vote overwhelmingly to outlaw gay 'propaganda' " .

Euronews . 11 June 2013. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020.

^ "Unsere Positionen zum Thema Queer" .

kpoe.at . Communist Party of Austria (KPÖ) . Retrieved 5 October 2024 .

^ DM (21 June 2016).

"Unite to Defend and Strengthen LGBTQ2SI Rights!" .

Communist Party of Canada - Parti Communiste du Canada . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ admin (25 August 2016).

"Canada and the Fightback: 38th Central Convention, Main Political Report, Section two" .

Communist Party of Canada - Parti Communiste du Canada . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ admin (23 June 2017).

"Pride 2017: An Injury to One is an Injury to All!" .

Communist Party of Canada - Parti Communiste du Canada . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ "Boiling Point: The Struggle against Capitalism and Monarchy in Swaziland" .

Red Africa Network . 22 June 2022 . Retrieved 25 October 2024 .

^ "Communist Party of Swaziland LGBTQI+ Protest" .

Twitter . 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 12 May 2023 .

^ Pierre, Bréchon (2011), Les partis politiques français , La documentation française ^ Analyse du scrutin n° 259 – Première séance du 12/02/2013 Results of the vote on the National Assembly's website ^ "Un député PCF contre le mariage gay" Archived 17 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine in Rouges & verts in Lemonde.fr, 11 January 2013 ^ a b "Greek Communist Party on Cohabitation Agreement" .

Ριζοσπάστης . 20 December 2015.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2015 . Retrieved 20 December 2015 .

^ Charalambous, Giorgos (2020). "The Communists". In Kevin Featherstone; Dimitri A. Sotiropoulos (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Modern Greek Politics (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 324.

ISBN 978-0-19-882510-4 .

^ "Δήλωση του Δημήτρη Κουτσούμπα για τη Διεθνή Ημέρα κατά της Ομοφοβίας" .

www.kke.gr (in Greek).

Archived from the original on 17 May 2022 . Retrieved 19 May 2022 .

^ "Greece's Mitsotakis makes progressive pivot with same-sex marriage bill" .

POLITICO . 7 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "SFI plans push for LGBTQ rights across campuses" .

The Indian Express . 16 October 2018 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ "In solidarity with LGBT community, CPI-M's youth arm demands education, job reservation for transgenders across India" .

Hindustan Times . 12 February 2017 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ "AIDWA Bengal to take up LGBT rights for first time" .

Deccan Herald . 21 November 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ a b "CPI(M) Releases Manifesto, Proposes Stoppage Of Mass Surveillance, Min Wage Of 18,000 Per Month" .

Moneycontrol . 28 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ IANS (28 March 2014).

"Manifestos bring hope to lesbians, gays et al (Election Special)" .

Business Standard India . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ "CPI-M releases manifesto, calls for anti-discriminatory bill covering LGBTQIA+" .

Mumbai Mirror . 29 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ Ghoshal, Somak (5 March 2014).

"Politics | Rainbow coalition" .

livemint.com . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ "Out and proud: India's opposition parties embrace same-sex civil unions" .

South China Morning Post . 12 April 2024 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ "Congress supports same-sex union in its manifesto" .

The Hindu . 5 April 2024.

ISSN 0971-751X . Archived from the original on 5 April 2024 . Retrieved 16 January 2025 .

^ "LGBTQ Policy – People Before Profit" . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ a b Atkins, C.J. (6 February 2024).

"Japanese Communists' first woman leader, Tomoko Tamura, comes out punching for peace" .

peoplesworld.org . Japanese Communist Party (JCP) . Retrieved 5 October 2024 .

^ "Nepal: Keep Promise, Condemn Abduction Based on Sexual Orientation | Human Rights Watch" . 16 April 2007 . Retrieved 21 April 2024 .

^ "Nepal: Maoists Should End Anti-Gay Violence | Human Rights Watch" . 16 April 2007 . Retrieved 21 April 2024 .

^ "Rødt" .

roedt.no (in Norwegian) . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ "Promoting LGBT+ rights in Russia: The liberal view" .

Liberal International . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ Times, The Moscow (29 October 2015).

"Russian Communist Party Members Want to Make Coming Out Illegal" .

The Moscow Times . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ "South African opposition protests Uganda's anti-LGBTQ bill" .

AP News . 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 October 2024 .

^ Hendricks, Text by Mary-Anne Gontsana Photos by Ashraf (24 July 2023).

"Supporters of gay rights and EFF members go head to head at UCT" .

GroundUp News . Retrieved 25 October 2024 .

^ Calitz, Ernst (24 July 2023).

"UCT protest against anti-gay academic Patrick Lumumba at EFF event" .

Daily Maverick . Retrieved 25 October 2024 .

^ Vanasco, Jennifer (3 March 2009).

"Philippines ends ban on gays in military" .

365 Gay . Archived from the original on 4 March 2009 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

^ Jackman, Josh (26 February 2019).

"Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte claims '40 percent' of rebels are gay" .

PinkNews . Retrieved 26 April 2021 .

^ a b emir, serap (25 June 2023).

"Komünist LGBT'ler: Onur Haftamız kutlu olsun! Eşit yurttaşlık sosyalizmde!" .

Türkiye Komünist Partisi (in Turkish) . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ Communist Youth of Turkey (25 June 2021).

"Eşit yurttaşlık sosyalizmde!" .

Twitter .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ Goel, Taylor.

"Interview with the Communist Party of Turkey: "Now is the time for socialism!" – Liberation News" . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ The New Arab Staff (17 March 2021).

"Turkish communist-led municipality to give LGBTQ workers Pride holiday" .

newarab.com . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ "Erkan Baş'tan Erdoğan'a sert sözler" .

www.cumhuriyet.com.tr (in Turkish). 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ Minute, Turkish (11 April 2023).

"Workers' Party of Turkey nominates country's only transgender parliamentary candidate" .

Turkish Minute . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ English, Duvar (13 April 2023).

"Trans women candidates from Turkish Workers' Party running for parliamentary seats" .

www.duvarenglish.com (in Turkish) . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ Kelliher 2014 , pp. 12–13.

^ Linehan, Thomas (2007).

Communism in Britain, 1920–39: From the Cradle to the Grave .

Manchester University Press . p. 45.

ISBN 9780719071409 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 – via Google Books .

^ Kelliher 2014 , pp. xx.

^ "Identity politics are anti-Marxian and a harmful diversion from the class struggle" .

The Communists . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ "Why gay rights is not a class issue" .

The Communists . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ "The reactionary nightmare of 'gender fluidity' " .

The Communists . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist-Leninist) (12 July 2023).

"This is video footage of an LGBT parade in Munich. Munich of the "Beerhall putsch"!" .

Twitter .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2024.

^ Revolutionary Communist Party (Spring 1988).

"On the Question of Homosexuality and the Emancipation of Women" (PDF) .

Revolution .

Revolutionary Communist Party .

^ "The Draft Programme of the RCP,USA" .

revcom.us . Retrieved 13 April 2023 .

^ Perez, José G. (19 April 2004).

"The SWP, Gay Liberation and Leninism" .

Socialist Workers Party . Archived from the original on 22 April 2005 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 .

^ "Permanent Revolution in the U.S. Today" .

socialism.com . Trotskyist and Revolutionary Socialist Conference. 30 November 1985. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 .

^ "Down with the Ban on Gay Marriage!" .

League for the Revolutionary Party . Retrieved 12 September 2015 .

^ "Über uns — DKP Queer" [About us — DKP Queer] (in German). DKP Queer; German Communist Party . Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

DKP queer ist eine Kommission des Parteivorstandes der DKP, die sich mit Orientierung, Geschlechtern und Praktiken menschlicher Sexualität beschäftigt.

[DKP queer is an agency of the party executive committee of the DKP [the German Communist Party], which deals with [sexual] orientation, gender, and human sexual practises.] ^ "Communists elect gay artist as new leader" .

YLE . 9 June 2013. Archived from the original on 16 January 2025 . Retrieved 16 January 2025 .

^ Ellis, Jo (4 July 1999).

"Homosexuality in Cuba: revolution within the revolution" .

greenleft.news .

^ Tatchell, Peter (Spring 2002).

"Gay Rights and Wrongs in Cuba" . Gay and Lesbian Humanist. Archived from the original on 21 August 2002 . Retrieved 8 March 2015 .

^ a b c Arguelles, Lourdes; Rich, B. Ruby (1985).

"Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution: Notes toward an Understanding of the Cuban Lesbian and Gay Male Experience" .

Signs .

11 (1): 120– 136.

doi : 10.1086/494093 .

S2CID 222288544 . Archived from the original on 16 January 2025.

^ a b "Gay and Lesbian Rights in Cuba" (PDF) .

Cuba Solidarity Campaign . p. 3.

^ Halatyn, Justin (24 October 2012).

"From Persecution to Acceptance? The History of LGBT Rights in Cuba" .

Council on Hemispheric Affairs . Retrieved 4 July 2022 .

^ Llovio-Menéndez, José Luis (1988).

Insider: my hidden life as a revolutionary in Cuba . Toronto: Bantam Books . pp.

156– 158, 172– 174.

ISBN 9780553051148 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 – via Google Books .

^ Lockwood, Lee (1990).

Castro's Cuba, Cuba's Fidel ([Rev.] ed.). Boulder: Westview Press. p. 124.

ISBN 0-8133-1086-5 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 – via Google Books .

^ "Gay and Lesbian Humanist - Gay Rights and Wrongs in Cuba" . 21 August 2002. Archived from the original on 21 August 2002 . Retrieved 9 November 2021 .

^ Hatch, Marcel (26 July 2008).

"Cuba: Celebrations of advancing gay rights" . Green Left . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

^ Evans, Rachel (23 December 2011).

"Rainbow Cuba: the sexual revolution within the revolution" . Links International Journal of Socialist Renewal.

^ "Cuba marks Latin America's first LGBTQ+ history month" .

Reuters . 16 May 2022 . Retrieved 19 July 2022 .

^ Newton, Creede (2 August 2015).

"Is Cuba becoming a haven for LGBT rights?" .

Al Jazeera .

^ "Cuba gay pride calls for same-sex marriage to become legal" .

BBC News . 10 May 2015.

^ Frank, Marc (26 September 2022).

"Cubans approve gay marriage by large margin in referendum" .

Reuters . Retrieved 27 September 2022 .

^ Carey, Henry F. (10 October 2014).

European Institutions, Democratization, and Human Rights Protection in the European Periphery .

Lexington Books . p. 349.

ISBN 9781498502054 .

^ Itaborahy, Lucas Paoli, ed. (2012).

State-sponsored Homophobia: A world survey of laws criminalising same-sex sexual acts between consenting adults (PDF) (Report).

International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association . p. 14. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 June 2012 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ "Décret № 47-229 du 19 novembre 1947 modifiant ou complétant les articles 12, 264, 302, 312, 317, 331, 332, 337, 339, 340, 341, 360, 405 et 483 du code pénal applicable en Afrique occidentale française" [Decree № 47-229 of 19 November 1947 modigying or completing articles ... of the penal code applicable to French West Africa].

Journal officiel de la République française (in French). 23 November 1947. p. 11569.

^ "Nakazatelen kodeks ot 1951 g. (Osobena chast – Prestŭpleniya protiv lichnostta / Prestŭpleniya protiv lichnata sobstvenost)" Наказателен кодекс от 1951 г. (Особена част – Престъпления против личността / Престъпления против личната собственост) [Penal Code 1951 (Special Part – Offenses against the Person / Offenses against Personal Property)] (in Bulgarian). 8 September 2009.

^ Ferreira, Lou (3 October 2018).

" 'Sexual liberation, socialist style': an overlooked women's rights story?" .

openDemocracy . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ Ha, Nathan (2015). "Detecting and Teaching Desire: Phallometry, Freund, and Behaviorist Sexology".

Osiris .

30 (1): 211.

doi : 10.1086/683020 .

PMID 27066625 .

S2CID 35890719 .

^ Carroll, Aengus, ed. (October 2016).

"State-Sponsored Homophobia: A World Survey of Sexual Orientation Laws: Criminalisation, Protection and Recognition" (PDF) (11th ed.).

ILGA .

^ Krakus, Anna; Vatulescu, Cristina (2019).

"Foucault in Poland: A Silent Archive" .

Diacritics .

47 (2): 72– 105.

doi : 10.1353/dia.2019.0020 .

S2CID 258106215 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ Ammon, Richard.

"A Brief History of Gay Poland" .

^ Shapiro, Ari.

"Tomasz Jedrowski's Debut Novel Tells Teenage Love Story In '80s Poland" .

NPR.org .

National Public Radio , Inc . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ "Legislație românească discriminatorie pentru LGBT – Istoric" [Discriminatory Romanian legislation for LGBT - History].

ACCEPT (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 4 September 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2016 .

^ a b "Legislația românească privind homosexualitatea" [Romanian legislation on homosexuality].

suntgay.ro (in Romanian).

^ Năstase, Mihnea Ion (2004).

"Gay and Lesbian Rights" .

Romania since 1989: Politics, Economics, and Society .

Lexington Books . pp.

315– 316.

ISBN 9780739105924 .

^ "Scandaluri publice. Orientarea sexuală și legea penală în Romania" [Public scandals. Sexual orientation and criminal law in Romania] (PDF) .

Report by Human Rights Watch and International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (in Romanian). ACCEPT. October 1988.

^ John, Kripa (31 August 2015).

"Communism and Its Effect on Gay Rights in Romania" .

Washington State University . Archived from the original on 21 October 2016 . Retrieved 20 August 2016 .

^ Hendriks, Aart; Tielman, Rob; van der Veen, Evert (1993).

The Third Pink Book: A Global View of Lesbian and Gay Liberation and Oppression . Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books . p. 208.

ISBN 9780879758318 .

^ "Somalia Country Assessment" (PDF) .

Refworld .

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .

^ Ali, Noor.

"Gay Somali refugees face death threats" .

Al Jazeera .

^ Healey, Dan (Summer 2001). "Masculine purity and 'Gentlemen's Mischief': Sexual Exchange and Prostitution between Russian Men, 1861–1941".

Slavic Review .

60 (2): 258.

doi : 10.2307/2697270 .

JSTOR 2697270 .

S2CID 42687288 .

^ "Azerbaijan: Information on the Treatment of Homosexuals" .

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees . Archived from the original on 9 October 2012 . Retrieved 20 January 2011 .

^ Berman, Harold Joseph, ed. (1966).

Soviet criminal law and procedure: the RSFSR codes .

Harvard University Press . p. 196.

^ Goodall, Kay Eileen; Malloch, Margaret S.; Munro, Bill; Munro, William G. (1 January 2013).

Building Justice in Post-transition Europe: Processes of Criminalisation Within Central and Eastern European Societies .

Routledge .

ISBN 9780415697132 – via Google Books .

^ West, Green (31 October 1997).

Sociolegal Control of Homosexuality: A Multi-Nation Comparison . Springer. p. 224.

ISBN 9780306455322 – via Google Books .

^ a b "Resource Information Center" .

United States Citizenship and Immigration Services . 14 October 2015 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ a b Duberman 1989 , p.362.

^ a b c d "Can a homosexual be a member of the Communist Party?" .

Workers World . 7 October 2004. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ Healey, Dan (2001).

Homosexual Desire in Revolutionary Russia . p. 188.

^ "Proletarian Humanism" 23 May 1934 ^ "Can a homosexual be a member of the Communist Party?" . Archived from the original on 29 March 2019 . Retrieved 28 June 2013 .

^ Steakley, James.

Gay Men and the Sexual History of the Political Left . Vol. 29. p. 170.

^ Ginsberg, Terri ; Mensch, Andrea (13 February 2012).

A Companion to German Cinema .

John Wiley & Sons .

ISBN 978-1-4051-9436-5 .

^ "A History of Homophobia" .

The Moscow Times . Archived from the original on 8 March 2014 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ The View from No. 13 People's Street. Aline Mosby. 1962 ^ a b Barshay, Jill J. (10 February 1993).

"Russia's Gay Men Step Out of Soviet-Era Shadows" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ Duberman 1989 , p.363.

^ "Russian Gay History" . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ Kon, Igor (19 July 2011).

"Soviet Homophobia" . International Libertarian Socialist Alliance. Archived from the original on 11 September 2012 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ Schlagdenhauffen, Régis (18 September 2018).

Queer in Europe during the Second World War .

Council of Europe . p. 139.

ISBN 9789287188632 . Retrieved 16 July 2022 .

^ a b "Povijest LGBTIQ aktivizma u Hrvatskoj: LGBT-Prava" [History of LGBTIQ activism in Croatia: LGBT-Rights] (in Serbo-Croatian). Lgbt-prava.ba. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Slovenia Age of Consent" . Archived from the original on 14 April 2016 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ "Krivični zakonik (Sl.list FNRJ br. 13/51), član 186" [Criminal Code (Official Gazette of FNRJ No. 13/51), Article 186] (in Serbian). Archived from the original on 3 November 2013.

Za protivprirodni blud između lica muškog pola, učinilac će se kazniti zatvorom do dve godine.

[For unnatural fornication between persons of the male gender, the perpetrator will be punished with imprisonment for up to two years.] ^ "Biti gej u SFRJ: zbog 'protuprirodnog bluda' osuđeno oko 500 muškaraca" [Being gay in SFRY: about 500 men convicted of 'unnatural fornication'].

www.crol.hr . 15 February 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2022 .

^ Vuletić, Dean (13 September 2002).

"Drugovi po oružju: Homoseksualnost, istoriografija i Drugi svetski rat" [Comrades in arms: Homosexuality, historiography and the Second World War] (PDF) (in Serbo-Croatian). Fabrika knjiga . Retrieved 16 July 2022 .

^ Spahić, Aida; Gavrić, Saša (2012).

Čitanka LGBT ljudskih prava, 2. dopunjeno izdanje [ LGBT Human Rights Reader, 2nd updated edition ] (PDF) (in Serbo-Croatian).

Sarajevo : Sarajevo Open Centre / Heinrich Böll Foundation .

ISBN 978-9958-577-02-4 . Retrieved 16 July 2022 .

^ "LGBTQ Timeline" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ Tapon, Francis (8 December 2011).

The Hidden Europe: What Eastern Europeans Can Teach Us . SonicTrek, Inc.

ISBN 9780976581222 – via Google Books .

Bibliography [ edit ] Kelliher, Diarmaid (2014). "Solidarity and Sexuality: Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners 1984–5".

History Workshop Journal .

77 (1): 240– 262.

doi : 10.1093/hwj/dbt012 .

S2CID 41955541 .

Skeates, Les (1 March 2007).

"Remembering Mark Ashton and Some 'Lost' Time" .

Outside The Gates . Archived from the original on 13 August 2007.

Timmons, Stuart (1990).

The Trouble with Harry Hay: Founder of the Modern Gay Movement . Boston: Alyson Publications.

ISBN 978-1555831752 .

^ Heidi Minning. Who is the 'I' in "I love you"?: The negotiation of gay and lesbian identities in former East Berlin, Germany.

Anthropology of East Europe Review , Volume 18, Number 2, Autumn 2000 Abrahams, Fred (1996).

Human Rights in Post-Communist Albania .

Human Rights Watch . p.

169 .

ISBN 9781564321602 . Retrieved 8 March 2015 .

Robinson, Lucy (2007).

Gay men and the left in post-war Britain: How the personal got political .

Manchester University Press . pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 9781847792334 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 – via Google Books .

v t e LGBTQ rights overview Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Intersex rights General Capital punishment Censorship of LGBTQ issues Criminalization Decriminalization Legal status of transgender people Legality of conversion therapy LGBTQ rights at the United Nations Activists Movements Organizations Societal attitudes Student movement Timeline of LGBTQ history Transgender rights movement By regions ( list ) Africa Americas North America South America Asia Europe European Union Oceania Middle East Commonwealth La Francophonie Post-Soviet states By years ( list ) 1700s 1800s 1900–1949 1950s 1960s 1970s 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980s 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990s 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000s 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010s 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020s 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Ideological Communism and LGBTQ rights LGBTQ conservatism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Libertarian perspectives on LGBTQ rights New Left Queer anarchism Queer radicalism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nkqnk
Cached time: 20250817231040
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.681 seconds
Real time usage: 1.842 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10001/1000000
Revision size: 108499/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 438345/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3025/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 602225/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.088/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25052712/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1510.660      1 -total
 57.96%  875.555      1 Template:Reflist
 25.26%  381.627     87 Template:Cite_web
 14.54%  219.649     39 Template:Cite_book
  7.97%  120.428     15 Template:Cite_news
  6.35%   95.893      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.63%   85.072      9 Template:Sfn
  5.62%   84.971      1 Template:Communism_sidebar
  5.59%   84.437     10 Template:Lang
  5.55%   83.868      1 Template:Communism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23472665:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817231040 and revision id 1294208928. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communism_and_LGBTQ_rights&oldid=1294208928 " Categories : Communism LGBTQ rights Marxism–Leninism Socialism and LGBTQ topics Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 uses Bulgarian-language script (bg) CS1 Bulgarian-language sources (bg) CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) CS1 Serbo-Croatian-language sources (sh) CS1 Serbian-language sources (sr) Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use dmy dates from June 2020 Articles containing German-language text Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 08:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communism and LGBTQ rights 12 languages Add topic

