Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 St. Martin's Hall Meeting, London, 1864 2 Internal tensions 3 Congresses 4 Hague Congress, 1872 5 After 1872: two First Internationals 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Primary sources 8.2 Secondary sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents International Workingmen's Association 59 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (First International) socialist political international (1864–1876) This article is about the socialist international. For the anarchist international, see International Working People's Association . For international anarcho-syndicalist union federation IWA-AIT, see IWA–AIT .

"First International" redirects here. For other uses, see First International (disambiguation) .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Portuguese .

(April 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Portuguese article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 547 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Portuguese Wikipedia article at [[:pt:Associação Internacional dos Trabalhadores]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|pt|Associação Internacional dos Trabalhadores}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

International Workingmen's Association Founding meeting of the IWA in London, 1864 Abbreviation IWA Predecessor International Association Successor Second International (not legal successor), International Working People's Association (claimed) Formation 28 September 1864 ; 160 years ago ( 1864-09-28 ) Founders George Odger , Henri Tolain , Edward Spencer Beesly , Karl Marx Dissolved July 1876 ; 149 years ago ( 1876-07 ) [ 1 ] Purpose Defense of the working class Class struggle against capitalism Establishment of a socialist society Headquarters St James's Hall , Regent Street , West End Location London (1864–1873) New York City (1873–1876) Region served Worldwide Membership 5–8 million Key people Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , Mikhail Bakunin , Louis Auguste Blanqui , Giuseppe Garibaldi Main organ Congress of the First International The International Workingmen's Association ( IWA ; 1864–1876), often called the First International , was a political international which aimed at uniting a variety of different left-wing socialist , social democratic , communist , [ 2 ] and anarchist groups and trade unions that were based on the working class and class struggle . It was founded in 1864 in a workmen's meeting held in St. Martin's Hall , London . Its first congress was held in 1866 in Geneva .

In Europe, a period of harsh reaction followed the widespread Revolutions of 1848 . The next major phase of revolutionary activity began almost twenty years later with the founding of the IWA in 1864. At its peak, the IWA reported having 8 million members [ 3 ] while police reported 5 million.

[ 4 ] In 1872, it split in two over conflicts between statist and anarchist factions and dissolved in 1876. The Second International was founded in 1889.

St. Martin's Hall Meeting, London, 1864 [ edit ] St. Martin's Hall On 28 September an international crowd of workers gathered to welcome the French delegates in St Martin's Hall in London. Among the many European radicals were English Owenites , followers of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Louis Auguste Blanqui , Irish and Polish nationalists , Italian republicans and German socialists.

[ 5 ] One of the German socialists, a 46-year-old émigré journalist named Karl Marx , would play a decisive role in the organisation but did not speak at the meeting.

[ 5 ] The positivist historian Edward Spencer Beesly , a professor at London University , was the chair.

[ 5 ] The meeting unanimously decided to found an international organisation of workers. The centre was to be in London, directed by a committee of 21, which was instructed to draft a programme and constitution. Most of the British members of the committee were drawn from the Universal League for the Material Elevation of the Industrious Classes [ 6 ] and were noted trade-union leaders like Odger, George Howell (former secretary of the London Trades Council , which itself declined affiliation to the IWA, although remaining close to it), Cyrenus Osborne Ward and Benjamin Lucraft and included Owenites and Chartists . The French members were Denoual, Victor Le Lubez and Bosquet. Italy was represented by Fontana. Other members were Louis Wolff , Johann Eccarius .

[ 7 ] This executive committee in turn selected a subcommittee to do the actual writing of the organisational programme—a group which included Marx and which met at his home about a week after the conclusion of the St. Martin's Hall assembly.

[ 5 ] This subcommittee deferred the task of collective writing in favour of sole authorship by Marx who ultimately drew up the fundamental documents of the new organisation.

[ 5 ] On 5 October, the General Council was formed with co-opted additional members representing other nationalities. It was based at the headquarters of the Universal League for the Material Elevation of the Industrious Classes at 18 Greek Street .

[ 8 ] Internal tensions [ edit ] At first, the IWA had mostly male membership, although in April 1865 it was agreed that women could become members. The initial leadership was exclusively male. At the IWA General Council meeting on 16 April 1867, a letter from the secularist speaker Harriet Law about women's rights was read and it was agreed to ask her if she would be willing to attend council meetings. On 25 June 1867, Law was admitted to the General Council and for the next five years was the only woman representative.

[ 9 ] Congresses [ edit ] Geneva Congress (1866) Lausanne Congress (1867) Brussels Congress (1868) Basel Congress (1869) Hague Congress, 1872 [ edit ] Main article: Hague Congress (1872) Karl Marx (1818–1883) The fifth Congress of the IWA was held from 2-7 September 1872 in The Hague , the Netherlands with 65 delegates attending. Though Bakunin's Alliance of Socialist Democracy had disbanded the previous year, [ citation needed ] Marx and Engels believed that the organisation still existed and was secretly plotting to control the IWA, resulting in the expulsion of Bakunin and members of the Alliance from the IWA.

[ 10 ] After the suppression of the Paris Commune (1871), Bakunin characterised Marx's ideas as authoritarian and argued that if a Marxist party came to power its leaders would end up as oppressive as the ruling class they had fought against (notably, in Statism and Anarchy ). In 1874, Marx wrote notes rebutting Bakunin's claims in this book, referring to them as mere political rhetoric without a theory of the State and without the knowledge of social class struggles and economic factors.

[ 11 ] The Portuguese section was one of the first to evolve into a party structure. Debates to create a socialist party began in 1873 [ 12 ] and the party was formed 10 January 1875.

After 1872: two First Internationals [ edit ] Mikhail Bakunin (1814–1876) Main articles: St. Imier Congress and Anti-authoritarian International The anarchist wing of the First International held a separate congress in September 1872 at St. Imier , Switzerland. The anarchists considered the expulsion of Bakunin and Guillaume as illegitimate and The Hague Congress as unrepresentative and improperly conducted. On 15–16 September 1872 at Saint-Imier, the Anarchist St. Imier International declared itself to be the true heir of the International. The Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA formed the largest national chapter of the anarchist bloc.

[ 13 ] On the Iberian Peninsula , the conflict within the IWA was acutely felt, rapidly transforming the region into another battleground between the two factions. The General Council attempted to curb the Alliance’s influence through the new Madrid Federation and Portuguese internationalists . On the opposing side, the anarchists, who held complete control of the working-class movement in Spain , tried to recruit Portuguese socialists to the Alliance.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Group of Narodnik Socialists The Internationale anthem Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Quint, Howard H.

The Forging of American Socialism: Origins of the Modern Movement. 2nd ed.

The American Heritage Series. (Indianapolis, New York & Kansas City: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc., 1964), 13, https://archive.org/details/forgingofamerica0000quin .

^ "Dictionary of politics: selected American and foreign political and legal terms" . Walter John Raymond. p. 85. Brunswick Publishing Corp. 1992. Retrieved January 27, 2010.

^ Testut, Oscar (May 29, 1871).

"Association International des Travailleurs" .

Journal Officiel (in French): 1152.

^ Payne, Robert (1968). "Marx: A Biography". Simon and Schuster: New York. p. 372.

^ a b c d e Saul K. Padover (ed. and trans.), "Introduction: Marx's Role in the First International," in Karl Marx, The Karl Marx Library, Volume 3: On the First International.

Saul K. Padover, ed. and trans. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1971; pg. xiv.

^ F. M. Leventhal, Respectable Radical: George Howell and Victorian Working Class Politics.

London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1971; p. ???

^ José Luis Rubio, Las internacionales obreras en América.

Madrid: 1971; p. 40.

^ F. M. Leventhal.

Respectable Radical . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson 1971.

^ Fauré, Christine (4 July 2013).

Political and Historical Encyclopaedia of Women . Routledge. pp.

345– 346.

ISBN 978-1-135-45691-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2013 .

^ Engels, Friedrich (August 1872).

Report on the Alliance presented in the name of the General Council to the Hague Congress (Report).

^ Conspectus of Bakunin’s Statism and Anarchy – Extract .

^ Lázaro, João (7 April 2023).

"The First International Seen from the Periphery: The Portuguese Case (1871–1876)" .

Labour History Review .

88 (1): 22.

doi : 10.3828/lhr.2023.1 .

^ Woodcock, George (2004).

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements . Broadview.

ISBN 9781551116297 .

^ Lázaro, João (2023).

"The First International Seen from the Periphery: The Portuguese Case (1871–1876)" .

Labour History Review .

88 : 17.

doi : 10.3828/lhr.2023.1 . Retrieved 30 July 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Primary sources [ edit ] Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe, Akademie-Verlag Berlin, vols. I/20–22: new edition of the minutes of the General Council of the International.

International Working Men's Association, Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868.

London: Westminster Printing Co., n.d. [1868].

The General Council of the First International. 1864–1866. The London Conference, 1865. Minutes.

Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1964.

The General Council of the First International. 1866–1868. Minutes.

Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1964.

The General Council of the First International. 1868–1870. Minutes.

Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1966.

The General Council of the First International. 1870–1871. Minutes.

Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1967.

The General Council of the First International. 1871–1872. Minutes Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1968.

The Hague Congress of the First International, September 2–7, 1872. Minutes and Documents.

Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1976.

The Hague Congress of the First International, September 2–7, 1872. Reports and Letters.

Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1978.

Secondary sources [ edit ] Samuel Bernstein, "The First International and the Great Powers," Science and Society , vol. 16, no. 3 (Summer 1952), pp. 247–272.

In JSTOR .

Samuel Bernstein, The First International in America .

New York: Augustus M. Kelley , 1962.

Samuel Bernstein, "The First International on the Eve of the Paris Commune," Science and Society, vol. 5, no. 1 (Winter 1941), pp. 24–42.

In JSTOR .

René Berthier, Social-Democracy and Anarchism: In the International Workers Association, 1864–1877.

London: Merlin Press, 2015.

Alex Blonna, Marxism and Anarchist Collectivism in the International Workingman's Association, 1864–1872.

MA thesis. California State University, Chico, 1977.

Henry Collins and Chimen Abramsky, Karl Marx and the British Labour Movement: Years of the First International.

London: Macmillan, 1965.

Henryk Katz, The Emancipation of Labor: A History of the First International.

Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1992.

Roger Morgan, The German Social Democrats and the First International, 1864–1872.

Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1965.

G. M. Stekloff, History of the First International .

Eden Paul and Cedar Paul (trans.). New York: International Publishers, 1928.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Workingmen's Association .

Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Internationale ".

Organized labour portal Anarchism portal Communism portal Socialism portal History of the International Workingmen's Association at Marxists.org Libertarian Communist Library Archived 2021-03-08 at the Wayback Machine Karl Marx's Inaugural Address of the International Working Men’s Association Secret Societies and the First International by Boris Nicolaevsky v t e International Workingmen's Association Congresses Geneva Congress (1866) Lausanne Congress (1867) Brussels Congress (1868) Basel Congress (1869) Hague Congress (1872) Office holders President 1864: George Odger 1867: Position reappointed at each meeting General Secretary 1864: Randal Cremer 1866: Peter Fox 1866: Randal Cremer 1867: Johann Eccarius 1871: John Hales 1872: Friedrich Sorge 1874: Carl Speyer Treasurer 1864: George William Wheeler 1865: William Dell 1865: George William Wheeler 1867: Robert Shaw 1868: Cornell William Frederick Stepney 1870: John Weston 1871: Albert Filix Thiesz 1871: Hermann Jung Affiliated organisations Cercle des prolétaires positivistes National Labor Union Activists Karl Marx Gabriel Mollin Mikhail Bakunin Pan-European political parties v t e Political internationals Active Conservative International Democracy Union Centrist Democrat International Progressive Progressive Alliance Progressive International Socialist Left communist International Communist Current International Communist Party Marxist–Leninist Coordination Committee of Maoist Parties and Organisations of South Asia European Communist Action International Meeting of Communist and Workers' Parties International Conference of Marxist–Leninist Parties and Organizations International Coordination of Revolutionary Organizations Trotskyist CWI CRFI FI (USFI) ICFI ICL-FI ICU IRL ISA IST IWL-FI LFI L5I RCI TF-FI WIRFI Other COPPPAL International League of Peoples' Struggle International Peoples' Assembly International Workers' Association São Paulo Forum Socialist International World Socialist Movement Other Global Greens ( Green ) Humanist International ( Universal Humanist ) Humanists International ( Secular humanist ) International Alliance of Libertarian Parties ( Libertarian ) International Monarchist League ( Monarchist ) Liberal International ( Liberal ) Muslim Brotherhood ( Islamist ) Pirate Parties International ( Pirate ) World Ecological Parties ( Ecologist ) World Union of National Socialists ( Neo-Nazi ) Historical Alliance of Democrats Anarchist St. Imier International Black International Committee for a Workers' International (1974) Communist Workers' International First International Second International Third International Vienna International International Agrarian Bureau International Entente of Radical and Similar Democratic Parties ILO International Revolutionary Marxist Centre International Secretariat of Democratic Parties of Christian Inspiration Labour and Socialist International Krestintern Fascist International Fourth International Situationist International Revolutionary Internationalist Movement International Communist Seminar E2D International West Indies Democratic Labour Party West Indies Federal Labour Party Young Europe Pan-European political parties Links to related articles v t e Karl Marx Family Heinrich Marx Henriette Pressburg Jenny von Westphalen Jenny Longuet Laura Marx Eleanor Marx Louise Juta Charles Longuet Paul Lafargue Edward Aveling Helene Demuth Biographies Karl Marx: The Story of His Life Karl Marx: His Life and Environment Karl Marx: His Life and Thought Films Die Deutschen Marx Reloaded The Young Karl Marx Miss Marx Memberships Communist League International Workingmen's Association Other cultural depictions Assassin's Creed Syndicate The Leader Karl Marx in Kalbadevi Marx in Soho Marx Returns " The Philosophers' Football Match " Tomb Statues " World Forum/Communist Quiz " Young Marx Related Friedrich Engels 2807 Karl Marx Opium of the people Timeline v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Norway Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wcbwl
Cached time: 20250817054833
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.056 seconds
Real time usage: 1.358 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4863/1000000
Revision size: 16296/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 385300/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 98465/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 95130/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.655/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8952558/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1055.784      1 -total
 39.61%  418.162     11 Template:Navbox
 31.59%  333.517      1 Template:Navboxes
 24.81%  261.901      1 Template:Anarchism
 23.56%  248.725      9 Template:Excerpt
 14.32%  151.229      1 Template:Reflist
 10.75%  113.512      1 Template:Infobox_organization
 10.59%  111.855      3 Template:Cite_journal
  9.94%  104.989      1 Template:Infobox
  7.59%   80.175      1 Template:First_International Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42437030:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817054833 and revision id 1304891294. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Workingmen%27s_Association&oldid=1304891294 " Categories : International Workingmen's Association Far-left politics History of anarchism History of socialism 1864 establishments in England 1876 disestablishments in Pennsylvania Trade unions established in 1864 Trade unions disestablished in the 1870s Organizations disestablished in 1876 Communist organizations in Europe International and regional union federations International socialist organizations Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from Portuguese Wikipedia All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 20:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Workingmen's Association 59 languages Add topic

