Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Physical geography 3 In popular culture 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Fonseca 44 languages العربية Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Kiswahili Lietuvių Македонски मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 13°15′N 87°45′W ﻿ / ﻿ 13.250°N 87.750°W ﻿ / 13.250; -87.750 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Gulf of the Pacific Ocean in El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gulf of Fonseca" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gulf of Fonseca Satellite Image, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 2001 Map showing position of the Gulf (bottom left) with respect to Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua The Gulf of Fonseca ( Spanish : Golfo de Fonseca ; pronounced [ˈɡol.fo ðe fonˈse.ka] ), a part of the Pacific Ocean , is a gulf in Central America , bordering El Salvador , Honduras , and Nicaragua . The waters of the gulf are shared among all three countries.

History [ edit ] Fonseca Bay was discovered by Europeans in 1522 by Gil González de Ávila , and named by him after his patron, Archbishop Juan Fonseca , the implacable enemy of Columbus.

[ 1 ] In 1849, E. G. Squier negotiated a treaty for the United States to build a canal across Honduras from the Caribbean Sea to the Gulf.

Frederick Chatfield , the British commander in Central America, was afraid the American presence in Honduras would destabilize the British Mosquito Coast , and sent his fleet to occupy El Tigre Island at the entrance to the Gulf. Shortly thereafter, however, Squier demanded the British leave, since he had anticipated the occupation and negotiated the island's temporary cession to the United States. Chatfield could only comply.

[ why?

] [ citation needed ] All three countries—Honduras, El Salvador, and Nicaragua—with coastline along the Gulf have been involved in a lengthy dispute over the rights to the Gulf and the islands located within.

In 1917, the Central American Court of Justice ruled in a trial which became known as the Fonseca case . It arose out of a controversy between El Salvador and Nicaragua. The latter had entered the Bryan–Chamorro Treaty which granted a portion of the bay to the United States for the establishment of a naval base. El Salvador argued that this violated its right to common ownership in the bay. The court sided with El Salvador, but the US decided to ignore the decision.

[ 2 ] International tensions over the Gulf were addressed by the United Nations ONUCA mission, starting in 1989 which included specific reference to the Gulf. For example, because the nature of the terrain in the region would have limited the efficacy of static observation posts, it was judged that the best results would be achieved by establishing mobile teams of observers, who would carry out regular patrols by road, by helicopter and, in the Gulf of Fonseca and nearby waters, by patrol boats and speedboats.

[ 3 ] In 1992, a chamber of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) decided the Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute, of which the Gulf dispute was a part. The ICJ determined that El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua were to share control of the Gulf of Fonseca. El Salvador was awarded the islands of Meanguera and Meanguerita, while Honduras was awarded El Tigre Island .

Physical geography [ edit ] See also: Punta El Chiquirín The Gulf of Fonseca covers an area of about 3,200 km 2 (1,200 sq mi), with a coastline that extends for 261 km (162 mi), of which 185 km (115 mi) are in Honduras, 40 km (25 mi) in Nicaragua, and 29 km (18 mi) in El Salvador.

The gulf is composed by a group of many volcanic islands, such as Zacate Grande and el Tigre in Honduras.

The climate in the Gulf is typical of tropical and subtropical regions, with two distinct seasons, the rainy and the dry. The Gulf receives nearly 80% of its total yearly rainfall of 1,400–1,600 mm (55–63 in) during the rainy season from May to November.

[ 4 ] The dry season occurs between December and May and contributes to an annual evaporation rate of 2,800 mm (110 in). As a result of less water flowing into the Gulf, the currents tend to flow inward from the Pacific Ocean, and levels of salinity in the estuaries increase, and seasonal drought occurs.

[ 5 ] Temperatures in the Gulf average between 25 and 30 °C (77–86 °F); March and April are the warmest months and November and December the coolest. Relative humidity varies between 65 and 86% depending on location. In contrast, the interior of the country is semitropical and cooler with an average temperature of 26 °C (79 °F).

[ 6 ] The vegetation of the wetland ecosystem is dominated by species of mangroves . Of the six species of mangrove identified in the Gulf, red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ) is the most common, mostly occupying the areas permanently inundated by the tides. Black mangrove ( Avicennia germinans ) is the second-most pervasive species and is generally found around the rivers where sediments are deposited along the shoreline. White mangrove ( Laguncularia racemosa ) is the third-most dominant, followed by botoncillo ( Conocarpus erectus ); both are generally found further inland and are inundated by the tide less frequently. The dominance of different species over others correlates with the frequency of floods, water quality, and levels of salinity.

[ 7 ] The amplitude of tides is 2.3 m (7.5 ft) on average per day in the Gulf. During low tides, the soils are inhabited by crabs , conch , and other species. During the high tide, the mangrove forests serve as a feeding ground and habitat for fish, shrimp , and other species, as the root structure of mangroves provides a refuge from larger predators.

[ 8 ] A number of volcanoes lie within and around the gulf.

In popular culture [ edit ] The Horatio Hornblower novel The Happy Return ( Beat To Quarters ) is set partially in the Gulf of Fonseca.

References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gulf of Fonseca .

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Fonseca, Bay of ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

604– 605.

^ "El Salvador v. Nicaragua, CACJ, Judgment of 9 March 1917, 11 Am. J. Int'l L. 674 (1917)" . Retrieved 4 June 2017 .

^ "ONUCA - Background" .

^ Honduran Secretariat of Industry and Commerce, 2002: 23 ^ El Comité para la Defensa y Desarrollo de la Flora y Fauna del Golfo de Fonseca (CODDEFFAGOLF), 2001: 10 ^ Honduran Secretariat of Industry and Commerce, 2002: 14 ^ Sanchez, 1999: 13 ^ CODDEFFAGOLF, 2001: 14 External links [ edit ] Footnotes to history UNESCO Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras: Nicaragua intervening) , International Court of Justice case registry Application for Revision of the Judgment of 11 September 1992 in the Case concerning the Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras: Nicaragua intervening) (El Salvador v. Honduras) , International Court of Justice case registry v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF Other NARA 13°15′N 87°45′W ﻿ / ﻿ 13.250°N 87.750°W ﻿ / 13.250; -87.750 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_Fonseca&oldid=1288729991 " Categories : Gulfs of the Pacific Ocean Bodies of water of El Salvador Bodies of water of Honduras Bodies of water of Nicaragua El Salvador–Honduras border Honduras–Nicaragua border Gulfs of North America Bodies of water of Central America Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2011 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from June 2021 Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages with Spanish IPA Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 13:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Fonseca 44 languages Add topic

