Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Joining FARC 3 Leader of FARC 4 Drug trafficking charges 5 Death 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Alfonso Cano 21 languages العربية Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Polski Português Русский Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Colombian revolutionary (1948–2011) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Alfonso Cano" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

(November 2011) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Alfonso Cano]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|Alfonso Cano}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Alfonso Cano Birth name Guillermo León Sáenz Vargas Nickname(s) Alfonso Born ( 1948-07-22 ) 22 July 1948 Bogotá , Colombia Died 4 November 2011 (2011-11-04) (aged 63) Suárez , Cauca , Colombia Allegiance FARC Rank Chief of Staff of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia Commands Western Bloc Battles / wars Colombian armed conflict Guillermo León Sáenz Vargas (22 July 1948 – 4 November 2011), [ 1 ] more commonly known by his nom de guerre Alfonso Cano , was a Colombian narcoterrorist , drug trafficker , [ 2 ] and commander of the militant group known as Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia ( Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia , FARC). He succeeded founder Manuel Marulanda (alias Sureshot , in Spanish : Tirofijo ) in March 2008 and commanded the Marxist rebel group until being killed in action by the Colombian Army .

Early life [ edit ] Born into an upper-class family in Bogotá, Cano began his studies in anthropology at the National University of Colombia in 1968, [ 3 ] where he became a member and leader of the Communist Youth . He was arrested by Colombian police directed by Rodrido Avendaño, layer of the moment who carried an investigation because of communist suspicions.  It was there that he met members of FARC, who invited him often to lecture about Marxism for a number of guerrilla columns. He dropped out of university to join the group and devoted himself to political activism. Ideologically he was described as a hardliner, with the belief that his ideas and side would ultimately win.

[ 4 ] Joining FARC [ edit ] During the late 1970s Cano is believed to have joined FARC, where he quickly rose through the ranks, working with the group's co-founder and chief ideologue, Jacobo Arenas . His main role was originally to serve as a sort of political commissary for the urban network of the guerrilla in Bogota, and in 1978 he was appointed chief of finances for the Central High Command. A search warrant on his apartment, where he lived with his first wife (Maria Eugenia) and son (Federico), ended in his arrest in 1981 and imprisonment in the La Modelo Penitentiary, where he founded a library. He was freed in 1983 as a result of the amnesty offered by the government of president Belisario Betancur .

He soon moved to the mountains to join the guerrilla soldiers, but instead of active combat he was sent to Casa Verde, the headquarters of the FARC commanders, in La Uribe (Meta), where he was recognized as an intellectual and as such was part of a number of peace dialogues with the government. His main role was to encourage the growth of the Coordinadora Guerrillera Simón Bolívar, a movement to join all guerrillas operating at the time in Colombia. With communism's collapse in Europe in 1989, Cano argued that the Soviet model had failed, and the FARC should develop its own model based on national ideas, whose paradigmatic figure was to be Simon Bolivar .

After Arenas' death in 1990, Cano succeeded him, joining the seven-member Secretariat that led the group, and remaining as the second in command for about two decades. He was chief negotiator during failed peace talks in 1991 and 1992. However he had little role in the long running 1999–2002 FARC–Government peace process with the government of Andres Pastrana . Pastrana later said that Cano never attended the peace talks.

[ 5 ] In 2000, Cano founded and became the leader of the Clandestine Colombian Communist Party .

Leader of FARC [ edit ] On 26 March 2008, Manuel Marulanda Vélez, the founder and leader of FARC, died of a heart attack and Cano succeeded him as commander-in-chief. During the same month two other members of the Secretariat, Raul Reyes and Ivan Rios , were killed in action. In July 2008, the Colombian Army rescued fifteen of FARC's highest-profile hostages, including Íngrid Betancourt , in Operation Jaque , further weakening the rebels' position.

As commander in chief, Cano spread his views about the guerrillas, and the nature and solution to the political conflict in Colombia. He believed that the conflict was a class struggle, and that it should be the rich and multinational companies that should fund the war, [ citation needed ] encouraging blackmailing and kidnapping of politicians and the rich. Mass kidnappings were used to press the government into exchanging hundreds of guerrilla members in jail. The most outstanding example of this practice was the kidnapping of 12 deputies from the Valle del Cauca department, an action that he coordinated with Pablo Catatumbo .

Drug trafficking charges [ edit ] Cano was wanted in the United States on drug trafficking charges, and the U.S. State Department had offered $5 million for his capture.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Death [ edit ] On 6 March 2008, the Miami Herald stated that the national daily El Tiempo had reported troops were pursuing Cano, and he was believed to have been wounded in a 21 February helicopter attack.

[ 8 ] This attack on Cano took place on the border of the two departments of Tolima and Valle del Cauca , rainy weather hampering the effort.

[ 9 ] Cano was shot and killed [ 10 ] by army forces on 4 November 2011 in the southwestern Cauca Department [ 11 ] in what the Colombian government dubbed " Operation Odysseus ." President Juan Manuel Santos confirmed his death on television, claiming the Colombian army dealt the FARC "the biggest blow in the history" of the guerrilla organization.

[ 12 ] The FARC leader's death came months after he fled his stronghold in the south of Tolima , being pursued by armed forces since.

[ 13 ] FARC responded to Santos' plea to lay down arms by saying that it would continue its fight against the government.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Terrorism in Colombia Drug trafficking in Colombia FARC References [ edit ] ^ "Top commander of Colombia's FARC group killed: gov't" .

Xinhua News Agency . 5 November 2011. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014 . Retrieved 5 November 2011 .

^ "Guillermo Leon Saenz-Vargas (Deceased)" .

U.S. Department of State .

^ "Obituary: Alfonso Cano" .

BBC . 5 November 2011 . Retrieved 6 November 2011 .

^ (in Spanish) Diario de la resistencia de Marquetalia , Jacobo Arenas, Ediciones Abejón Mono, 1972.

^ "Obituary: Alfonso Cano: from ideologue to FARC rebel leader" .

Associated Press . 5 November 2011 . Retrieved 6 November 2011 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Guillermo Leon Saenz Vargas, alias 'Alfonso Cano' " .

InSight Crime . 10 March 2017.

^ "Alfonso Cano obituary" .

The Guardian . 6 November 2011.

^ "21 February helicopter attack" .

Miami Herald . 6 March 2008.

[ dead link ] ^ (in Spanish) El Nuevo Herald article of 7 March 72008.

Archived 10 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) Leader Killed Archived 7 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine by Rachelle Dragani ^ Alsema, Adriaan (4 November 2011).

"Colombian army kills FARC leader 'Alfonso Cano' " .

Colombia Reports . Archived from the original on 7 November 2011 . Retrieved 4 November 2011 .

^ Alsema, Adriaan (5 November 2011).

"Cano's death 'biggest blow in history' of FARC: Santos" .

Colombia Reports . Archived from the original on 7 November 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2011 .

^ Alsema, Adriaan (5 November 2011).

"Chronology of 'Operation Odyssey' that killed 'Alfonso Cano' " .

Colombia Reports . Archived from the original on 8 November 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2011 .

^ Brodzinsky, Sibylla (6 November 2011).

"Colombia's Farc rebels vow to keep fighting despite top commander's death" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 7 November 2011 .

External links [ edit ] "FARC-EP Official Website, last updated 27 October 2007" . Archived from the original on 10 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 March 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) v t e FARC-EP Organization Chain of Command Eastern Bloc Southern Bloc Central Bloc Western Bloc Caribbean Bloc Northwestern Bloc Middle Magdalena Bloc Secretariat Timoleón Jiménez (Commander in Chief) Iván Márquez Joaquín Gómez Mauricio Jaramillo Pablo Catatumbo Pastor Alape Other personnel Manuel Marulanda Vélez (founder) † Jacobo Arenas (founder) † Simón Trinidad (captured) Raúl Reyes † Mono Jojoy † Alfonso Cano † Efraín Guzmán † Iván Ríos † Sonia (captured) Tomás Medina Caracas † Martín Caballero † Rodrigo Granda Iván Vargas (captured) Marcos Calarcá Andrés París Tanja Nijmeijer Karina (surrendered) Romaña † Fabian Ramirez César (captured) Characteristics History Structure Attacks PCCC Patriotic Union Front Ricardo Franco List of political hostages v t e Colombian conflict (1964–present) Participants Timeline Key aspects La Violencia (1948–1958) Marquetalia Republic The National Front Dominican Embassy siege (1980) Palace of Justice siege (1985) DAS Building bombing (1989) Patriotic Union Party extermination Humanitarian exchange Mapiripán Massacre (1997) El Caguán DMZ Failed peace process (1999–2002) Bojayá massacre (2002) Valle del Cauca Deputies hostage crisis (2002–2009) El Nogal Club bombing (2003) Neiva bombing (2003) Parapolitics scandal (2006–2007) Operation Emmanuel "False positives" scandal Andean diplomatic crisis (2008) Operation Jaque (2008) Operation Fenix (2008) Nariño massacres (2009) 2013 Colombian clashes Renewed peace process (2012–present) Peace agreement referendum (2016) 2022 Huila attack Total Peace concept Catatumbo campaign 2025 Catatumbo clashes Government aspects Democratic security Plan Colombia Plan Patriota Colombia–United States relations Human rights in Colombia Politics of Colombia Illegal drug trade Illegal drug trade in Colombia War on drugs Operation Snowcap Narcoterrorism Catatumbo campaign Kidnappings Kidnappings in Colombia FARC political hostages Lawsuits Sinaltrainal v. Coca-Cola (2001) Rodriquez v. Drummond (2003) Doe v. Chiquita (2007) Guerrillas Government of Colombia Paramilitaries ELN EPL FARC dissidents Former guerrillas FARC-EP List of FARC attacks M19 MOEC CGSB ERP MAQL FARIP Linked to PCCC São Paulo Forum PC de C (M-L) Cuban revolutionaries Provisional IRA Colombia Three ETA ANNCOL Fighters+Lovers Colombian drug cartels Some Colombian politicians Military Forces of Colombia : National Army Air Force Navy Colombian Naval Infantry National Police Other: Migración Colombia Attorney General units Former government program CONVIVIR Linked to DynCorp International United Nations Mission in Colombia European Union United States Canada Águilas Negras Los Rastrojos Clan del Golfo Former paramilitaries AUC AAA Linked to Spearhead Ltd CONVIVIR Colombian drug cartels Mexican drug cartels Some Colombian military personnel Some Colombian politicians v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alfonso_Cano&oldid=1300663949 " Categories : 1948 births 2011 deaths Deaths by firearm in Colombia Military personnel from Bogotá Members of FARC Colombian guerrillas killed in action Colombian communists Anti-revisionists National University of Colombia alumni Colombian drug traffickers Hidden categories: Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2024 Articles with dead external links from June 2016 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2011 All articles needing additional references Biography articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 18:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alfonso Cano 21 languages Add topic

