Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Copywriter 2.2 Literary works 2.2.1 Early works and literary breakthrough, 1975–1987 2.2.2 The Satanic Verses and Haroun and the Sea of Stories , 1988–1990 2.2.3 Further works, 1990s–2000s 2.2.4 Later works, novels, and essays, 2015–2024 2.3 Critical reception 2.4 Academic and other activities 2.5 Film and television 3 The Satanic Verses and the fatwa Toggle The Satanic Verses and the fatwa subsection 3.1 Failed assassination attempt (1989) 3.2 Translators attacked 3.3 Hezbollah's comments (2006) 3.4 International Guerillas (1990) 3.5 Al-Qaeda hit list (2010) 3.6 Jaipur Literature Festival (2012) 3.7 2022 murder attempt 4 Awards, honours, and recognition Toggle Awards, honours, and recognition subsection 4.1 Knighthood 5 Religious and political beliefs Toggle Religious and political beliefs subsection 5.1 Religious background 5.2 Political background 5.2.1 UK politics 5.2.2 US politics 5.2.3 Against religious extremism 5.2.4 South Asian politics and Kashmir 6 Personal life 7 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 7.1 Novels 7.2 Collections 7.3 Children's books 7.4 Essays and nonfiction 7.5 Memoirs 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Relevant literature 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Salman Rushdie 97 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Kernowek Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian-British-American novelist (born 1947) Sir Salman Rushdie CH FRSL Rushdie in 2024 Born Ahmed Salman Rushdie ( 1947-06-19 ) 19 June 1947 (age 78) Bombay , British India Occupation Writer professor Citizenship India (until 1964) UK (from 1964) [ 1 ] US (from 2016) Education University of Cambridge ( BA ) Genre Magic realism satire postcolonialism Subject Historical criticism travel writing Spouse Clarissa Luard ​ ​ ( m.

1976; div.

1987) ​ Marianne Wiggins ​ ​ ( m.

1988; div.

1993) ​ Elizabeth West ​ ​ ( m.

1997; div.

2004) ​ Padma Lakshmi ​ ​ ( m.

2004; div.

2007) ​ Rachel Eliza Griffiths ​ ​ ( m.

2021) ​ Children 2 Relatives Natalie Rushdie (daughter-in-law) Signature Website salmanrushdie .com Sir Ahmed Salman Rushdie [ 2 ] ( / s ʌ l ˈ m ɑː n ˈ r ʊ ʃ d i / sul- MAHN RUUSH -dee ; [ 3 ] born 19 June 1947) is an Indian-born British and American novelist.

[ 4 ] His work often combines magic realism with historical fiction and primarily deals with connections, disruptions, and migrations between Eastern and Western civilizations , typically set on the Indian subcontinent . Rushdie's second novel, Midnight's Children (1981), won the Booker Prize in 1981 and was deemed to be "the best novel of all winners" on two occasions, marking the 25th and the 40th anniversary of the prize .

After his fourth novel, The Satanic Verses (1988), Rushdie became the subject of several assassination attempts and death threats because of what was seen by some to be an irreverent depiction of Muhammad.

This included a fatwa calling for his death issued by Ruhollah Khomeini , the supreme leader of Iran . The book was banned in 20 countries.

[ 5 ] Numerous killings and bombings have been carried out by extremists who cite the book as motivation, sparking a debate about censorship and religiously motivated violence. In 2022, Rushdie survived a stabbing at the Chautauqua Institution in Chautauqua, New York , that led to loss of his right eye and damage to his liver and hands.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 1983, Rushdie was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature .

[ 8 ] He was appointed a Commandeur de l' Ordre des Arts et des Lettres of France in 1999.

[ 9 ] Rushdie was knighted in 2007 for his services to literature.

[ 10 ] In 2008, The Times ranked him 13th on its list of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945.

[ 11 ] Since 2000, Rushdie has lived in the United States. He was named Distinguished Writer in Residence at the Arthur L. Carter Journalism Institute of New York University in 2015.

[ 12 ] Earlier, he taught at Emory University . He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters . In 2012, he published Joseph Anton: A Memoir , an account of his life in the wake of the events following The Satanic Verses . Rushdie was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine in April 2023.

[ 13 ] Rushdie's personal life, including his five marriages and four divorces, has attracted media attention, particularly during his marriage to television personality and activist Padma Lakshmi .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Rushdie was born in Bombay on 19 June,1947 [ 17 ] in British India , into a Kashmiri Muslim family.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] He is the son of Anis Ahmed Rushdie, a Cambridge -educated lawyer-turned-businessman, and Negin Bhatt, a teacher. Rushdie's father was dismissed from the Indian Civil Services (ICS) after it emerged that the birth certificate submitted by him had changes to make him appear younger than he was.

[ 20 ] Rushdie has three sisters.

[ 21 ] He wrote in his memoir, Joseph Anton , that his father adopted the name Rushdie in honour of Averroes (Ibn Rushd). He recalls his "first literary influence:" "When I first saw The Wizard of Oz it made a writer of me." [ 22 ] He recalls "Every child in India in my day (and probably still) was obsessed with P. G. Wodehouse and Agatha Christie . I read mountains of books by both." [ 23 ] He also recalls that "Alice captured my imagination as few other books did: both the books, not just Alice's Adventures in Wonderland but Through the Looking-Glass as well, and I can still recite the whole of " Jabberwocky " and " The Walrus and the Carpenter " from memory. I also loved the Swallows and Amazons series by Arthur Ransome because of the unimaginable freedom those young people sailing in the Lake District were given by their families ... When I was 16, I read The Lord Of The Rings and became obsessed, and can still recite the inscription on the Ruling Ring ('One ring to rule them all...') in the dark language of Mordor. I read an astonishing amount of Golden Age science fiction, not just Ray Bradbury , Arthur C. Clarke and Kurt Vonnegut but more arcane writers like Clifford D. Simak , James Blish , Zenna Henderson and L. Sprague de Camp ." [ 24 ] He has written about his family following the Indian custom of kissing holy books if they were dropped on the floor. "But we kissed everything. We kissed dictionaries and atlases. We kissed Enid Blyton novels and Superman comics. If I'd ever dropped the telephone directory I'd probably have kissed that, too." [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Rushdie grew up in Bombay and was educated at the Cathedral and John Connon School in Fort in South Bombay , before moving to England in 1964 to attend Rugby School in Rugby, Warwickshire . He then attended the University of Cambridge as an undergraduate student at King's College, Cambridge , from where he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in History .

[ 17 ] Career [ edit ] Copywriter [ edit ] Rushdie worked as a copywriter for the advertising agency Ogilvy & Mather , where he came up with "irresistibubble" for Aero and "Naughty but Nice" for cream cakes, and for the agency Ayer Barker (until 1982), for whom he wrote the line "That'll do nicely" for American Express .

[ 27 ] Collaborating with musician Ronnie Bond , Rushdie wrote the words for an advertising record on behalf of the now defunct Burnley Building Society that was recorded at Good Earth Studios , London. The song was called "The Best Dreams" and was sung by George Chandler .

[ 28 ] It was while at Ogilvy that Rushdie wrote Midnight's Children , before becoming a full-time writer.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Rushdie was a personal friend of Angela Carter 's, calling her "the first great writer I ever met".

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Literary works [ edit ] Rushdie’s works are often categorized as postmodern , particularly within the tradition of Magic Realism . However, they also reveal early signs of a literary and cultural shift beyond postmodernism. In our contemporary world – saturated with reality TV, talk shows and other forms of pure entertainment – apathy, passivity and inaction have become defining features.

Jeffrey T. Nealon identifies this prevailing sense of disengagement as a hallmark of the post-postmodern condition, which is sometimes referred to as metamodernism : “we post-postmodern capitalists are trained by our media masters to watch rather than act, consume rather than do.” [ 34 ] The overt political tensions of the Cold War era have been replaced by a more insidious, media-driven culture of distraction and spectacle. In response, Rushdie's works blend fantasy with realism to jolt readers out of this stupor, challenging delusions and encouraging renewed critical awareness.

Early works and literary breakthrough, 1975–1987 [ edit ] Rushdie's debut, the science fiction tale Grimus (1975), was generally ignored by the public and literary critics. His next novel, Midnight's Children (1981), put him on the map. It follows the life of Saleem Sinai, born at the stroke of midnight as India gained its independence, who is endowed with special powers and a connection to other children born at the birth of the modern nation of India . Sinai has been compared to Rushdie.

[ 35 ] However, Rushdie refuted the idea of having written any of his characters as autobiographical, stating, "People assume that because certain things in the character are drawn from your own experience, it just becomes you. In that sense, I've never felt that I've written an autobiographical character." [ 36 ] Rushdie writes of his "debt to the oral narrative traditions of India and also to the great novelists Jane Austen and Charles Dickens —Austen for her portraits of brilliant women caged by the social convention of their time, women whose Indian counterparts I knew well; Dickens for his great, rotting, Bombay-like city, and his ability to root his larger-than-life characters and surrealist imagery in a sharply observed, almost hyperrealistic background." [ 37 ] Shortly after its publication, V. S. Pritchett wrote: "In Salman Rushdie, the author of Midnight's Children , India has produced a glittering novelist—one with startling imaginative and intellectual resources, a master of perpetual storytelling. Like García Marquez in One Hundred Years of Solitude , he weaves a whole people's capacity for carrying its inherited myths—and new ones that it goes on generating—into a kind of magic carpet. The human swarm swarms in every man and woman as they make their bid for life and vanish into the passion or hallucination that hangs about them like the smell of India itself. Yet at the same time there are strange Western echoes, of the irony of Sterne in Tristram Shandy —that early nonlinear writer—in Rushdie's readiness to tease by breaking off or digressing at the gravest moments. This is very odd in an Indian novel! The book is really about the mystery of being born and the puzzle of who one is." [ 38 ] Midnight's Children won the 1981 Booker Prize and, in 1993 and 2008, the Best of the Bookers and Booker of Bookers special prizes.

[ 39 ] After Midnight's Children , Rushdie depicted the political turmoil in Pakistan with Shame (1983), basing his characters on Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq .

Shame won France's Prix du Meilleur Livre Étranger (Best Foreign Book) and was a close runner-up for the Booker Prize. Both these works of postcolonial literature are characterised by a style of magic realism and the immigrant outlook that Rushdie is very conscious of as a member of the Kashmiri diaspora .

[ 40 ] Rushdie wrote a non-fiction book about Nicaragua in 1987 called The Jaguar Smile . This book has a political focus and is based on his first-hand experiences and research at the scene of Sandinista political experiments. He became interested in Nicaragua after he had been a neighbour of Madame Somoza , wife of the former Nicaraguan dictator, and his son Zafar was born around the time of the Nicaraguan revolution.

[ 41 ] The Satanic Verses and Haroun and the Sea of Stories , 1988–1990 [ edit ] His most controversial work, The Satanic Verses , was published in 1988 and won the Whitbread Award .

[ 42 ] It was followed by Haroun and the Sea of Stories (1990). Written in the shadow of the fatwa, it is about the magic of story-telling and an allegorical defence of the power of stories over silence.

[ 17 ] Further works, 1990s–2000s [ edit ] In 1990, Rushdie reviewed Thomas Pynchon 's Vineland in The New York Times , and offered some droll musings on the author's reclusiveness: "So he wants a private life and no photographs and nobody to know his home address. I can dig it, I can relate to that (but, like, he should try it when it's compulsory instead of a free-choice option)." [ 43 ] Rushdie recalls: "I was able to meet the famously invisible man. I had dinner with him at Sonny Mehta 's apartment in Manhattan and found him very satisfyingly Pynchonesque. At the end of dinner I thought, well, now we're friends, and maybe we'll see each other from time to time. He never called again." [ 44 ] Rushdie has published many short stories, including those collected in East, West (1994). His 1995 novel The Moor's Last Sigh , a family saga spanning some 100 years of India's history, won the Whitbread Award .

[ 45 ] The Ground Beneath Her Feet (1999) is a riff on the myth of Orpheus and Eurydice , casting Orpheus and Eurydice as rock stars.

[ 46 ] The book features many original song lyrics; one was the basis for the U2 song " The Ground Beneath Her Feet ". Rushdie is credited as the lyricist.

[ 28 ] Rushdie presenting his 2005 novel Shalimar the Clown Following Fury (2001), set mainly in New York and avoiding the previous sprawling narrative style that spans generations, periods and places, Rushdie's novel Shalimar the Clown (2005), a story about love and betrayal set in Kashmir and Los Angeles , was hailed as a return to form by a number of critics.

[ 17 ] In his 2002 non-fiction collection Step Across This Line , he professes his admiration for Italo Calvino and Pynchon, among others. His early influences included Jorge Luis Borges , Mikhail Bulgakov , Lewis Carroll and Günter Grass . When asked who his favorite novelist is, he says: "There are days when it's Kafka , in whose world we all live; others when it's Dickens , for the sheer fecundity of his imagination and the beauty of his prose. But it's probably Joyce on more days than anyone else." [ 23 ] 2008 saw the publication of The Enchantress of Florence , one of Rushdie's most challenging works that focuses on the past. It tells the story of a European's visit to Akbar 's court, and his revelation that he is a lost relative of the Mughal emperor. The novel was praised by Ursula Le Guin in a review in The Guardian as a "sumptuous mixture of history with fable".

[ 47 ] Luka and the Fire of Life , a sequel to Haroun and the Sea of Stories , was published in November 2010 to critical acclaim.

[ 17 ] Earlier that year, he announced that he was writing his memoir, Joseph Anton: A Memoir , which was published in September 2012.

[ 48 ] In 2012, Rushdie became one of the first major authors to embrace Booktrack (a company that synchronises ebooks with customised soundtracks), when he published his short story " In the South " on the platform.

[ 49 ] Later works, novels, and essays, 2015–2024 [ edit ] 2015 saw the publication of Two Years Eight Months and Twenty-Eight Nights , a modern take on the One Thousand and One Nights . Based on the conflict of scholar Ibn Rushd (from whom Rushdie's family name derives), Rushdie explores themes of transnationalism and cosmopolitanism by depicting a war of the universe with a supernatural world of jinns .

Ursula K. Le Guin wrote: "Rushdie is our Scheherazade , inexhaustibly enfolding story within story and unfolding tale after tale with such irrepressible delight that it comes as a shock to remember that, like her, he has lived the life of a storyteller in immediate peril. Scheherazade told her 1,001 tales to put off a stupid, cruel threat of death; Rushdie found himself under similar threat for telling an unwelcome tale. So far, like her, he has succeeded in escaping. May he continue to do so." [ 50 ] In 2017, The Golden House , a satirical novel set in contemporary America, was published. 2019 saw the publication of Quichotte , a modern retelling of Don Quixote .

[ 51 ] In 2021 Languages of Truth , a collection of essays written between 2003 and 2020, was published.

[ 52 ] Rushdie's fifteenth novel Victory City , described as an epic tale of a woman who breathes a fantastical empire into existence, was published in February 2023.

[ 53 ] The book was Rushdie's first released work after he was attacked and severely injured as he was about to give a public lecture in New York in 2022.

[ 54 ] In April 2024, his autobiographical book Knife: Meditations After an Attempted Murder , in which Rushdie writes about the attack and his recovery, was published.

[ 55 ] Knife was a finalist for the 2024 National Book Award for Nonfiction .

[ 56 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Rushdie has had a string of commercially successful and critically acclaimed novels. His works have been shortlisted for the Booker Prize five times, in 1981 for Midnight's Children , 1983 for Shame , 1988 for The Satanic Verses , 1995 for The Moor's Last Sigh , and in 2019 for Quichotte .

[ 57 ] In 1981, he was awarded the prize.

[ 58 ] His 2005 novel Shalimar the Clown received the prestigious Hutch Crossword Book Award , and, in the UK, was a finalist for the Whitbread Book Awards . It was shortlisted for the 2007 International Dublin Literary Award .

[ 59 ] Rushdie's works have spawned 30 book-length studies and more than 700 articles on his writing.

[ 17 ] He is frequently mentioned a favourite to win the Nobel Prize in Literature .

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Academic and other activities [ edit ] Rushdie has mentored younger Indian (and ethnic-Indian) writers, influenced an entire generation of Indo-Anglian writers, and is an influential writer in postcolonial literature in general.

[ 62 ] He opposed the British government's introduction of the Racial and Religious Hatred Act , something he writes about in his contribution to Free Expression Is No Offence , a collection of essays by several writers, published by Penguin in November 2005.

Salman Rushdie having a discussion with Emory University students Rushdie was the President of PEN American Center from 2004 to 2006 and founder of the PEN World Voices Festival.

[ 63 ] In 2007, he began a five-year term as Distinguished Writer in Residence at Emory University in Atlanta , Georgia, where he has also deposited his archives. In May 2008, he was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters .

[ 64 ] In 2014, he taught a seminar on British Literature and served as the 2015 keynote speaker [ 65 ] [ 66 ] In September 2015, he joined the New York University Journalism Faculty as a Distinguished Writer in Residence.

[ 67 ] Rushdie is a member of the advisory board of The Lunchbox Fund , [ 68 ] a non-profit organisation that provides daily meals to students of township schools in Soweto of South Africa. He is a member of the advisory board of the Secular Coalition for America , [ 69 ] an advocacy group representing the interests of atheistic and humanistic Americans in Washington, D.C., and a patron of Humanists UK (formerly the British Humanist Association). He is a laureate of the International Academy of Humanism .

[ 70 ] In November 2010 he became a founding patron of Ralston College , a new liberal arts college that has adopted as its motto a Latin translation of a phrase ("free speech is life itself") from an address he gave at Columbia University in 1991 to mark the 200th anniversary of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution .

[ 71 ] Film and television [ edit ] Rushdie, right, with writers Catherine Lacey and Siri Hustvedt at the 2014 Brooklyn Book Festival Though he enjoys writing, Rushdie says he would have become an actor if his writing career had not been successful. From early childhood, he dreamed of appearing in Hollywood films (which he later realised in his frequent cameo appearances).

[ 72 ] Rushdie includes fictional television and movie characters in some of his writings. He had a cameo appearance in the film Bridget Jones's Diary based on the book of the same name , which is itself full of literary in-jokes. On 12 May 2006, Rushdie was a guest host on The Charlie Rose Show , where he interviewed Indo-Canadian filmmaker Deepa Mehta , whose 2005 film Water faced violent protests. He appears in the role of Helen Hunt 's obstetrician-gynaecologist in the film adaptation (Hunt's directorial debut) of Elinor Lipman 's novel Then She Found Me . In September 2008, and again in March 2009, he appeared as a panellist on the HBO programme Real Time with Bill Maher . Rushdie has said that he was approached for a cameo in Talladega Nights : "They had this idea, just one shot in which three very, very unlikely people were seen as NASCAR drivers. And I think they approached Julian Schnabel , Lou Reed , and me. We were all supposed to be wearing the uniforms and the helmet, walking in slow motion with the heat haze." In the end, their schedules did not allow for it.

[ 73 ] In 2009, Rushdie signed a petition in support of film director Roman Polanski , calling for his release after Polanski was arrested in Switzerland in relation to his 1977 charge for drugging and raping a 13-year-old girl.

[ 74 ] Rushdie collaborated on the screenplay for the cinematic adaptation of his novel Midnight's Children with director Deepa Mehta . The film was also called Midnight's Children .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Seema Biswas , Shabana Azmi , Nandita Das , [ 77 ] and Irrfan Khan participated in the film.

[ 78 ] Production began in September 2010; [ 79 ] the film was released in 2012.

Rushdie announced in June 2011 that he had written the first draft of a script for a new television series for the US cable network Showtime , a project on which he will also serve as an executive producer. The new series, to be called The Next People , will be, according to Rushdie, "a sort of paranoid science-fiction series, people disappearing and being replaced by other people." The idea of a television series was suggested by his US agents, said Rushdie, who felt that television would allow him more creative control than feature film.

The Next People is being made by the British film production company Working Title , the firm behind projects including Four Weddings and a Funeral and Shaun of the Dead .

[ 80 ] In 2017, Rushdie appeared as himself in episode 3 of season 9 of Curb Your Enthusiasm , [ 81 ] sharing scenes with Larry David to offer advice on how Larry should deal with the fatwa that has been ordered against him.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] The Satanic Verses and the fatwa [ edit ] Further information: Satanic Verses controversy The publication of The Satanic Verses by Viking Penguin Publishing in September 1988 caused immediate controversy in the Islamic world because of what was seen by some to be an irreverent depiction of Muhammad . The title refers to a disputed Muslim tradition that is referenced in the book. According to this tradition, Muhammad ( Mahound in the book) added verses ( Ayah ) to the Quran accepting three Arabian pagan goddesses who were worshiped in Mecca as divine beings. According to the legend, Muhammad later revoked the verses, saying the devil tempted him to utter these lines to appease the Meccans (hence the "Satanic" verses). However, the narrator reveals to the reader that these disputed verses were actually from the mouth of the Archangel Gabriel . The book was banned in many countries with large Muslim communities, including India, Iran, Bangladesh, Sudan, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Kenya, Thailand, Tanzania, Indonesia, Singapore, Venezuela, and Pakistan. In total, 20 countries banned the book.

[ 5 ] In response to the protests, on 22 January 1989, Rushdie published a column in The Observer that called Muhammad "one of the great geniuses of world history," but noted that Islamic doctrine holds Muhammad to be human, and in no way perfect. He held that the novel is not "an anti-religious novel. It is, however, an attempt to write about migration, its stresses and transformations." [ 84 ] On 14 February 1989— Valentine's Day , and also the day of his close friend Bruce Chatwin 's funeral—a fatwa ordering Rushdie's execution was proclaimed on Radio Tehran by Ayatollah Khomeini , the Supreme leader of Iran at the time, calling the book " blasphemous against Islam". Chapter IV of the book depicts the character of an Imam in exile who returns to incite revolt from the people of his country with no regard for their safety. According to Khomeini's son, his father never read the book.

[ 85 ] A bounty was offered for Rushdie's death , [ 86 ] and he was thus forced to live under police protection for several years.

[ 86 ] On 7 March 1989, the United Kingdom and Iran broke diplomatic relations over the Rushdie controversy.

[ 87 ] In 1989, The New York Times published "Words For Salman Rushdie": "28 distinguished writers born in 21 countries speak to him from their common land – the country of literature. For expressing their ideas publicly in the past many of these writers have suffered censorship, exile – forced or self-imposed – and imprisonment." Czesław Miłosz wrote: "I have particular reasons to defend your rights, Mr. Rushdie. My books have been forbidden in many countries or have had whole passages censored out. I'm grateful to people who stood then by the principle of free expression, and I back you now in my turn." Ralph Ellison : "You deserve the full and passionate solidarity of any man of dignity, but I am afraid this is too little. This story of a man alone against worldwide intolerance, and of a book alone against the craziness of the media, can become the story of many others. The bell tolls for all of us." Umberto Eco : "Keep to your convictions. Try to protect yourself. A death sentence is a rather harsh review." Anita Desai : "Silence, exile and cunning, yes. And courage." [ 88 ] Christopher Hitchens recalled: "When the Washington Post telephoned me on Valentine's Day 1989 to ask for my opinion about the Ayatollah Khomeini's fatwah , I felt at once here was something that completely committed me. It was, if I can phrase it like this, a matter of everything I hated versus everything I loved. In the hate column: dictatorship, religion, stupidity, demagogy, censorship, bullying, and intimidation. In the love column: literature, irony, humour, the individual, and the defense of free expression. Plus, of course, friendship–although I'd like to think my response would have been the same even if I hadn't known Salman at all. To re-state the premise of the argument again: the theocratic head of a foreign despotism offers money in his own name in order to suborn the murder of a civilian of another country, for the offense of writing a work of fiction. No more root-and-branch challenge to the values of the Enlightenment (on the bicentennial of the fall of the Bastille ), or to the First Amendment to the Constitution , could be imagined." [ 89 ] Rushdie wrote: "I have often been asked if Christopher defended me because he was my close friend. The truth is that he became my close friend because he wanted to defend me ... He and I found ourselves describing our ideas, without conferring, in almost identical terms. I began to understand that while I had not chosen the battle it was at least the right battle, because in it everything that I loved and valued (literature, freedom, irreverence, freedom, irreligion, freedom) was ranged against everything I detested (fanaticism, violence, bigotry, humorlessness, philistinism, and the new offense culture of the age). Then I read Christopher using exactly the same everything-he-loved-versus-everything-he-hated trope, and felt … understood." [ 90 ] In 1993, 100 writers and intellectuals from the Muslim world, including Adonis , Mohammed Arkoun , Mahmoud Darwish , Amin Maalouf and Edward Said expressed solidarity in the collection For Rushdie .

Naguib Mahfouz wrote: "The veritable terrorism of which he is a target is unjustifiable, indefensible. One idea can only be opposed by other ideas. Even if the punishment is carried out, the idea as well as the book will remain." Tahar Ben Jelloun wrote that the fatwa was "intolerable, inadmissible and has nothing to do with the tolerant Islam that I was taught" and threatened "the ability to create characters and develop them in the space and time chosen by the writer." Rabah Belamri wrote "A society that refuses to question itself, that denies artists and thinkers the right to raise doubts, that dares not laugh at itself, has no hope of prospering." The composer Ahmed Essyad wrote a piece of music dedicated "To Salman Rushdie, so that, as an artist, he can write what I disagree with." Rushdie expressed gratitude for "anthology of blows struck in the fight against obscurantism and fanaticism" by "the most gifted, the most learned, the most important voices of the Muslim and Arab world, gathered together to subject my work and the furor surrounding it to so brilliant, so many-sided, so judicious an examination." [ 91 ] When, on BBC Radio 4 , he was asked for a response to the threat, Rushdie said, "Frankly, I wish I had written a more critical book," and "I'm very sad that it should have happened. It's not true that this book is a blasphemy against Islam. I doubt very much that Khomeini or anyone else in Iran has read the book or more than selected extracts out of context." [ 92 ] Later, he wrote that he was "proud, then and always", of that statement; while he did not feel his book was especially critical of Islam, "a religion whose leaders behaved in this way could probably use a little criticism." [ 93 ] The publication of the book and the fatwa sparked violence around the world, with bookstores firebombed.

[ 94 ] Muslim communities in several nations in the West held public rallies, burning copies of the book.

[ 95 ] Several people associated with translating or publishing the book were attacked, seriously injured, and even killed.

[ a ] Many more people died in riots in some countries. Despite the danger posed by the fatwa, Rushdie made a public appearance at London's Wembley Stadium on 11 August 1993, during a concert by U2 . In 2010, U2 bassist Adam Clayton recalled that "lead vocalist Bono had been calling Salman Rushdie from the stage every night on the Zoo TV tour. When we played Wembley, Salman showed up in person and the stadium erupted. You [could] tell from [drummer] Larry Mullen, Jr.'s face that we weren't expecting it. Salman was a regular visitor after that. He had a backstage pass and he used it as often as possible. For a man who was supposed to be in hiding, it was remarkably easy to see him around the place." [ 96 ] On 24 September 1998, as a precondition to the restoration of diplomatic relations with the UK, the Iranian government, then headed by Mohammad Khatami , gave a public commitment that it would "neither support nor hinder assassination operations on Rushdie." [ 97 ] [ 98 ] Hardliners in Iran have continued to reaffirm the death sentence.

[ 99 ] In early 2005, Khomeini's fatwa was reaffirmed by Iran's current leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , in a message to Muslim pilgrims making the annual pilgrimage to Mecca .

[ 100 ] Additionally, the Revolutionary Guards declared that the death sentence on him is still valid.

[ 101 ] Rushdie has reported that he still receives a "sort of Valentine 's card" from Iran each year on 14 February letting him know the country has not forgotten the vow to kill him and has jokingly referred to it as " my unfunny Valentine ".

[ 102 ] He said, "It's reached the point where it's a piece of rhetoric rather than a real threat." [ 103 ] Despite the threats on Rushdie personally, he said that his family has never been threatened, and that his mother, who lived in Pakistan during the later years of her life, even received outpourings of support. Rushdie himself has been prevented from entering Pakistan, however.

[ 104 ] A former bodyguard to Rushdie, Ron Evans, planned to publish a book recounting the behaviour of the author during the time he was in hiding. Evans said Rushdie tried to profit financially from the fatwa and was suicidal, but Rushdie dismissed the book as a "bunch of lies" and took legal action against Evans, his co-author and their publisher.

[ 105 ] On 26 August 2008, Rushdie received an apology at the High Court in London from all three parties.

[ 106 ] A memoir of his years of hiding, Joseph Anton , was released on 18 September 2012; "Joseph Anton" was Rushdie's secret alias during the height of the controversy.

[ 107 ] In February 1997, Ayatollah Hasan Sane'i , leader of the bonyad panzdah-e khordad (Fifteenth of Khordad Foundation),
reported that the blood money offered by the foundation for the assassination of Rushdie would be increased from $2 million to $2.5 million.

[ 108 ] Then a semi-official religious foundation in Iran increased the reward it had offered for the killing of Rushdie from $2.8 million to $3.3 million.

[ 109 ] In November 2015, former Indian minister P. Chidambaram acknowledged that banning The Satanic Verses was wrong.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] In 1998, Iran's former president Mohammad Khatami proclaimed the fatwa "finished"; but it has never been officially lifted, and in fact has been reiterated several times by Ali Khamenei and other religious officials. Yet more money was added to the bounty in February 2016.

[ 112 ] Failed assassination attempt (1989) [ edit ] On 3 August 1989, while a man using the alias [ 113 ] Mustafa Mahmoud Mazeh was priming a book bomb loaded with RDX explosives in a hotel in Paddington , Central London, the bomb exploded prematurely, destroying two floors of the hotel and killing Mazeh. A previously unknown Lebanese group, the Organization of the Mujahidin of Islam, said he died preparing an attack "on the apostate Rushdie". There is a shrine in Tehran's Behesht-e Zahra cemetery for Mustafa Mahmoud Mazeh that says he was "Martyred in London, 3 August 1989. The first martyr to die on a mission to kill Salman Rushdie." Mazeh's mother was invited to relocate to Iran, and the Islamic World Movement of Martyrs' Commemoration built his shrine in the cemetery that holds thousands of Iranian soldiers slain in the Iran–Iraq War .

[ 97 ] Translators attacked [ edit ] In 1991 an Italian translator of the book was stabbed but survived. Days later Hitoshi Igarashi , its Japanese translator, was stabbed to death. Two years later its Norwegian publisher, William Nygaard , was shot three times but survived.

[ 114 ] Hezbollah's comments (2006) [ edit ] During the 2006 Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy , Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah declared that "If there had been a Muslim to carry out Imam Khomeini's fatwa against the renegade Salman Rushdie, this rabble who insult our Prophet Mohammed in Denmark, Norway and France would not have dared to do so. I am sure there are millions of Muslims who are ready to give their lives to defend our prophet's honour and we have to be ready to do anything for that." [ 115 ] International Guerillas (1990) [ edit ] In 1990, soon after the publication of The Satanic Verses , a Pakistani film entitled International Gorillay ( International Guerillas ) was released that depicted Rushdie as a "James Bond-style villain" plotting to cause the downfall of Pakistan by opening a chain of casinos and discos in the country; he is ultimately killed at the end of the movie. The film was popular with Pakistani audiences, and it "presents Rushdie as a Rambo -like figure pursued by four Pakistani guerrillas".

[ 116 ] The British Board of Film Classification refused to allow it a certificate; "it was felt that the portrayal of Rushdie might qualify as criminal libel, causing a breach of the peace as opposed to merely tarnishing his reputation." This effectively prevented the release of the film in the UK. Two months later, however, Rushdie himself wrote to the board, saying that while he thought the film "a distorted, incompetent piece of trash", he would not sue if it were released. He later said, "If that film had been banned, it would have become the hottest video in town: everyone would have seen it". While the film was a great hit in Pakistan, it went virtually unnoticed elsewhere.

[ 117 ] Al-Qaeda hit list (2010) [ edit ] In 2010, [ 118 ] Anwar al-Awlaki published an Al-Qaeda hit list in Inspire magazine , including Rushdie along with other figures claimed to have insulted Islam, including Ayaan Hirsi Ali , cartoonist Lars Vilks , and three Jyllands-Posten staff members: Kurt Westergaard , Carsten Juste , and Flemming Rose .

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] The list was later expanded to include Stéphane "Charb" Charbonnier , who was murdered in a terror attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris, along with 11 other people. After the attack, Al-Qaeda called for more killings.

[ 122 ] Rushdie expressed his support for Charlie Hebdo , saying "I stand with Charlie Hebdo , as we all must, to defend the art of satire, which has always been a force for liberty and against tyranny, dishonesty and stupidity ... religious totalitarianism has caused a deadly mutation in the heart of Islam and we see the tragic consequences in Paris today." [ 123 ] In response to the attack, Rushdie commented on what he perceived as victim-blaming in the media, stating: "You can dislike Charlie Hebdo .... But the fact that you dislike them has nothing to do with their right to speak. The fact you dislike them certainly doesn't in any way excuse their murder." [ 124 ] [ 125 ] Jaipur Literature Festival (2012) [ edit ] Main article: Jaipur Literature Festival Rushdie was due to appear at the Jaipur Literature Festival in January 2012 in Jaipur, Rajasthan , India.

[ 126 ] However, he later cancelled his event appearance, and a further tour of India at the time, citing a possible threat to his life as the primary reason.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] Several days after, he indicated that state police agencies had lied, in order to keep him away, when they informed him that paid assassins were being sent to Jaipur to kill him. Police contended that they were afraid Rushdie would read from the banned The Satanic Verses , and that the threat was real, considering imminent protests by Muslim organizations.

[ 129 ] Meanwhile, Indian authors Ruchir Joshi , Jeet Thayil , Hari Kunzru and Amitava Kumar abruptly left the festival, and Jaipur, after reading excerpts from Rushdie's banned novel at the festival. The four were urged to leave by organizers as there was a real possibility they would be arrested.

[ 130 ] A proposed video link session between Rushdie and the Jaipur Literature Festival was also cancelled at the last minute [ 131 ] after the government pressured the festival to stop it.

[ 129 ] Rushdie returned to India to address a conference in New Delhi on 16 March 2012.

[ 132 ] 2022 murder attempt [ edit ] Main article: Stabbing of Salman Rushdie On 12 August 2022, while about to start a lecture at the Chautauqua Institution in Chautauqua , New York, Rushdie was attacked by a man who rushed onto the stage and stabbed him repeatedly, including in the face, neck and abdomen.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] The attacker was pulled away before being taken into custody by a state trooper ; Rushdie was airlifted to UPMC Hamot , a tertiary trauma center in Erie, Pennsylvania , where he underwent surgery before being put on a ventilator.

[ 133 ] [ 135 ] Security measures at UPMC Hamot were increased due to the potential threat of further attempts on his life. This included 24-hour protection with a security officer outside his room and searches being performed upon entry into the hospital. The suspect was identified as 24-year-old Hadi Matar of Fairview, New Jersey .

[ 133 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Later in the day, Rushdie's agent, Andrew Wylie , confirmed that Rushdie had received stab injuries to the liver and hand, and that he might lose an eye.

[ 138 ] A day later, Rushdie was taken off the ventilator and was able to speak.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] On 23 October 2022, Wylie reported that Rushdie had lost sight in one eye and the use of one hand but survived the murder attempt.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] Rushdie's memoir about the attack, Knife: Meditations After an Attempted Murder , was published in April 2024.

[ 143 ] It hit number one in the Sunday Times Bestsellers List in the General hardbacks category.

[ 144 ] In the memoir, Rushdie engages in fictional conversations with the assailant, who is referred to as 'A.' [ 145 ] The jury selection for the trial was originally scheduled to begin on 8 January 2024. However, Matar's lawyer successfully petitioned to delay the trial, arguing that they are entitled to see the memoir and any related materials before Matar stands trial, as the documents constitute evidence.

[ 146 ] Rushdie recalled experiencing a vivid dream of being stabbed in an ancient Roman amphitheatre two days before the actual stabbing occurred. The intensity of the dream caused him to consider canceling the event until he eventually decided on attending.

[ 147 ] In February 2025, the attacker, Hadi Matar, was found guilty of attempted murder and assault in connection with the stabbing.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] In May 2025, Matar was sentenced to 25 years in prison for the attack.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] Awards, honours, and recognition [ edit ] Salman Rushdie has received many plaudits for his writings, including the European Union's Aristeion Prize for Literature, the Premio Grinzane Cavour (Italy), and the Writer of the Year Award in Germany, and many of literature's highest honours.

[ 154 ] Awards and honours include: Austrian State Prize for European Literature (1993) [ 155 ] Booker Prize (1981) [ 156 ] Doctor Honoris Causa (Dr.h.c.) from the University of Liège , Belgium (1999) [ 157 ] Golden PEN Award [ 158 ] Hans Christian Andersen Literature Award (2014) [ 159 ] Honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters (L.H.D.) from Indiana University (2018) [ 160 ] Honorary degree of Doctor of Letters (Litt.D.) from Emory University (2015) [ 161 ] [ 162 ] James Joyce Award from University College Dublin (2008) [ 163 ] Outstanding Lifetime Achievement in Cultural Humanism from Harvard University (2007) [ 164 ] PEN Pinter Prize (UK) [ 165 ] St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates [ 166 ] Swiss Freethinkers Award 2019 [ 167 ] Champion of Writers Award from Authors Guild Foundation in 2025 [ 168 ] Knighthood [ edit ] Main article: Salman Rushdie knighthood controversy Rushdie was knighted for services to literature in the Queen's Birthday Honours on 16 June 2007. He remarked: "I am thrilled and humbled to receive this great honour, and am very grateful that my work has been recognised in this way." [ 169 ] In response to his knighthood, many nations with Muslim majorities protested. Parliamentarians of several of these countries condemned the action, and Iran and Pakistan called in their British envoys to protest formally. Controversial condemnation issued by Pakistan's Religious Affairs Minister Muhammad Ijaz-ul-Haq was in turn rebuffed by former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto .

[ 170 ] Several called publicly for his death. Some non-Muslims expressed disappointment at Rushdie's knighthood, claiming that the writer did not merit such an honour and there were several other writers who deserved the knighthood more than Rushdie.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] Al-Qaeda condemned the Rushdie honour. The group's then-leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri , was quoted as saying in an audio recording that the UK's award for Rushdie was "an insult to Islam", and it was planning "a very precise response." [ 173 ] When asked if the knighthood was an insult to Muslims, Christopher Hitchens answered " Midnight's Children did not just win the Booker, and Salman did not just later win the Booker of Bookers, Midnight's Children won the main literary award in Iran, people tend to forget. When the fatwa was issued against him by a senile theocratic dictator who had run his own country into beggary and bankruptcy and misery, every Arab and Muslim writer worthy of the name, all signed, and wrote in a book for Salman, we identify our cause with you, and your struggle with free expression in our culture. If you say that Muslims are being offended by this, and you lump them all together, you immediately grant that they are in fact represented by the most extreme, homicidal, fanatical, illiterate, intolerant people who not only haven't read this book, but couldn't read it. And that's an insult to Islam!" [ 174 ] Rushdie was appointed a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) in the 2022 Birthday Honours for services to literature.

[ 175 ] Religious and political beliefs [ edit ] Religious background [ edit ] Rushdie came from a liberal Muslim family, [ 176 ] but he is an atheist . In a 2006 interview with PBS , Rushdie called himself a "hardline atheist".

[ 177 ] In 1989, in an interview following the fatwa , Rushdie said that he was in a sense a lapsed Muslim, though "shaped by Muslim culture more than any other," and a student of Islam.

[ 36 ] In another interview the same year, he said, "My point of view is that of a secular human being. I do not believe in supernatural entities, whether Christian, Jewish, Muslim or Hindu." [ 178 ] In December 1990, Rushdie issued a statement reaffirming his Muslim faith, distancing himself from statements made by characters in Satanic Verses that cast aspersion on Islam or Prophet Mohammad, and opposing the release of the paperback edition of the novel.

[ 179 ] Later, in 1992, he cited the release of the statement as perhaps his lowest point, regretting its language, which he said he had not written.

[ 180 ] Rushdie advocates the application of higher criticism , pioneered during the late 19th century. In a guest opinion piece printed in The Washington Post and The Times in mid-August 2005, Rushdie called for a reform in Islam.

[ 181 ] What is needed is a move beyond tradition, nothing less than a reform movement to bring the core concepts of Islam into the modern age, a Muslim Reformation to combat not only the jihadist ideologues but also the dusty, stifling seminaries of the traditionalists, throwing open the windows to let in much-needed fresh air. ... It is high time, for starters, that Muslims were able to study the revelation of their religion as an event inside history, not supernaturally above it. ... Broad-mindedness is related to tolerance; open-mindedness is the sibling of peace.

— Salman Rushdie, "Muslims unite! A new Reformation will bring your faith into the modern era" Rushdie is a critic of moral and cultural relativism . In an interview with Point of Inquiry in 2006, he described his view as follows: [ 182 ] We need all of us, whatever our background, to constantly examine the stories inside which and with which we live. We all live in stories, so called grand narratives. Nation is a story. Family is a story. Religion is a story. Community is a story. We all live within and with these narratives. And it seems to me that a definition of any living vibrant society is that you constantly question those stories. That you constantly argue about the stories. In fact the arguing never stops. The argument itself is freedom. It's not that you come to a conclusion about it. And through that argument you change your mind sometimes.… And that's how societies grow. When you can't retell for yourself the stories of your life then you live in a prison.… Somebody else controls the story.… Now it seems to me that we have to say that a problem in contemporary Islam is the inability to re-examine the ground narrative of the religion.… The fact that in Islam it is very difficult to do this, makes it difficult to think new thoughts.

Rushdie is an advocate of religious satire . He condemned the Charlie Hebdo shooting and defended comedic criticism of religions in a comment originally posted on English PEN where he called religions a medieval form of unreason. Rushdie called the attack a consequence of "religious totalitarianism", which according to him had caused "a deadly mutation in the heart of Islam". He said: [ 183 ] Religion, a medieval form of unreason, when combined with modern weaponry becomes a real threat to our freedoms. This religious totalitarianism has caused a deadly mutation in the heart of Islam and we see the tragic consequences in Paris today. I stand with Charlie Hebdo, as we all must, to defend the art of satire, which has always been a force for liberty and against tyranny, dishonesty and stupidity. 'Respect for religion' has become a code phrase meaning 'fear of religion.' Religions, like all other ideas, deserve criticism, satire, and, yes, our fearless disrespect.

When asked about reading and writing as a human right, Rushdie states: "...there are the larger stories, the grand narratives that we live in, which are things like nation, and family, and clan, and so on. Those stories are considered to be treated reverentially. They need to be part of the way in which we conduct the discourse of our lives and to prevent people from doing something very damaging to human nature." [ 184 ] Though Rushdie believes the freedoms of literature to be universal, the bulk of his fictions portrays the struggles of the marginally underrepresented. This can be seen in his portrayal of the role of women in his novel Shame . In this novel, Rushdie, "suggests that it is women who suffer most from the injustices of the Pakistani social order." [ 185 ] His support of feminism can also be seen in a 2015 interview with New York magazine's The Cut .

[ 186 ] Political background [ edit ] Paul Auster and Rushdie greeting Israeli President Shimon Peres with Caro Llewellyn in 2008 UK politics [ edit ] In 2006, Rushdie stated that he supported comments by Jack Straw , then- Leader of the House of Commons from Labour, who criticized the wearing of the niqab (a veil that covers all of the face except the eyes). Rushdie stated that his three sisters would never wear the veil. He said, "I think the battle against the veil has been a long and continuing battle against the limitation of women, so in that sense I'm completely on Straw's side." [ 187 ] US politics [ edit ] Rushdie and Bernie Sanders in 2004 Rushdie supported the 1999 NATO bombing of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , leading historian Tariq Ali to label Rushdie part of what he considered to be "warrior writers" as "the belligerati".

[ 188 ] He was supportive of the US-led campaign to remove the Taliban in Afghanistan, which began in 2001 but was a vocal critic of the 2003 war in Iraq . He stated that while there was a "case to be made for the removal of Saddam Hussein ", US unilateral military intervention was unjustifiable.

[ 189 ] Terry Eagleton , a former admirer of Rushdie's work and Marxist literary critic , criticized him, saying he "cheered on the Pentagon 's criminal ventures in Iraq and Afghanistan." [ 190 ] Eagleton subsequently apologized for having misrepresented Rushdie's views.

[ 191 ] Rushdie supported the election of Barack Obama for the US presidency and has often criticized the Republican Party . He was involved in the Occupy Movement , both as a presence at Occupy Boston and as a founding member of Occupy Writers.

[ 192 ] Rushdie is a supporter of gun control , blaming a shooting at a Colorado cinema in July 2012 on the American right to keep and bear arms .

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] He acquired American citizenship in 2016 and voted for Hillary Clinton in that year's election .

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] Noting the rise of "populist authoritarian demagoguery" around the world, Rushdie said there was "a willingness amongst at least some part of the [US] population to cease to value the democratic values enshrined in the first amendment . So I think the problem is, I would now say, political more than primarily religious".

[ 197 ] Against religious extremism [ edit ] In the wake of the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy in March 2006 Rushdie signed the manifesto Together Facing the New Totalitarianism , a statement warning of the dangers of religious extremism . The Manifesto was published in the left-leaning French weekly Charlie Hebdo in March 2006.

[ 198 ] When Amnesty International suspended human rights activist Gita Sahgal for saying to the press that she thought the organization should distance itself from Moazzam Begg and his organization, Rushdie said: [ 199 ] Amnesty…has done its reputation incalculable damage by allying itself with Moazzam Begg and his group Cageprisoners , and holding them up as human rights advocates. It looks very much as if Amnesty's leadership is suffering from a kind of moral bankruptcy , and has lost the ability to distinguish right from wrong. It has greatly compounded its error by suspending the redoubtable Gita Sahgal for the crime of going public with her concerns. Gita Sahgal is a woman of immense integrity and distinction. ... It is people like Gita Sahgal who are the true voices of the human rights movement; Amnesty and Begg have revealed, by their statements and actions, that they deserve our contempt.

In July 2020, Rushdie was one of the 153 signers of the "Harper's Letter", also known as " A Letter on Justice and Open Debate ", that expressed concern that "the free exchange of information and ideas, the lifeblood of a liberal society, is daily becoming more constricted." [ 200 ] In October 2023, Rushdie expressed his "horror" at both Hamas ' attack on Israel and Israel 's retaliation in the Gaza Strip and called for a "cessation in hostilities".

[ 201 ] In May 2024, Rushdie argued that if a Palestinian state ever came into being, it would resemble a " Taliban -like state" and become a client state of Iran. He further stated, "There's an emotional reaction to the death in Gaza, and that's absolutely right. But when it slides over towards antisemitism and sometimes to actual support of Hamas, then it's very problematic." He voiced his puzzlement regarding the current support of progressive students for what he described as a "fascist terrorist group".

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] [ 204 ] South Asian politics and Kashmir [ edit ] Rushdie has been critical of Pakistan's former Prime Minister Imran Khan after Khan took personal jabs at him in a 2012 interview. Khan had called Rushdie "unbalanced", saying he has the "mindset of a small man", claiming they had "never met" and he would never "want to meet him ever", despite the two being spotted together in public numerous times.

[ 205 ] Rushdie has expressed his preference for India over Pakistan on numerous occasions in writing and on live television interviews. In one such interview in 2003, Rushdie said "Pakistan sucks" after being asked about why he felt more like an outsider there than in India or England. He cited India's diversity, openness, and "richness of life experience" as his preference over Pakistan's "airlessness", resulting from a lack of personal freedom, widespread public corruption, and inter-ethnic tension.

[ 206 ] [ non-primary source needed ] In Indian politics, Rushdie has criticized the Bharatiya Janata Party and its chairperson, the incumbent Prime Minister Narendra Modi .

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] In a 2006 interview about his novel Shalimar the Clown , Rushdie laments the division of Kashmir into zones of Indian and Pakistani administration as having cut his family down the middle.

[ 209 ] In August 2019, he criticized the revocation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir , tweeting: "Even from seven thousand miles away it's clear that what's happening in Kashmir is an atrocity. Not much to celebrate this August 15th." [ 210 ] He has previously referred to crackdowns in Indian-administered Kashmir as pretexts for the rise of jihadism in the region : [ 209 ] The phrase of "crackdown" that the Indian army uses really is a euphemism of mass destruction. And rape . And brutalisation. That happens all the time. It's still happening now. ... The decision to treat all Kashmiris as if they're potential terrorists is what has unleashed this, the kind of "holocaust" against the Kashmiri people. And we know ourselves, from most recent events in Europe, how important it is to resist treating all Muslims as if they're terrorists, but the Indian army has taken the decision to do the opposite of that, to actually decide that everybody is a potential combatant to treat them in that way. And the level of brutality is quite spectacular. And, frankly, without that the jihadists would have had very little response from the Kashmiri people who were not really traditionally interested in radical Islam. So now they're caught between the devil and the deep blue sea, and that's the tragedy of the place. ... And really what I was trying to do was say exactly that the attraction of the jihad in Kashmir arose out of the activities of the Indian army.

Personal life [ edit ] Rushdie has been married five times and has two children; his first four marriages ended in divorce. He was first married to Clarissa Luard, [ 211 ] literature officer of the Arts Council of England , [ 212 ] from 1976 to 1987. The couple had a son, Zafar, born in 1979, [ 213 ] who is married to the London-based jazz singer Natalie Coyle .

[ 214 ] He left Clarissa Luard in the mid-1980s for the Australian writer Robyn Davidson , to whom he was introduced by their mutual friend Bruce Chatwin .

[ 215 ] Rushdie and Davidson never married, and they had split up by the time his divorce from Clarissa came through in 1987. Rushdie's second wife was the American novelist Marianne Wiggins ; they were married in 1988 and divorced in 1993.

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] His third wife, from 1997 to 2004, was British editor and author Elizabeth West; [ 218 ] [ 219 ] they have a son, Milan, born in 1997. After a miscarriage, the couple ended their relationship in 2004.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] In 2004, very shortly after his third divorce, Rushdie married Padma Lakshmi , an Indian-born actress, model, television personality, producer, author, businessperson, and activist. At the time of their first meeting in 1999, Lakshmi was 28, while Rushdie was 51.

[ 222 ] Rushdie stated that Lakshmi had asked for a divorce in January 2007, [ 223 ] and later that year, in July, the couple filed it.

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] Padma Lakshmi criticized Rushdie as insecure and spoiled, stating he constantly craved praise and demanded "frequent sex." [ 226 ] [ 227 ] [ 228 ] She claimed he referred to her as a "bad investment." [ 229 ] Lakshmi also said that Rushdie was insensitive to her painful endometriosis .

[ 227 ] [ 230 ] [ 231 ] Following his split from Lakshmi, Rushdie was frequently seen with various women, including Riya Sen , journalist Aita Ighodaro , and actresses Olivia Wilde and Rosario Dawson , among others.

[ 232 ] [ better source needed ] In 2009, actress Pia Glenn castigated him as "cowardly, dysfunctional, and immature" after he ditched her via email.

[ 233 ] [ 232 ] In 2021, Rushdie married American poet and novelist Rachel Eliza Griffiths .

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] In 1999, Rushdie had an operation to correct ptosis , a problem with the levator palpebrae superioris muscle that causes drooping of the upper eyelid. According to Rushdie, this condition made it increasingly difficult for him to open his eyes. He said: "If I hadn't had an operation, in a couple of years from now I wouldn't have been able to open my eyes at all." [ 236 ] Since 2000, Rushdie has lived in the United States, mostly near Union Square in Lower Manhattan , New York City.

[ 237 ] He is a fan of the English football club Tottenham Hotspur .

[ 238 ] He has been a holder of the Person of Indian Origin Card , which grants certain rights to people of the Indian diaspora short of full citizenship.

[ 239 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Novels [ edit ] Grimus (1975) Midnight's Children (1981) Shame (1983) The Satanic Verses (1988) The Moor's Last Sigh (1995) The Ground Beneath Her Feet (1999) Fury (2001) Shalimar the Clown (2005) The Enchantress of Florence (2008) Two Years Eight Months and Twenty-Eight Nights (2015) The Golden House (2017) [ 240 ] Quichotte (2019) [ 241 ] Victory City (2023) [ 242 ] [ 243 ] Collections [ edit ] East, West (1994) Mirrorwork: 50 Years of Indian Writing 1947–1997 (1997, Editor, with Elizabeth West) The Best American Short Stories (2008, Guest Editor) Children's books [ edit ] Haroun and the Sea of Stories (1990) [ 244 ] Luka and the Fire of Life (2010) Essays and nonfiction [ edit ] In Good Faith , Granta Books (1990) Imaginary Homelands: Essays and Criticism, 1981–1991 (1992) The Wizard of Oz: BFI Film Classics , British Film Institute (1992) Mohandas Gandhi , Time (13 April 1998) [ 245 ] Imagine There Is No Heaven (Extract from Letters to the Six Billionth World Citizen , published in English by Uitgeverij Podium, Amsterdam) [ 246 ] Step Across This Line: Collected Nonfiction 1992–2002 (2002) [ 247 ] The East Is Blue (2004) [ 248 ] "A fine pickle", The Guardian (28 February 2009) [ 249 ] In the South , Booktrack (7 February 2012) Languages of Truth: Essays 2003–2020 (2021) [ 250 ] Memoirs [ edit ] The Jaguar Smile: A Nicaraguan Journey (1987) Joseph Anton: A Memoir (2012) Knife: Meditations After an Attempted Murder (2024) [ 143 ] See also [ edit ] Biography portal Blasphemy The Butterfly Hunter Criticism of Islam Censorship in South Asia Hysterical realism Indians in the New York City metropolitan area List of fatwas List of Indian writers PEN International Postmodern literature Notes [ edit ] ^ See Hitoshi Igarashi , Ettore Capriolo , William Nygaard .

References [ edit ] ^ "Salman Rushdie" .

Oxford Reference .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2022 .

^ "Salman Rushdie claims victory in Facebook name battle" . BBC News. 15 November 2011.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2017 . Retrieved 16 June 2017 .

^ Pointon, Graham (ed.): BBC Pronouncing Dictionary of British Names , second edition. Oxford Paperbacks, 1990.

^ Taseer, Aatish (2 August 2019).

" 'That the world that you knew, and that in a way made you – that world vanishes. I don't think I'm alone in that,' says Salman Rushdie" .

openthemagazine.com . Open.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 5 August 2019 .

^ a b Foroutan, Parnaz (16 April 2022).

"Salman Rushdie's stabbing is part of an American phenomenon" .

NBC News . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ "Salman Rushdie: Losing an eye upsets me every day" . 15 April 2024 . Retrieved 22 January 2025 .

^ Gelles, David; Root, Jay; Harris, Elizabeth (12 August 2022).

"Live Updates: Salman Rushdie Is Stabbed During Speech in Western New York" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ "Rushdie, Sir Salman" .

Royal Society of Literature . 1 September 2023 . Retrieved 29 June 2025 .

^ " Rushdie to Receive Top Literary Award ." Chicago Tribune .

7 January 1999. Retrieved 26 March 2012.

^ " Birthday Honours List – United Kingdom ." The London Gazette 58358(1):B1. 16 June 2007. Retrieved 26 March 2012.

Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The 50 Greatest British Writers Since 1945".

The Times , 5 January 2008. Retrieved 1 January 2010. Subscription required.

^ "Distinguished Professionals in Residence" . Archived from the original on 5 April 2017 . Retrieved 4 April 2017 .

^ "Time 100" .

Time . 13 April 2023.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2023 . Retrieved 15 April 2023 .

^ "Controversy man Salman Rushdie" .

India Today . 24 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ Bain, Ellissa (13 August 2022).

"Who is Salman Rushdie's wife? Inside his four marriages" .

HITC .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ "6 unexpected revelations from Padma Lakshmi's memoir that shocked the world" .

India Today . 1 September 2016 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

^ a b c d e f "Salman Rushdie – Literature" .

literature.britishcouncil.org .

Archived from the original on 29 August 2019 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ Literary Encyclopedia : "Salman Rushdie" Archived 12 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 20 January 2008 ^ Liukkonen, Petri.

"Salman Rushdie" .

Books and Writers . Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on 13 January 2008.

^ "Revealed after 76 yrs: Rushdie's dad's secret humiliation in London" .

mumbaimirror.indiatimes.com . 15 December 2014.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 13 September 2018 .

^ Salman Rushdie Discusses Creativity and Digital Scholarship with Erika Farr on YouTube ^ Robert Coover (15 January 1995).

"There's No Place Like Oz" .

The New York Times .

^ a b "Salman Rushdie: By the Book" .

The New York Times . 17 September 2015.

^ Siganporia, Shahnaz (4 September 2015).

"What's on Salman Rushdie's reading list?" .

Vogue India .

^ "Always the Outsider" .

archive.nytimes.com . Retrieved 5 February 2025 .

^ "Is Nothing Sacred?" .

Granta . 26 April 1990 . Retrieved 5 February 2025 .

^ Ravikrishnan, Ashutosh.

Salman Rushdie's Midnight Child Archived 15 April 2013 at archive.today . South Asian Diaspora. 25 July 2012.

^ a b Glaister, Dan (22 January 1999).

"After the Satanic Verses, the romantic lyrics" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ " Salman Rushdie biography Archived 1 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine ", 2004, British Council. Retrieved 20 January 2008.

^ Birrell, George (18 January 1997).

"Negative because there is little positive to say" .

The Herald . Glasgow.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2014 . Retrieved 9 December 2010 .

^ "The birth pangs of Midnight's Children" Archived 6 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine , TLS , 1 April 2006.

^ Rushdie, Salman (8 March 1992).

"Angela Carter, 1940–92: A Very Good Wizard, a Very Dear Friend" .

The New York Times .

^ Rushdie, Salman (25 March 2023).

"Full text of "Burning Your Boats The Collected Short Stories Angela Carter" " .

Internet Archive (Introduction) . Retrieved 4 March 2024 .

^ Nealon, Jeffrey T.

(2015). “Post-Postmodernism: Or, The Cultural Logic of Just-In-Time Capitalism,” Supplanting the Postmodern: An Anthology of Writings on the Arts and Culture of the Early 21st Century , New York and London: Bloomsbury, p. 88 ^ Martyris, Nina (20 July 2008).

"One more bouquet for Saleem Sinai" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2009 . Retrieved 7 November 2008 .

Saleem is not Salman (although he marries a Padma) and Saleem's grandfather Dr Aadam Aziz is not him either, but there is a touching prescience at work here. In the opening pages of Midnight's Children, Dr Aziz while bending down on his prayer mat, bumps his nose on a hard tussock of earth. His nose bleeds and his eyes water and he decides then and there that never again will he bow before God or man. "This decision, however, made a hole in him, a vacancy in a vital inner chamber, leaving him vulnerable to women and history." Battered by a fatwa and one femme fatale too many, Salman would have some understanding of this.

^ a b Meer, Ameena (1989).

"Interview: Salman Rushdie" .

Bomb .

27 (Spring). Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 22 March 2015 .

^ Rushdie, Salman.

Midnight's Children . p. xi.

^ Pritchett, V. S. (19 July 1981).

"Salman Rushdie's Fantastical Tour de Force" .

The New Yorker .

^ "Readers across the world agree that Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children is the Best of the Booker" . Man Booker Prizes. 2008. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008 . Retrieved 10 July 2008 .

^ "Rushdie Special" .

The Telegraph Online . 20 June 2011 . Retrieved 15 June 2024 .

^ Kumar, Seetha (15 February 1987).

"Salman Rushdie in Nicaragua: A rendezvous with revolution" .

The Indian Express .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ "Controversial Novel Wins Whitbread Literary Prize".

Deseret News . 18 November 1988.

^ Rushdie, Salman (14 January 1990).

"Still Crazy After All These Years" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 .

^ Rushdie, Salman (26 January 2018).

"Books that made me | Salman Rushdie: 'I couldn't finish Middlemarch. I know, I know. I'll try again' " .

The Guardian .

^ "The Moor's Last Sigh" .

Publishers Weekly . 13 January 1997.

^ "The Ground Beneath her Feet" at Salman Rushdie.com.

Archived 11 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Le Guin, Ursula K (29 March 2008).

"The real uses of enchantment" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ Page, Benedicte (12 October 2010).

"Salman Rushdie at work on fatwa memoir" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2019 . Retrieved 14 September 2012 .

^ "Salman Rushdie Collaborates With Booktrack and the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra, Booktrack Launches A New E-reader Platform" . Booktrack. Archived from the original on 4 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 July 2012 .

^ Le Guin, Ursula K. (4 September 2015).

"Two Years, Eight Months and Twenty‑Eight Nights by Salman Rushdie review – a modern Arabian Nights" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 4 March 2024 .

^ Kidd, James (24 August 2019).

"Salman Rushdie's Quichotte brings Cervantes' epic Don Quixote into the modern age" .

South China Morning Post .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2022 . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Languages of Truth by Salman Rushdie" . Penguin Random House.

Archived from the original on 8 October 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

^ "Victory City by Salman Rushdie" . Penguin Random House.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2023 .

^ Gruber, Fiona (8 February 2023).

"Salman Rushdie's new novel is a tale of power, exile and steely defiance" .

The Age .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ Morrison, Blake (15 April 2024).

"Knife by Salman Rushdie review – a story of hatred defeated by love" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ Italie, Hillel (1 October 2024).

"Salman Rushdie, Percival Everett and Miranda July are National Book Award finalists" .

The Independent . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ "Booker Prize 2019 shortlist announced" .

Books+Publishing . 4 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 September 2019 . Retrieved 6 September 2019 .

^ Jordison, Sam (10 July 2008).

"Midnight's Children is the right winner" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 .

^ "The 2007 Shortlist" . Dublin City Public Libraries/International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award. 2007. Archived from the original on 29 April 2007 . Retrieved 5 April 2007 .

^ Shaffi, Sarah (4 October 2022).

"Salman Rushdie among favourites for this year's Nobel prize for literature" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2022 .

^ "It's time for Salman Rushdie's Nobel prize" .

The New Yorker . 5 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2022 .

^ Finney, Brian (1998).

"Demonizing Discourse in Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses" .

California State University, Long Beach . Archived from the original on 29 August 2000.

^ Rohter, Larry (7 May 2012).

"Rushdie Brings PEN Festival to Close" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2012 . Retrieved 6 August 2012 .

^ Academicians Database Archived 4 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine , American Academy of Arts and Letters. Retrieved 26 March 2012.

^ "Salman Rushdie to Teach and Place His Archive at Emory University" . Emory University Office of Media Relations. 6 October 2006. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006 . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

^ Williams, Kimber (7 May 2015).

"Rushdie reflects on more than a decade of Emory experiences" .

Emory Report .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2019 . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

^ "New Distinguished Writer in Residence: Salman Rushdie" .

NYU Journalism . 5 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ "The Lunchbox Fund" .

thelunchboxfund.org .

Archived from the original on 6 September 2021 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 .

^ "Salman Rushdie" .

Secular Coalition for America .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2021 . Retrieved 31 October 2021 .

^ "Salman Rushdie Author and Patron of the BHA" .

British Humanist Association .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2017 . Retrieved 7 March 2017 .

^ "Collegium Ralstonianum apud Savannenses – Home" . Ralston.ac.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ "Salman Rushdie" .

IMDb .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2011 . Retrieved 27 August 2022 .

^ "Salman Rushdie: 'The curse of an interesting life' " . The Talks. 27 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2013 . Retrieved 5 April 2013 .

^ "Signez la pétition pour Roman Polanski!" [Sign the petition for Roman Polanski!].

La Règle du jeu (in French). 10 November 2009.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 August 2021 .

^ "Rushdie visits Mumbai for 'Midnight's Children' film" .

The Times of India . 11 January 2010. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010 . Retrieved 13 March 2010 .

^ Jha, Subhash K. (13 January 2010).

"I'm a film buff: Rushdie" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 13 March 2010 .

^ "Dreaming of Midnight's Children" .

The Indian Express . 5 January 2010.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2011 . Retrieved 13 March 2010 .

^ "Irrfan moves from Mira Nair to Deepa Mehta" .

Hindustan Times . 20 January 2010. Archived from the original on 4 March 2010 . Retrieved 13 March 2010 .

^ "Tête-à-tête with Deepa Mehta" .

Hindustan Times . 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 12 March 2010 . Retrieved 13 March 2010 .

^ Thorpe, Vanessa (12 June 2011).

"Salman Rushdie says TV drama series have taken the place of novels" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2013 . Retrieved 11 June 2011 .

^ "Curb Your Enthusiasm – Season 9" .

HBO .

Archived from the original on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 December 2017 .

^ "Salman Rushdie on Inspiring the New Season of 'Curb Your Enthusiasm' " .

The Hollywood Reporter . 4 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ "How 'Curb Your Enthusiasm' Kept Salman Rushdie's Fatwa Cameo a Secret" .

The Hollywood Reporter . 17 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ Rushdie, Salman (22 January 1989). "Choice between light and dark".

The Observer .

^ "Ayatollah Khomeini Never Read Salman Rushdie's Book" .

The New Yorker . 14 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ a b Osborne, Samuel (21 February 2016).

"Iranian state media has put a $600,000 bounty on Salman Rushdie's head" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2017 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ Rule, Sheila (8 March 1989).

"Iran Breaks Off Relations With Britain" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2015 . Retrieved 24 January 2019 .

^ "Words for Salman Rushdie" .

The New York Times . 12 March 1989.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 4 April 2023 .

^ Hitchens, Christopher.

Hitch-22 . p. 268.

^ Rushdie, Salman (6 January 2012).

"Salman Rushdie on the Wonder of Christopher Hitchens" .

Vanity Fair . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ Ridding, Alan (4 November 1993).

"Muslim Thinkers Rally for Rushdie" .

The New York Times .

^ Murtagh, Peter (15 February 1989).

"Rushdie in hiding after Ayatollah's death threat" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 – via www.theguardian.com.

^ Rushdie, Salman (10 September 2012).

"The Disappeared" .

The New Yorker . No. 17 September 2012. p. 50.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2014 . Retrieved 16 September 2012 .

^ Malik, Kenan (29 September 2018).

"The Satanic Verses sowed the seeds of rifts that have grown ever wider – Kenan Malik" .

The Observer .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 – via www.theguardian.com.

^ "The Satanic Verses affair marked a low point for politicians – Letters" .

The Observer . 7 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 – via www.theguardian.com.

^ U2 (July 2010). "Stairway to Devon − OK, Somerset!".

Q . p. 101.

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Loyd, Anthony (8 June 2005).

"Tomb of the unknown assassin reveals mission to kill Rushdie" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010.

^ "26 December 1990: Iranian leader upholds Rushdie fatwa" . BBC News: On This Day. 26 December 1990.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2012 . Retrieved 10 October 2006 .

^ Rubin, Michael (1 September 2006).

"Can Iran Be Trusted?" . The Middle East Forum: Promoting American Interests.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2006 . Retrieved 10 October 2006 .

^ Webster, Philip ; Hoyle, Ben; Navai, Ramita (20 January 2005).

"Ayatollah revives the death fatwa on Salman Rushdie" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 3 March 2007 . Retrieved 10 October 2006 .

^ "Iran adamant over Rushdie fatwa" .

BBC News . 12 February 2005. Archived from the original on 6 February 2006 . Retrieved 10 October 2006 .

^ Rushdie, Salman (15 February 1999).

"My Unfunny Valentine" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 7 November 2017 .

^ "Rushdie's term" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 15 February 2007 .

^ "Cronenberg meets Rushdie: David Cronenberg and Salman Rushdie talk..." Shift Magazine . June–July 1995. Archived from the original on 3 April 2007.

^ "Rushdie anger at policeman's book" . BBC. 2 August 2008.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2009 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 .

^ "Bodyguard apologises to Rushdie" . BBC. 26 August 2008.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2009 . Retrieved 4 January 2010 .

^ Flood, Alison (12 April 2012).

"Salman Rushdie reveals details of fatwa memoir" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2013 . Retrieved 27 April 2012 .

^ Buchta, Wilfried (2000).

Who rules Iran?

(PDF) . The Washington Institute and The Konrad Adenauer. p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ Post Staff Report (16 September 2012).

"Iran adds to reward for Salman Rushdie's death" .

The New York Post .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2012 . Retrieved 16 September 2012 .

^ "Govt's decision to ban Salman Rushdie's 'The Satanic Verses' was wrong, says P Chidambaram" .

Firstpost . 28 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2016 . Retrieved 17 October 2016 .

^ "Rajiv Gandhi govt's ban on Salman Rushdie's 'Satanic Verses' wrong: Chidambaram" .

The Indian Express . 29 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2016 . Retrieved 25 October 2016 .

^ Cain, Sian (22 February 2016).

"Salman Rushdie: Iranian media raise more money for fatwa" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2016 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ Loyd, Anthony (8 June 2005).

"First Rushdie 'martyr' - Untold assassination plot revealed" .

The Telegraph India .

^ Chautauqua, Will Pavia (22 February 2025).

"Salman Rushdie thought the nightmare was over but death was stalking him for 36 years" .

www.thetimes.com . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ "Hezbollah: Rushdie death would stop Prophet insults" . Agence France-Presse. 2 February 2006. Archived from the original on 7 August 2007 . Retrieved 26 April 2012 .

^ Tamney, Joseph Bernard (2002).

The Resilience of Conservative Religion: The Case of Popular, Conservative Protestant Congregations . Cambridge, UK: The Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge.

^ "International Guerrillas and Criminal Libel" .

Screenonline .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2009 . Retrieved 7 February 2008 .

^ Stewart, Scott (22 July 2010).

"Fanning the Flames of Jihad" .

Security Weekly . Stratfor. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013.

Inspire also features a "hit list" that includes the names of people like Westergaard who were involved in the cartoon controversy as well as other targets such as Dutch politician Geert Wilders, who produced the controversial film Fitna in 2008 ^ Bennet, Dashiell (1 March 2013).

"Look Who's on Al Qaeda's Most-Wanted List" .

The Wire .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 15 January 2015 .

^ Urquhart, Conal (7 January 2015).

"Paris Police Say 12 Dead After Shooting at Charlie Hebdo" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2015 . Retrieved 15 January 2015 .

^ Ward, Victoria (7 January 2015).

"Murdered Charlie Hebdo cartoonist was on al Qaeda wanted list" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ Lucy Cormack (8 January 2015).

"Charlie Hebdo editor Stephane Charbonnier crossed off chilling al-Qaeda hitlist" .

The Age .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2015 . Retrieved 15 January 2015 .

^ Time . 7 January 2015.

salman rushdie response ^ Ring, Wilson (15 January 2015).

"Salman Rushdie, threatened over book, defends free speech" . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on 24 January 2015 . Retrieved 15 January 2015 .

^ Thurston, Jack (15 January 2015).

"After Paris Attacks, Salman Rushdie Defends Absolute Right of Free Speech While in Vermont" .

NECN . NBC Universal.

Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 15 January 2015 .

^ "2012 Speakers" . Archived from the original on 25 January 2012.

^ Singh, Akhilesh Kumar (20 January 2012).

"Salman Rushdie not to attend Jaipur Literature Festival" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2012 . Retrieved 20 January 2012 .

^ "Salman Rushdie pulls out of Jaipur literature festival" .

BBC News . 20 January 2012.

Archived from the original on 20 January 2012 . Retrieved 20 January 2012 .

^ a b Singh, Akhilesh Kumar (24 January 2012).

"Jaipur Literature Festival: Even a virtual Rushdie is unwelcome for Rajasthan govt" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 .

^ Singh, Akhilesh Kumar; Chowdhury, Shreya Roy (23 January 2012).

"Salman Rushdie shadow on Jaipur Literature Festival: 4 authors who read from 'The Satanic Verses' sent packing" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2012 . Retrieved 23 January 2012 .

^ Gill, Nikhila (24 January 2012).

"Rushdie's Video Talk Is Canceled at India Literature Festival" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2014 . Retrieved 6 December 2014 .

^ "Salman Rushdie to be a 'presence' at India conference" .

BBC News . 13 March 2012.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2019 . Retrieved 21 June 2018 .

^ a b c Root, Jay; Gelles, David; Harris, Elizabeth A.; Jacobs, Julia (12 August 2022).

"Salman Rushdie on Ventilator Hours After Being Stabbed in Western New York" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ "Who is Hadi Matar? Everything we know about Salman Rushdie's alleged attacker | Fox News" .

www.foxnews.com . Retrieved 12 January 2024 .

^ Singh, Kanishka; Allen, Jonathan (13 August 2022).

"Salman Rushdie on ventilator after New York stabbing" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ Vargas, Ramon Antonio (12 August 2022).

"Police identify Salman Rushdie attack suspect as 24-year-old from New Jersey" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ Singh, Kanishka; Allen, Jonathan (12 August 2022).

"Salman Rushdie is stabbed in the neck at a New York lecture" . Reuters.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ "Salman Rushdie: Author on ventilator and unable to speak, agent says" .

BBC News . 13 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ Thompson, Carolyn; Italie, Hillel (14 August 2022).

"Agent: Rushdie off ventilator and talking, day after attack" . AP News.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ "Salman Rushdie is off ventilator and able to talk, agent says" .

The Guardian . 14 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ Altares, Guillermo (22 October 2022).

"Andrew Wylie, 'The Jackal' of books: 'Amazon is like ISIS; it takes no prisoners' " .

EL PAÍS English Edition .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2022 . Retrieved 24 October 2022 .

^ Jones, Sam (23 October 2022).

"Salman Rushdie has lost sight in one eye and use of one hand, says agent" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2023 . Retrieved 23 October 2022 .

^ a b Wagner, Erica (15 April 2024).

"Review: Salman Rushdie's memoir is horrific, upsetting – and a masterpiece" .

The Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

^ Times, The Sunday (28 April 2024).

"The Sunday Times Bestsellers List — the UK's definitive book chart" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 28 April 2024 .

^ Sathian, Sanjena (16 April 2024).

"Salman Rushdie Did Not Want to Write This Book" .

Vulture . Retrieved 27 April 2024 .

^ Creamer, Ella (4 January 2024).

"Trial of Salman Rushdie's attacker postponed because of author's memoir" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 27 April 2024 .

^ Gross, Terry (16 April 2024).

"Two nights before the attack, Salman Rushdie dreamed he was stabbed onstage" .

NPR .

^ "Attacker Convicted in Salman Rushdie Stabbing Case" .

Citizen News Daily . February 2025 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ "Salman Rushdie attacker found guilty of attempted murder and assault" .

www.bbc.com . 21 February 2025 . Retrieved 7 April 2025 .

^ Vargas, Ramon Antonio (21 February 2025).

"Man found guilty of attempted murder in Salman Rushdie stabbing trial" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 7 April 2025 .

^ Fadulu, Lola (21 February 2025).

"Man Who Stabbed Salman Rushdie Is Found Guilty of Attempted Murder" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 7 April 2025 .

^ Crane, Emily (16 May 2025).

"Salman Rushdie's attacker Hadi Matar sentenced for horrific stabbing" . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ "Salman Rushdie attacker sentenced to 25 years in prison" .

www.bbc.com . 16 May 2025 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ Martyris, Nina (20 July 2008).

"One more bouquet for Saleem Sinai" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2009 . Retrieved 7 November 2008 .

^ "Salman Rushdie: Kennedy Center" .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ "Salman Rushdie: The Booker Prizes" . 19 June 1947.

Archived from the original on 6 September 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ Salman Rushdie on YouTube ^ "Golden Pen Award" .

English PEN .

Archived from the original on 21 November 2012 . Retrieved 3 December 2012 .

^ "Salman Rushdie får dansk litteraturpris på halv million" [Salman Rushdie receives the Danish literature prize of a half-million].

Politiken (in Danish). 12 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2013 . Retrieved 12 June 2013 .

^ "University Honors & Awards, Indiana University website" .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ Davis, Janel (16 February 2015).

"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution: Author Salman Rushdie to deliver Emory commencement May 11" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ Chronological Listing of Honorary Degree Recipients, Emory University, 1846 – present – website Emory University ^ "Salman Rushdie honoured at UCD, The Irish Times website" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 11 October 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ Epstein, Greg (20 April 2007).

"HNN #18: Salman Rushdie & Cultural Humanism" .

American Humanist Association and the Humanist Chaplaincy of Harvard University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2015 . Retrieved 9 October 2015 .

^ "Salman Rushdie awarded the 2014 PEN/Pinter Prize" .

English PEN . 19 June 2014.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2014 . Retrieved 19 June 2014 .

^ "Saint Louis Literary Award – Saint Louis University" .

www.slu.edu . Archived from the original on 23 August 2016 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ "Salman Rushdie and Barbara Miller to receive Swiss Freethinker Award 2019" .

free-thought.ch . 7 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2019 . Retrieved 18 November 2019 .

^ "The Authors Guild Foundation Gala" .

The Authors Guild . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ "15 June 2007 Rushdie knighted in honours list" .

BBC News . 15 June 2007.

Archived from the original on 23 August 2007 . Retrieved 16 June 2007 .

^ Pierce, Andrew.

"Salman Rushdie is knighted by the Queen" .

Telegraph.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 May 2017 .

^ "Sir Rubbish: Does Rushdie Deserve a Knighthood", Times Higher Education Supplement , 20 June 2007.

^ "Protests spread to Malaysia over knighthood for Salman Rushdie" .

The New York Times . 20 June 2007.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2011 . Retrieved 23 May 2017 .

^ "10 July 2007 Al-Qaeda condemns Rushdie honour" .

BBC News . 10 July 2007.

Archived from the original on 28 August 2017 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ "When Christopher Hitchens Vigilantly Defended Salman Rushdie After the Fatwah: "It Was a Matter of Everything I Loved" " .

Open Culture .

^ "No. 63714" .

The London Gazette (Supplement). 1 June 2022. p. B6.

^ "Salman Rushdie" .

Biography.com .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2017 . Retrieved 11 October 2017 .

^ "Bill Moyers on Faith & Reason – Bill Moyers and Salman Rushdie" .

PBS . 23 June 2006.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 11 September 2017 .

^ "Fact, faith and fiction".

Far Eastern Economic Review . 2 March 1989. p. 11.

^ Hedges, Chris (25 December 1990).

"Rushdie Seeks to Mend His Rift With Islam" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2023 . Retrieved 26 June 2023 .

^ Kamen, Al (15 August 2022).

"In 1992, Salman Rushdie wasn't sure he'd ever be safe" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2022 . Retrieved 26 June 2023 .

^ "Muslims unite! A new Reformation will bring your faith into the modern era" Archived 12 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine , The Times , 11 August 2005.

^ "Salman Rushdie – Secular Values, Human Rights and Islamism" . Point of Inquiry.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2008 . Retrieved 11 October 2006 .

^ Crum, Maddie (7 January 2015).

"Salman Rushdie Responds To Charlie Hebdo Attack, Says Religion Must Be Subject To Satire" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2015 . Retrieved 20 June 2015 .

^ "The Art of Bravery: An Interview with Salman Rushdie" .

Los Angeles Review of Books . 25 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 – via PEN America.

^ Deszcz, Justyna (April 2004). "Salman Rushdie's attempt at a feminist fairytale reconfiguration in Shame ".

Folklore .

115 (1): 27– 44.

doi : 10.1080/0015587042000192510 .

ISSN 0015-587X .

S2CID 145667781 .

ProQuest 2152779627 .

^ The Cut (17 November 2015).

"15 Male Celebrities Answer 'Are You a Feminist?' " .

The Cut .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2022 . Retrieved 7 December 2015 .

^ Wagner, Thomas (10 October 2006).

"Blair, Rushdie support former British foreign secretary who ignited veil debate" . SignOnSanDiego.com.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 10 October 2006 .

^ Mandel, Michael . 2004.

How America Gets Away With Murder .

Pluto Press . p. 60.

^ "Letters, Salman Rushdie: No fondness for the Pentagon's politics | World news" .

The Guardian . London. 9 July 2007.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2010 .

^ "The ageing punk of lit crit still knows how to spit – Times Online" . Archived from the original on 12 May 2008 . Retrieved 30 July 2008 .

^ Terry Eagleton; Michael Kustow; Matthew Wright; Neil Morris (12 July 2007).

"Letters: Writers challenging so-called civilisation" .

The Guardian .

Scott Trust Limited .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2015 . Retrieved 20 June 2015 .

^ "OccupyWriters.com" .

occupywriters.com .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 August 2022 .

^ "Salman Rushdie stirs up frenzy with tweets in response to Colorado multiplex shooting | New York Daily News" .

Daily News . New York. 21 July 2012.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ Cheney, Alexandra (20 July 2012).

"Salman Rushdie Sparks Furor With Colorado Theater Shooting Tweets – Speakeasy" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ Begley, Sarah (8 September 2017).

"Salman Rushdie Plays the Trump Card" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 27 February 2019 .

^ Ha, Thu-Huong (9 February 2017).

"Salman Rushdie's new book features a 'narcissistic, media-savvy villain' with colored hair" .

Quartz .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2019 . Retrieved 27 February 2019 .

^ Gabbatt, Adam (14 September 2023).

" 'We're facing another old enemy': Rushdie warns against global authoritarianism" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 .

^ "Writers issue cartoon row warning" .

BBC News . 1 March 2006.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2014 .

^ Salman Rushdie's statement on Amnesty International Archived 1 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine , The Sunday Times , 21 February 2010 ^ "A Letter on Justice and Open Debate | Harper's Magazine" .

Harper's Magazine . 7 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2021 . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

^ "Rushdie urges end to fighting between Israel and Hamas" . France 24. 20 October 2023.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 24 October 2023 .

^ Perry, Kevin E G (20 May 2024).

"Salman Rushdie says a new Palestinian state would be 'Taliban-like' " . INDEPENDENT . Retrieved 22 May 2024 .

^ Creamer, Ella (20 May 2024).

"Salman Rushdie says a Palestinian state formed today would be 'Taliban-like' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 22 May 2024 .

^ Jackson, James (19 May 2024).

"A free Palestine would be a Taliban-like state, says Salman Rushdie" .

The Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 7 April 2025 .

^ Hickman, Leo (26 March 2012).

"Salman Rushdie v Imran Khan: it's war" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 8 March 2022 .

^ Salman Rushdie on Pakistan Sucks!

.

Biermann69 . 27 December 2014.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 March 2022 – via YouTube.

^ Burke, Jason (10 April 2014).

"A Narendra Modi victory would bode ill for India, say Rushdie and Kapoor" .

The Guardian . Delhi.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 June 2014 .

^ Flood, Alison (14 November 2019).

"Rushdie and Atwood join calls to restore citizenship to critic of Modi" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 23 December 2019 .

^ a b Gropp, Lewis (12 October 2009).

"Interview with Salman Rushdie: Kashmir, Paradise Lost" .

Qantara.de – Dialogue with the Islamic World .

Archived from the original on 17 June 2020 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ Rushdie, Salman (15 August 2019).

"Even from seven thousand miles away it's clear that what's happening in Kashmir is an atrocity. Not much to celebrate this August 15th" .

@salmanrushdie .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ Descended from the gentry family LUARD, formerly of Byborough. See Burke's Landed Gentry 18th edn. vol. 1 (1965), p. 465, col. 2.

^ Nasta, Susheila (18 July 2008).

"Clarissa Luard 1948–1999" .

Wasafiri .

15 (31): 59.

doi : 10.1080/02690050008589686 .

S2CID 162777055 .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ Free BMD website. Birth registered Q3 1979 Camden.

^ Kim, Leena (1 November 2016).

"Zafar Rushdie and Natalie Coyle Marry in His Father Salman's Adopted City" .

Town & Country . New York: Hearst Communications.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ Bruce Chatwin, letter to Ninette Dutton , 1 November 1984, in Under the Sun: The Letters of Bruce Chatwin , ed. Elizabeth Chatwin and Nicholas Shakespeare , p. 395 ^ Grove, Lloyd (7 March 1989).

"Rushdie Wiggins' Uncommon Bond" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ "Rushdie Granted Divorce From American Wife" .

Los Angeles Times . 3 March 1993.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ Bain, Ellissa (13 August 2022).

"Who is Salman Rushdie's wife? Inside his four marriages" .

HITC .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ "Elizabeth West" .

usmacmillan.com .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ "11 Revelations From Salman Rushdie's Memoir, 'Joseph Anton' " .

The Daily Beast . 18 September 2012 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ Rushdie, Salman (22 September 2012).

" 'You saw an illusion and you destroyed your family for it.' " .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ " 'Demanding husband' : Padma Lakshmi writes about her marriage to Salman Rushdie" .

The News Minute . 7 March 2024 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ Anthony, Andrew (6 April 2008).

"The Bookers' favourite" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2022 . Retrieved 4 September 2022 .

By this he means the end of his marriage. In January of 2007, Lakshmi asked for a divorce.

^ Keller, Julie (3 July 2007).

"Rushdie, Top Chef Wife Skewer Marriage" .

E!

. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.

^ Atad, Corey (14 August 2022).

"Padma Lakshmi Is 'Relieved' That Ex-Husband Salman Rushdie Is Recovering After Stabbing Attack" .

ET Canada . Archived from the original on 5 September 2022 . Retrieved 4 September 2022 .

They filed for divorce in 2007.

^ Gorka, Shifali (13 August 2022).

"Salman Rushdie's ex Padma Lakshmi spotted in NYC hours after he was stabbed, here's a look at his 4 ex-wives" .

meaww.com . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ a b "Salman Rushdie needed constant care and frequent sex, reveals Padma Lakshmi in her memoir" .

India Today . 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ "What Padma Lakshmi's marriage to Salman Rushdie tells us about high-maintenance husbands" .

Telegraph . 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ Hauser, Christine (9 March 2016).

"Padma Lakshmi Opens Up About Rushdie in Memoir" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ Crocker, Lizzie (11 March 2016).

"Padma Lakshmi Dishes on Her Darkest Days With Salman Rushdie" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ "My fiery marriage to Rushdie: At first he brought me breakfast, then he turned cold, says ex-wife" .

National Post . 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ a b "As Salman Rushdie steps out with another beautiful woman... just how DOES he do it?" .

Standard . 12 April 2022 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ "Rushdie is cowardly, dysfunctional and immature: Ex-lover" .

India Today . 18 October 2009 . Retrieved 7 October 2024 .

^ Yentob, Alan (2024).

"Salman Rushdie: Through a Glass Darkly" .

bbc.co.uk .

Language is a knife: Language is a way of cutting things open and revealing the truth ^ Remnick, David (13–20 February 2023).

"Defiance : despite a near–fatal stabbing—and decades of death threats—Salman Rushdie won't stop telling stories" . Profiles.

The New Yorker . Vol. 99, no. 1. pp.

50– 61.

Online version is titled "The defiance of Salman Rushdie".

^ " "Rushdie: New book out from under shadow of fatwa" , CNN, 15 April 1999.

Archived 28 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 21 April 2007.

^ Holson, Laura M., "From Exile to Everywhere" Archived 21 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , 23 March 2012 (online), 25 March 2012 (print). Retrieved 26 March 2012.

^ Collie, Ashley (21 July 2015).

"Shakespeare's Hotspur Would Be Proud to See His Namesake Tottenham Hotspur Leading Another British Invasion of America" .

HuffingtonPost.com . HPMG News.

Archived from the original on 19 September 2017 . Retrieved 5 September 2017 .

^ "Salman Rushdie row: 'Those having objection to PIO should move court' " .

The Economic Times .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2021 .

^ "The Golden House" Archived 9 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine by Salman Rushdie, Random House .

^ "Quichotte" Archived 25 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine by Salman Rushdie, Penguin Random House .

^ "New Rushdie Novel 'Victory City' To Be Published In February 2023" .

Bertelsmann . 27 July 2022.

Archived from the original on 19 December 2022 . Retrieved 19 December 2022 .

^ Review: Gruber, Fiona (8 February 2023).

"Salman Rushdie's new novel is a tale of power, exile and steely defiance" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2023 . Retrieved 5 March 2023 .

^ "Haroun and the Sea of Stories by Salman Rushdie" .

Purple Pencil Project . 5 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

^ Rushdie, Salman (13 April 1998).

"Mohandas Gandhi" .

Time . Archived from the original on 16 May 2007.

^ Rushdie, Salman (16 October 1999).

"Imagine There Is No Heaven (extract)" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 .

^ "Step Across This Line by Salman Rushdie" .

Penguin Random House .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2021 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 .

^ Baxter, Sarah; Richard Brooks (8 August 2004).

"Porn is vital to freedom, says Rushdie" .

The Times .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2022 .

^ Rushdie, Salman (28 February 2009).

"A fine pickle | Salman Rushdie on celluloid adaptations of novels" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2021 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 .

^ "Languages of Truth by Salman Rushdie" .

Penguin Random House .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2021 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 .

Relevant literature [ edit ] Szpila, Grzegorz. "Paremic verses: Proverbial meanings in Salman Rushdie's novels." Journal of Literary Semantics 37.2(2008): 97–127.

Szpila, Grzegorz. "Paremic Allusions in Salman Rushdie's Novels." Proverbium , 25 (2008), 379–398.

Szpila, Grzegorz.

Idioms in Salman Rushdie's Novels. A PhraseoStylistic Approach . Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2012. 293 pp.

External links [ edit ] Salman Rushdie at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Salman Rushdie at IMDb Salman Rushdie at British Council : Literature Salman Rushdie at The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Salman Rushdie at The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Appearances on C-SPAN Salman Rushdie collected news and commentary at The New York Times Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library , Emory University: Salman Rushdie papers, 1947–2012 v t e Salman Rushdie Novels Grimus (1975) Midnight's Children (1981) Shame (1983) The Satanic Verses (1988) The Moor's Last Sigh (1995) The Ground Beneath Her Feet (1999) Fury (2001) Shalimar the Clown (2005) The Enchantress of Florence (2008) Two Years Eight Months and Twenty-Eight Nights (2015) The Golden House (2017) Quichotte (2019) Victory City (2023) Story collections East, West (1994) Nonfiction Imaginary Homelands: Essays and Criticism 1981–1991 (1992) Homeless by Choice (1992) Step Across This Line: Collected Nonfiction 1992–2002 (2002) The East Is Blue (2004) Languages of Truth (2021) Plays Haroun and the Sea of Stories (with Tim Supple and David Tushingham) Midnight's Children (with Tim Supple and Simon Reade) Screenplays Midnight's Children (with Deepa Mehta) Children's books Haroun and the Sea of Stories (1990) Luka and the Fire of Life (2010) Anthology The Vintage Book of Indian Writing (co-editor) Short stories " In the South " (2009) Memoirs The Jaguar Smile: A Nicaraguan Journey (1987) Joseph Anton: A Memoir (2012) Knife: Meditations After an Attempted Murder (2024) The Satanic Verses controversy Cat Stevens comments (1989) 1989 firebombing of the Riverdale Press An Essay on Censorship (1989) The Blasphemers' Banquet (1989) A Brief History of Blasphemy (1990) The Rushdie Affair: The Novel, the Ayatollah, and the West (1990) International Guerillas (1990) Hitoshi Igarashi (1947–1991) " The Ground Beneath Her Feet " (2000) Knighthood (2007) Stabbing (2022) Related PEN World Voices v t e Recipients of the Booker Prize List of winners and nominated authors The Best of the Booker The Golden Man Booker International Booker Prize 1969–79 1969: P. H. Newby ( Something to Answer For ) 1970: Bernice Rubens ( The Elected Member ) 1970 Lost Prize : J. G. Farrell ( Troubles ) 1971: V. S. Naipaul ( In a Free State ) 1972: John Berger ( G.

) 1973: J. G. Farrell ( The Siege of Krishnapur ) 1974: Nadine Gordimer ( The Conservationist ) and Stanley Middleton ( Holiday ) 1975: Ruth Prawer Jhabvala ( Heat and Dust ) 1976: David Storey ( Saville ) 1977: Paul Scott ( Staying On ) 1978: Iris Murdoch ( The Sea, The Sea ) 1979: Penelope Fitzgerald ( Offshore ) 1980s 1980: William Golding ( Rites of Passage ) 1981: Salman Rushdie ( Midnight's Children ) 1982: Thomas Keneally ( Schindler's Ark ) 1983: J. M. Coetzee ( Life & Times of Michael K ) 1984: Anita Brookner ( Hotel du Lac ) 1985: Keri Hulme ( The Bone People ) 1986: Kingsley Amis ( The Old Devils ) 1987: Penelope Lively ( Moon Tiger ) 1988: Peter Carey ( Oscar and Lucinda ) 1989: Kazuo Ishiguro ( The Remains of the Day ) 1990s 1990: A. S. Byatt ( Possession ) 1991: Ben Okri ( The Famished Road ) 1992: Michael Ondaatje ( The English Patient ) and Barry Unsworth ( Sacred Hunger ) 1993: Roddy Doyle ( Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha ) 1994: James Kelman ( How Late It Was, How Late ) 1995: Pat Barker ( The Ghost Road ) 1996: Graham Swift ( Last Orders ) 1997: Arundhati Roy ( The God of Small Things ) 1998: Ian McEwan ( Amsterdam ) 1999: J. M. Coetzee ( Disgrace ) 2000s 2000: Margaret Atwood ( The Blind Assassin ) 2001: Peter Carey ( True History of the Kelly Gang ) 2002: Yann Martel ( Life of Pi ) 2003: DBC Pierre ( Vernon God Little ) 2004: Alan Hollinghurst ( The Line of Beauty ) 2005: John Banville ( The Sea ) 2006 : Kiran Desai ( The Inheritance of Loss ) 2007 : Anne Enright ( The Gathering ) 2008 : Aravind Adiga ( The White Tiger ) 2009 : Hilary Mantel ( Wolf Hall ) 2010s 2010 : Howard Jacobson ( The Finkler Question ) 2011 : Julian Barnes ( The Sense of an Ending ) 2012 : Hilary Mantel ( Bring Up the Bodies ) 2013 : Eleanor Catton ( The Luminaries ) 2014 : Richard Flanagan ( The Narrow Road to the Deep North ) 2015 : Marlon James ( A Brief History of Seven Killings ) 2016 : Paul Beatty ( The Sellout ) 2017 : George Saunders ( Lincoln in the Bardo ) 2018 : Anna Burns ( Milkman ) 2019 : Margaret Atwood ( The Testaments ) and Bernardine Evaristo ( Girl, Woman, Other ) 2020s 2020 : Douglas Stuart ( Shuggie Bain ) 2021 : Damon Galgut ( The Promise ) 2022 : Shehan Karunatilaka ( The Seven Moons of Maali Almeida ) 2023 : Paul Lynch ( Prophet Song ) 2024 : Samantha Harvey ( Orbital ) v t e Recipients of the Austrian State Prize for European Literature Zbigniew Herbert (1965) W. H. Auden (1966) Vasko Popa (1967) Václav Havel (1968) Not given (1969) Eugène Ionesco (1970) Peter Huchel (1971) Sławomir Mrożek (1972) Harold Pinter (1973) Sándor Weöres (1974) Miroslav Krleža (1975) Italo Calvino (1976) Pavel Kohout (1977) Simone de Beauvoir (1978) Fulvio Tomizza (1979) Sarah Kirsch (1980) Doris Lessing (1981) Tadeusz Różewicz (1982) Friedrich Dürrenmatt (1983) Christa Wolf (1984) Stanisław Lem (1985) Giorgio Manganelli (1986) Milan Kundera (1987) Andrzej Szczypiorski (1988) Marguerite Duras (1989) Helmut Heissenbüttel (1990) Péter Nádas (1991) Salman Rushdie (1992) Chinghiz Aitmatov (1993) Inger Christensen (1994) Aleksandar Tišma (1995) Jürg Laederach (1996) Antonio Tabucchi (1997) Dubravka Ugrešić (1998) Péter Esterházy (1999) António Lobo Antunes (2000) Umberto Eco (2001) Christoph Hein (2002) Cees Nooteboom (2003) Julian Barnes (2004) Claudio Magris (2005) Jorge Semprún (2006) A. L. Kennedy (2007) Ágota Kristóf (2008) Per Olov Enquist (2009) Paul Nizon (2010) Javier Marías (2011) Patrick Modiano (2012) John Banville (2013) Lyudmila Ulitskaya (2014) Mircea Cărtărescu (2015) Andrzej Stasiuk (2016) Karl Ove Knausgård (2017) Zadie Smith (2018) Michel Houellebecq (2019) Drago Jančar (2020) László Krasznahorkai (2021) Ali Smith (2022) Marie NDiaye (2023) v t e Iran–United Kingdom relations Diplomatic posts Embassy of Iran, London Ambassadors of Iran to the United Kingdom Embassy of the United Kingdom, Tehran Ambassadors of the United Kingdom to Iran Persian embassy to Europe (1599–1602) Persian embassy to Europe (1609–1615) Diplomacy Anglo-Persian Treaty of 1801 Treaty of Paris (1857) Reuter concession D'Arcy Concession Anglo-Russian Convention Anglo-Persian Agreement Tehran Conference P5+1 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action Conflicts Anglo-Persian War Persian Campaign Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran British military network in Iran Iran–Iraq War British support for Iraq Incidents Anglo-Persian capture of Hormuz British occupation of Bushehr Tobacco Protest Zainab Pasha 1921 Persian coup d'état Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. case 1953 Iranian coup d'état Nationalization of the Iranian oil industry Abadan Crisis Timeline Iranian revolution Guadeloupe Conference Conspiracy theory Iranian Embassy siege Salman Rushdie Satanic Verses controversy 2004 Iranian seizure of Royal Navy personnel 2007 Iranian arrest of Royal Navy personnel 2011 attack on the British Embassy in Iran 2011–2012 Strait of Hormuz dispute 2018 attack on the Iranian Embassy in London Detention of Craig and Lindsay Foreman Individuals Kameel Ahmady Anoosheh Ashoori Abbas Edalat Arthur Edwards Kamal Foroughi Ghoncheh Ghavami Fowzi Badavi Nejad Roya Saberi Negad Nobakht Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe Related Anglo-Persian Oil Company Bahrain province BBC Persian East India Company Imperial Bank of Persia Persian Gulf Residency Rhum gasfield Gholhak Garden Tehran War Cemetery Neda Agha-Soltan Graduate Scholarship Old fox Great Game New Great Game Iranian influence operations in the UK Category:Iran–United Kingdom relations Portals : Biography Freedom of speech India Islam Literature United Kingdom United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz KulturNav FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie Deutsche Synchronkartei DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9j9xt
Cached time: 20250817204832
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.581 seconds
Real time usage: 2.892 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17167/1000000
Revision size: 166806/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 582313/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19731/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 876582/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.683/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 30094522/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2516.809      1 -total
 61.34% 1543.762      2 Template:Reflist
 24.51%  616.956    101 Template:Cite_web
 23.75%  597.748    102 Template:Cite_news
 12.24%  308.121      1 Template:Infobox_writer
 12.03%  302.689      1 Template:Infobox
  4.36%  109.787      2 Template:Plainlist
  4.09%  103.017      5 Template:Marriage
  3.90%   98.178      1 Template:Lang
  3.44%   86.482      3 Template:Br_separated_entries Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28722:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817204832 and revision id 1306449846. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Salman_Rushdie&oldid=1306449846 " Categories : Salman Rushdie 1947 births Living people 20th-century British essayists 20th-century British male writers 20th-century British novelists 21st-century American essayists 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American memoirists 21st-century American novelists 21st-century atheists 21st-century British essayists 21st-century British male writers 21st-century British memoirists 21st-century British novelists 21st-century British screenwriters Alumni of King's College, Cambridge American critics of Islam American former Muslims American free speech activists American male essayists American male novelists American male writers of Indian descent American people of Kashmiri descent American writers with disabilities Best Screenplay Genie and Canadian Screen Award winners Booker Prize winners British atheism activists British atheists British Book Award winners British copywriters British critics of Islam British emigrants to the United States British feminist writers British former Muslims British free speech activists British humanists British male essayists British male feminists British male novelists British male short story writers British people of Kashmiri descent British writers of Indian descent British writers with disabilities Cathedral and John Connon School alumni Critics of Islamism Emory University faculty Eyepatch wearers Failed assassination attempts in the United States Fatwas Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature Film producers from Mumbai Former Muslim critics of Islam Indian emigrants to England Iran–United Kingdom relations Iran's Book of the Year Awards recipients James Tait Black Memorial Prize recipients Kashmiri Muslims Knights Bachelor Magic realism writers Male actors from Mumbai Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Naturalized citizens of the United States Novelists from Maharashtra People educated at Rugby School People with Overseas Citizenship of India Postcolonial literature Postmodern writers Screenwriters from Mumbai Survivors of terrorist attacks Victims of bomb threats Victims of Islamic terrorism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Pages containing London Gazette template with parameter supp set to y Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from August 2022 Use dmy dates from August 2022 Articles containing French-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2025 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN New York Times topic template using Wikidata Pages using navbox columns without the first column This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 20:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Salman Rushdie 97 languages Add topic

