Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Otto Hesse 23 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1811–1874) This article is about the mathematician. For the baseball player, see Otto Hess (baseball) .

Otto Hesse Born ( 1811-04-22 ) 22 April 1811 Königsberg , Kingdom of Prussia Died 4 August 1874 (1874-08-04) (aged 63) Munich , Kingdom of Bavaria Nationality German Alma mater Königsberg University Known for Hessian curve Hessian matrix Hesse normal form Hesse configuration Hessian group Hessian pairs Hesse's theorem Hesse pencil Hesse's principle of transfer Scientific career Fields Mathematician Institutions Polytechnic School Thesis De octo punctis intersectionis trium superficium secundi ordinis [ 1 ] (1840) Doctoral advisor Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi Doctoral students Carl Neumann , Olaus Henrici , Gustav Kirchhoff , Jacob Lüroth , Adolph Mayer , Max Noether , and Ernst Schröder Ludwig Otto Hesse (22 April 1811 – 4 August 1874) was a German mathematician . Hesse was born in Königsberg , Prussia , and died in Munich , Bavaria . He worked mainly on algebraic invariants , and geometry . The Hessian matrix , the Hesse normal form , the Hesse configuration , the Hessian group , Hessian pairs , Hesse's theorem , Hesse pencil , and the Hesse transfer principle [ 2 ] are named after him. Many of Hesse's research findings were presented for the first time in Crelle's Journal or Hesse's textbooks.

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Hesse was born in Königsberg (today Kaliningrad ) as the son of Johann Gottlieb Hesse, a businessman and brewery owner and his wife Anna Karoline Reiter (1788–1865). He studied in his hometown at the Albertina under Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi . Among his teachers were count Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel and Friedrich Julius Richelot . He earned his doctorate in 1840 at the University of Königsberg with the dissertation De octo punctis intersectionis trium superficium secundi ordinis . In 1841, Hesse completed his habilitation thesis. In the same year he married Sophie Marie Emilie Dulk, the daughter of pharmacists and chemistry professor Friedrich Philipp Dulk (1788–1852). The couple had a son and five daughters. Hesse taught for some time physics and chemistry at the Vocational School in Königsberg and lectured at the Albertina. In 1845 he was appointed associate professor in Königsberg. In 1855 he moved to Halle and in 1856 to Heidelberg until 1868, when he finally moved to Munich to the newly established Polytechnic School . In 1869 he joined the Bavarian Academy of Sciences .

His doctoral students include Olaus Henrici , Gustav Kirchhoff , Jacob Lüroth , Adolph Mayer , Carl Neumann , Max Noether , Ernst Schröder , and Heinrich Martin Weber .

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Vorlesungen über analytische Geometrie des Raumes.

(Lectures on analytic geometry of space) Leipzig (3. A. 1876) ( Internet Archive ) Vorlesungen aus der analytischen Geometrie der geraden Linie, des Punktes und des Kreises.

(Lectures from the analytical geometry of the straight line, the point and the circle) Leipzig (1881). Hrsg. A. Gundelfinger ( Internet Archive ) Die Determinanten elementar behandelt.

(Determinants elementary treated) Leipzig (2. A. 1872) ( Göttinger Digitalisierungszentrum ) Die vier Species.

(The four Species) Leipzig (1872) ( Internet Archive ) His collected works were published in 1897 by Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities .

Hesse, Ludwig Otto (1972) [1897], Dyck, W.; Gundelfinger, S.; Lüroth, J.; et al. (eds.), Ludwig Otto Hesse's gesammelte Werke , New York: Chelsea Publishing Co., ISBN 978-0-8284-0261-3 , MR 0392474 ( Internet Archive ) References [ edit ] ^ a b Otto Hesse at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ Kolmogorov, Andrei N.; Yushkevich, Adolf-Andrei P., eds. (2012).

Mathematics of the 19th Century: Geometry, Analytic Function Theory . Birkhäuser. p. 111.

ISBN 9783034891738 .

^ MacTutor History of Mathematics archive and Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Otto Hesse" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Otto Hesse at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Vorlesungen über analytische Geometrie des Raumes, insbesondere über Oberflächen zweiter Ordnung Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography : " Hesse, Ludwig Otto " Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Vatican Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Otto_Hesse&oldid=1235251860 " Categories : 1811 births 1874 deaths 19th-century German mathematicians Algebraists German geometers Scientists from Königsberg University of Königsberg alumni Academic staff of the University of Königsberg Academic staff of the Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg Academic staff of Heidelberg University Academic staff of the Technical University of Munich German textbook writers Members of the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 18 July 2024, at 11:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Otto Hesse 23 languages Add topic

