Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents James C. Kaufman 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychologist For the American politician, see James D. Kaufman .

This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources .

Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.

Find sources: "James C. Kaufman" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) James C. Kaufman Born Great Neck , New York , U.S.

Nationality American Alma mater Yale University University of Southern California Scientific career Fields Creativity , Cognitive Psychology , Educational Psychology , Personality Psychology Institutions University of Connecticut Website http://www.jamesckaufman.com James C. Kaufman is an American psychologist known for his research on creativity. He is a Professor of Educational Psychology at the University of Connecticut in Storrs, Connecticut . Previously, he taught at the California State University, San Bernardino , where he directed the Learning Research Institute.  He received his Ph.D. from Yale University in Cognitive Psychology , where he worked with Robert J. Sternberg .

Early life [ edit ] Born in Great Neck, New York, he attended the University of Southern California as an undergraduate, where he worked with both John L. Horn and novelist T. Coraghessan Boyle . His parents are psychologists Alan S. Kaufman and Nadeen L. Kaufman .

Career [ edit ] He is a prolific researcher and editor who is best known for his theoretical contributions to the study of creativity .

[ 1 ] His most prominent theoretical work, with Ron Beghetto, is the Four-C Model of Creativity. This model explores the idea of expanding traditional conceptions of eminent creativity ("Big-C") and everyday creativity ("little-c") to include "mini-c"—creativity that is inherent in the learning process—and "Pro-c"—creativity at a professional level that has not yet had a historical impact.

[ 2 ] Kaufman and Beghetto have further proposed the construct of creative metacognition, which refers to both knowing one's creative strengths and weaknesses as well as recognizing appropriate times and contexts to express one's creativity.

[ 3 ] In addition, with Robert Sternberg and Jean Pretz, he developed the propulsion model of creative contributions, outlined in the book The Creativity Conundrum.

[ 4 ] With John Baer, he developed the Amusement Park Theoretical (APT) Model of Creativity.

[ 5 ] Kaufman's empirical work has focused on a few different key areas. Most media attention has focused on his research on creativity and mental illness.  He coined "the Sylvia Plath Effect ," after finding that female poets were more likely to be mentally ill than other writers, in a paper in the Journal of Creative Behavior , [ 6 ] and his work on poets dying young has been featured in the New York Times, [ 7 ] NPR, BBC, CNN, and newspapers and magazines across the world.  He has recently focused on issues of creativity and fairness, arguing that creativity should be a supplemental part of college admissions [ 8 ] Kaufman has written and edited more than 50 books, including Creativity 101 (Springer, 2016), the Cambridge Handbook of Creativity (with Sternberg; Cambridge, 2010), Essentials of Creativity Assessment (with Jonathan A. Plucker and John Baer; Wiley, 2008), the ALA Choice award winning Teaching for Creativity in the Common Core Classroom (with Ron Beghetto and John Baer; Teachers College Press, 2014), and The Psychology of Creative Writing (with Scott Barry Kaufman , Cambridge, 2009).  He was the Series Editor of the Explorations in Creativity Research series for Academic Press.

Kaufman was the founding co-editor of both Psychology of Popular Media Culture and Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts , both published by the American Psychological Association . He is the senior associate editor of Creativity Research Journal .

[ 9 ] He received the 2003 Daniel E. Berlyne Award from Division 10 of the American Psychological Association for outstanding research by a junior scholar; the National Association of Gifted Children's 2008 E. Paul Torrance Award for creativity research; the 2009 Western Psychological Association Early Career in Research Award; the 2011 Paul Farnworth Award, also from Division 10 of the American Psychological Association , for service to the division; the 2011-2012 Mensa Award for Research Excellence.; [ 10 ] and the 2017 Rudolf Arnheim Award for outstanding research by a senior scholar. He is a past president of the American Psychological Association's Division 10.

Kaufman is also a playwright and lyricist. His musical, Discovering Magenta, written with composer Michael Bitterman, had its premiere in 2015 in New York City as part of the Thespis Theatre Festival.

[ 11 ] The musical is the story of a mental health worker trying to help a patient who has suffered past [ 12 ] His short play "My Very Elegant Mother" made its NYC debut in 2008 at the Riant Theatre [ 13 ] and was adapted into an audiobook.

Works [ edit ] Pseudoscience: The Conspiracy against Science (MIT Press) edited by Kaufman and collaborator (and wife) Allison B. Kaufman was released in 2018 and contains essays by experts on pseudoscience like Kevin Folta , Britt Hermes and David Gorski . Kaufman contributes an essay with Paul Joseph Barnett who explains that "pseudoscientific beliefs have been flourishing because of the idea that '"everybody has the right not to be offended'".

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Creativity Expert James Kaufman Joins UConn Faculty" . 18 March 2014.

^ Kaufman, J. C., & Beghetto, R. A. (2009). Beyond Big and Little: The Four C Model of Creativity. Review of General Psychology, 13, 1-12.

^ Kaufman, J. C., & Beghetto, R. A. (2013). In praise of Clark Kent: Creative metacognition and the importance of teaching kids when (not) to be creative. Roeper Review, 35, 155-165.

^ Sternberg, R. J., Kaufman, J. C., & Pretz, J. E. (2002). The creativity conundrum. Philadelphia:  Psychology Press ^ Baer, J., & Kaufman, J. C. (2005). Bridging generality and specificity:  The Amusement Park Theoretical (APT) Model of creativity. Roeper Review, 27, 158-163.

^ Kaufman, J. C. (2001). The Sylvia Plath effect:  Mental illness in eminent creative writers. Journal of Creative Behavior, 35 (1), 37-50 ^ Lee, F. R. (April 24, 2004). Going early into that good night. New York Times, Arts p, 1, 4.

^ Kaufman, J. C. (2010). Using creativity to reduce ethnic bias in college admissions. Review of General Psychology, 14, 189-203.

^ "Creativity Research Journal" .

Taylor and Francis Online .

^ "Winners, 2011-2012" .

Mensa Education and Research Foundation .

^ Gonzalez, Juan-Jose.

"DISCOVERING MAGENTA makes NYC Debut at Thespis Theatre Festival" .

BroadwayWorld.com .

^ Keller, Ilana.

" "Magenta" to make NYC debut at Thespis fest" .

Asbury Park Press .

^ "Riant ! Riant! Arts and Entertainmnet [sic] (Riant TV - RTV): July 2008" .

^ Bigliardi, Stefano (2019). "The Advocates of Pseudoscience Are Not Monsters - but Pseudoscience Is".

Skeptical Inquirer .

43 (6). Center for Inquiry: 58– 59.

External links [ edit ] Official website And All That Jazz Psychology Today Blog James C. Kaufman at IMDb Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii ORCID Scopus Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_C._Kaufman&oldid=1255043210 " Categories : 1974 births Living people California State University, San Bernardino faculty American cognitive psychologists Creativity researchers American intelligence researchers People from Great Neck, New York University of Connecticut faculty University of Southern California alumni Yale University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from October 2021 All articles lacking reliable references BLP articles lacking sources from October 2021 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 2 November 2024, at 21:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James C. Kaufman 2 languages Add topic

