Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Award 2 Current award categories 3 Recognition 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Aurora Awards 6 languages Deutsch Français Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian literary award for speculative fiction The Aurora Awards ( French : Prix Aurora-Boréal ) are a set of primarily literary awards given annually for the best Canadian science fiction or fantasy professional and fan works and achievements from the previous year.

[ 1 ] The event is organized by Canvention and the awards are given out by the Canadian SF and Fantasy Association and SFSF Boreal Inc.

[ 1 ] Originally they were known as the Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy Awards which was shortened to CSFFA and nicknamed the Casper Awards based on that acronym, but this name was changed to the Aurora Awards in 1991, because the Aurora is the same in English and French.

[ 2 ] The categories have expanded from those focused on literary works to include categories that recognize achievements in comics, music, poetry, art, film and television.

Originally, the CSFFA gave out both the English-language and French-language versions of the awards, with the French-language version known as the Prix Aurora . However, the French-language section of the awards is now known as the Prix Aurora-Boréal and was created through an agreement between SFSFBI and the CSFFA in November 2010, which combined the independent Prix Boréal and the Prix Aurora into a single award affiliated to the English-language award. The awards are selected by member vote, in a similar style to that of the Hugo Awards .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The first award was granted in 1980 at Hal-Con 3 , in Halifax, Nova Scotia , which was in turn the first convention to be named Canvention, a name which rotates to the convention hosting the awards that year in addition to its regular name.

[ 5 ] Voting for the awards is done by members of the Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy Association, who pay an annual fee of $10.

[ 6 ] Publishers cannot vote during the nomination or shortlist ballot, but can submit works by authors they represent without paying a fee.

[ 6 ] Award [ edit ] The Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy Association (CSFFA) and the SFSFBI give out the Aurora and Aurora-Boréal Awards for the best science fiction and fantasy works in each of the categories. CSFFA handle the anglophone Aurora Awards and the SFSFBI handle the francophone Aurora-Boréal Awards, though both organizations co-sponsor the other award. Nominees are only valid if they were produced or completed in the previous calendar year.

For the Aurora Awards, the official nominees are chosen by the awards committee from all of the works that have received at least 5 nominations by CSFFA members throughout the year, and then the shortlist is voted on by every member of the CSFFA.

[ 7 ] This is obtained through a $10 membership fee, [ 8 ] and can be voted in person with a voting card at the annual general meeting of the CSFFA at that year's Canvention, or online through a portal set up by the CSFFA. A member must have been a member for at least 1 month before Canvention to be eligible for voting. The deadlines for voting are set by the CSFFA at the previous year's Canvention.

[ 7 ] For a category to not have an award given for it, usually there has to be less than three eligible nominees in that category before the start of voting, or enough people have voted for the No Award option on the ballot, and this wins a majority.

[ 7 ] The voting uses the instant-runoff voting method, where the voters rank their choices and the lowest scorer is eliminated until one nominee has a majority.

[ 7 ] For the CSFFA Hall of Fame, the inductee must have been nominated for the trophy, and then selected by a 4-person jury, which is selected by the CSFFA each year.

[ 7 ] Current award categories [ edit ] Medium English-language award French-language award Professional awards Novels Best Novel Meilleur roman YA Novels Best YA Novel Other Literature Best Related Work Meilleurs ouvrages connexes Comics Best Graphic Novel Meilleure bande dessinée Short Fiction Best Novelette/Novella Best Short Fiction Meilleure nouvelle Poetry Best Poem/Song Music Création artistique audiovisuelle Film & Television Best Visual Presentation (to 2022) Art Best Cover Art/Interior Illustration Lifetime Achievement Hall of Fame Trophy Fan awards Writing/Publication Best Fan Writing and Publications Fanédition Fan Organization Best Fan Organizational (to 2022) Other Works Best Fan Related Work Recognition [ edit ] CSFFA is a federally recognized Canadian non-profit, since 2011.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "Literary glow of Auroras lures galaxy of sci/fi stars".

Edmonton Journal , June 6, 1991.

^ Mallett, Daryl F.; Reginald, Robert (1993).

Reginald's Science Fiction and Fantasy Awards . Borgo Press. p. 27.

ISBN 0-8095-1200-9 .

^ "It's almost time for sci-fi awards".

Sudbury Star , September 11, 1999.

^ "Speculative fiction seriously coming of age".

Edmonton Journal , September 13, 1998.

^ van Belkom, Edo (1999).

Aurora Awards: An Anthology of Prize-Winning Science Fiction and Fantasy .

Quarry Press .

^ a b Michelle, Ellen (20 January 2020).

"How the Aurora Awards help foster Canada's sci-fi community and fan culture" .

Quill & Quire . Retrieved 28 October 2021 .

^ a b c d e "FAQ" . CSFFA.

^ "Become a new member" . CSFFA.

External links [ edit ] Prix Aurora Awards/CSFFA website v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aurora_Awards&oldid=1301175868 " Categories : Aurora Awards Awards established in 1980 1980 establishments in Canada Canadian fiction awards Canadian poetry awards French-language literary awards Science fiction awards Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 13:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aurora Awards 6 languages Add topic

