Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 Pi and squaring the circle 1.2 Robert Kilwardby on Bryson's syllogism 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Bryson of Heraclea 11 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Galego Italiano Română Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century BC Greek mathematician Bryson of Heraclea ( Greek : Βρύσων Ἡρακλεώτης , gen .: Βρύσωνος; fl. late 5th-century BCE) was an ancient Greek mathematician and sophist who studied the solving the problems of squaring the circle and calculating pi .

Life and work [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Bryson; he came from Heraclea Pontica , and he may have been a pupil of Socrates . He is mentioned in the 13th Platonic Epistle , [ 1 ] and Theopompus even claimed in his Attack upon Plato that Plato stole many ideas for his dialogues from Bryson of Heraclea.

[ 2 ] He is known principally from Aristotle , who criticizes his method of squaring the circle.

[ 3 ] He also upset Aristotle by asserting that obscene language does not exist.

[ 4 ] Diogenes Laërtius [ 5 ] and the Suda [ 6 ] refer several times to a Bryson as a teacher of various philosophers, but since some of the philosophers mentioned lived in the late 4th-century BCE, it is possible that Bryson became confused with Bryson of Achaea , who may have lived around that time.

[ 7 ] Pi and squaring the circle [ edit ] Bryson, along with his contemporary, Antiphon , was the first to inscribe a polygon inside a circle, find the polygon 's area, double the number of sides of the polygon, and repeat the process, resulting in a lower bound approximation of the area of a circle . "Sooner or later (they figured), ...[there would be] so many sides that the polygon ...[would] be a circle." [ 8 ] Bryson later followed the same procedure for polygons circumscribing a circle, resulting in an upper bound approximation of the area of a circle. With these calculations, Bryson was able to approximate π and further place lower and upper bounds on π's true value.

Aristotle criticized this method, [ 9 ] but Archimedes would later use a method similar to that of Bryson and Antiphon to calculate π; however, Archimedes calculated the perimeter of a polygon instead of the area.

Robert Kilwardby on Bryson's syllogism [ edit ] The 13th-century English philosopher Robert Kilwardby described Bryson's attempt of proving the quadrature of the circle as a sophistical syllogism —one which "deceives in virtue of the fact that it promises to yield a conclusion producing knowledge on the basis of specific considerations and concludes on the basis of common considerations that can produce only belief." [ 10 ] His account of the syllogism is as follows: Bryson's syllogism on the squaring of the circle was of this sort, it is said: In any genus in which one can find a greater and a lesser than something, one can find what is equal; but in the genus of squares one can find a greater and a lesser than a circle; therefore, one can also find a square equal to a circle.

This syllogism is sophistical not because the consequence is false, and not because it produces a syllogism on the basis of apparently readily believable things-for it concludes necessarily and on the basis of what is readily believable. Instead, it is called sophistical and contentious [ litigiosus ] because it is based on common considerations and is dialectical when it should be based on specific considerations and be demonstrative.

[ 11 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Platonic Epistles, xiii. 360c ^ Athenaeus, xi. ch. 118, 508c-d ^ Aristotle, Posterior Analytics , 75b4; Sophistical Refutations , 171b16, 172a3 ^ Aristotle, Rhetoric , 3.2, 1405b6-16 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, i. 16, vi. 85, ix. 61 ^ Suda, Pyrrhon , Krates , Theodoros ^ Robert Drew Hicks, Diogenes Laertius: Lives of Eminent Philosophers , page 88. Loeb Classical Library ^ Blatner, page 16 ^ Aristotle, Posterior Analytics , 75b37-76a3.

^ Robert Kilwardby, De ortu scientiarum , LIII, §512, pp. 272f.

^ Robert Kilwardby, De ortu scientiarum , LIII, §512, pp. 273.

References [ edit ] Blatner, David. The Joy of Pi. Walker Publishing Company, Inc. New York, 1997.

Diels, H. and Kranz, W. Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 2 vv. Zürich and Berlin 1964. (DK) Kilwardby, Robert.

De ortu scientiarum . Auctores Britannici Medii Aevi IV ed. A.G. Judy. Toronto: PIMS, 1976. Published for the British Academy by the Oxford University Press. (The translation of this quote is found in: N. Kretzmann & E. Stump (eds. & trns.), The Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical Texts: Volume 1, Logic and the Philosophy of Language . Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1989.) Philosophy Dictionary definition of Bryson of Heraclea. The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy. Copyright © 1994, 1996, 2005 by Oxford University Press.

Heath, Thomas (1981).

A History of Greek Mathematics, Volume I: From Thales to Euclid . Dover Publications, Inc.

ISBN 0-486-24073-8 .

External links [ edit ] The History of Pi O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Bryson of Heraclea" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 WorldCat National Germany Norway Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bryson_of_Heraclea&oldid=1286429324 " Categories : Ancient Greek geometers 4th-century BC Greek people 5th-century BC births 4th-century BC deaths Sophists 5th-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 21:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bryson of Heraclea 11 languages Add topic

