Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Personal life 3 Honors, awards and positions 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents Steven Durlauf Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Steven N. Durlauf ) American economist This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biographical article is written like a résumé .

Please help improve it by revising it to be neutral and encyclopedic .

( June 2023 ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Steven Durlauf" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources .

Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.

Find sources: "Steven Durlauf" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Steven Neil Durlauf Born ( 1958-08-12 ) August 12, 1958 (age 67) Encino, California Alma mater Harvard University (BA) Yale University (PhD) Scientific career Fields Economics , Public Policy Institutions University of Chicago Thesis (1986) Doctoral advisor Peter C. B. Phillips Steven N. Durlauf, Director of the Stone Center for Research on Wealth Inequality and Mobility, and Frank P. Hixon Distinguished Service Professor at the Harris School of Public Policy at the University of Chicago.

Steven Neil Durlauf (born August 12, 1958) is an American economist and social scientist. He is currently Frank P. Hixon Distinguished Service Professor and the inaugural Director of the Stone Center for Research on Wealth Inequality and Mobility at the Harris School of Public Policy Studies at the University of Chicago .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Durlauf was previously the William F. Vilas Research Professor and Kenneth J. Arrow Professor of Economics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison . As of 2021, is also a Part Time Professor at the New Economic School .

Durlauf's research spans many topics in microeconomics and macroeconomics. His most important substantive contributions involve the areas of poverty, inequality and economic growth. Much of his research has attempted to integrate sociological ideas into economic analysis. His major methodological contributions include both economic theory and econometrics. He helped pioneer the application of statistical mechanics techniques to the modelling of socioeconomic behavior and has also developed identification analyses for the empirical analogs of these models. Other research has focused on the development of techniques for policy evaluation and the construction of an econometrics of cross country income differences. Durlauf is also known as a critic of the use of the concept of social capital by social scientists and has also challenged the ways that agent-based modelling and complexity theory have been employed by social and natural scientists to study socioeconomic phenomena. Finally, Durlauf has written on issues of fairness and justice, developing normative justifications for "associational redistribution" which refers to the idea that policies such as affirmative action should be understood as redistributing various social and economic ties.

Education [ edit ] Durlauf received his B.A. in economics from Harvard University in 1980, and his Ph.D. in economics from Yale University in 1986.

Personal life [ edit ] Durlauf is married to Olga Nikolayevna Durlauf, a cardiologist and medical school professor. He has three children.

[ citation needed ] Honors, awards and positions [ edit ] Durlauf was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2011. He is also a Fellow of the Econometric Society , the Society for Economic Measurement, the Society for the Advancement of Economic Theory and the International Association for Applied Econometrics. He is a research associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research .

From 2010 to 2022, Durlauf was a co-director of the Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Global Working group.  Durlauf was Editor of the Journal of Economic Literature from 2013 to 2022. He previously served as General Editor of the New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. In late 2022, he was selected as the inaugural director of the Stone Center for Research on Wealth Inequality and Mobility. This research center is housed in the University of Chicago's Harris School of Public Policy and is a member of a network of research institutions funded by the James M. and Cathleen D. Stone Foundation. The center pursues interdisciplinary research on the nature of wealth inequality and barriers to mobility with a particular interest in intergenerational mobility.

[ citation needed ] External links [ edit ] Faculty Homepage References [ edit ] ^ "Steven Durlauf | The University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy" .

harris.uchicago.edu . 2023-08-24 . Retrieved 2023-08-24 .

^ "Stone Center for Research on Wealth Inequality and Mobility Launches with $5 Million Gift" .

The University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy . 2023-08-28 . Retrieved 2023-08-24 .

Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Steven_Durlauf&oldid=1292269526 " Categories : Living people 1958 births 21st-century American economists Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni Economics journal editors Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Harvard College alumni Fellows of the Econometric Society American econometricians University of Chicago Booth School of Business faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from June 2023 All articles with a promotional tone BLP articles lacking sources from September 2023 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles lacking reliable references from September 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 03:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Steven Durlauf Add languages Add topic

