Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sub-specialties Toggle Sub-specialties subsection 1.1 Operational health physics 1.2 Medical physics 2 Radiation protection instruments Toggle Radiation protection instruments subsection 2.1 Installed instruments 2.2 Portable instruments 2.3 Instrument types 2.4 Guidance on use 2.5 Radiation dosimeters 3 Units of measure Toggle Units of measure subsection 3.1 Absorbed dose 3.2 Equivalent dose 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 The term "health physics" 5 Radiation-related quantities 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Health physics 8 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी 日本語 தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of physics focused on radiation protection For the academic journal of the same name, see Health Physics (journal) .

1947 Oak Ridge National Laboratory poster.

Health physics, also referred to as the science of radiation protection , is the profession devoted to protecting people and their environment from potential radiation hazards, while making it possible to enjoy the beneficial uses of radiation. Health physicists normally require a four-year bachelor’s degree and qualifying experience that demonstrates a professional knowledge of the theory and application of radiation protection principles and closely related sciences.

Health physicists principally work at facilities where radionuclides or other sources of ionizing radiation (such as X-ray generators ) are used or produced; these include research, industry, education, medical facilities, nuclear power, military, environmental protection, enforcement of government regulations, and decontamination and decommissioning—the combination of education and experience for health physicists depends on the specific field in which the health physicist is engaged.

Sub-specialties [ edit ] There are many sub-specialties in the field of health physics, [ 1 ] including Ionising radiation instrumentation and measurement Internal dosimetry and external dosimetry Radioactive waste management Radioactive contamination , decontamination and decommissioning Radiological engineering (shielding, holdup, etc.) Environmental assessment, radiation monitoring and radon evaluation Operational radiation protection /health physics Particle accelerator physics Radiological emergency response/planning - (e.g., Nuclear Emergency Support Team ) Industrial uses of radioactive material Medical health physics Public information and communication involving radioactive materials Biological effects/radiation biology Radiation standards Radiation risk analysis Nuclear power Radioactive materials and homeland security Radiation protection Nanotechnology Operational health physics [ edit ] The subfield of operational health physics, also called applied health physics in older sources, focuses on field work and the practical application of health physics knowledge to real-world situations, rather than basic research.

[ 2 ] Medical physics [ edit ] The field of Health Physics is related to the field of medical physics [ 3 ] and they are similar to each other in that practitioners rely on much of the same fundamental science (i.e., radiation physics, biology, etc.) in both fields. Health physicists, however, focus on the evaluation and protection of human health from radiation, whereas medical health physicists and medical physicists support the use of radiation and other physics-based technologies by medical practitioners for the diagnosis and treatment of disease.

[ 4 ] Radiation protection instruments [ edit ] Practical ionising radiation measurement is essential for health physics. It enables the evaluation of protection measures, and the assessment of the radiation dose likely, or actually received by individuals. The provision of such instruments is normally controlled by law.  In the UK it is the Ionising Radiation Regulations 1999.

The measuring instruments for radiation protection are both "installed" (in a fixed position) and portable (hand-held or transportable).

Installed instruments [ edit ] Installed instruments are fixed in positions which are known to be important in assessing the general radiation hazard in an area. Examples are installed "area" radiation monitors, Gamma interlock monitors, personnel exit monitors, and airborne contamination monitors.

The area monitor will measure the ambient radiation, usually X-Ray, Gamma or neutrons; these are radiations which can have significant radiation levels over a range in excess of tens of metres from their source, and thereby cover a wide area.

Interlock monitors are used in applications to prevent inadvertent exposure of workers to an excess dose by preventing personnel access to an area when a high radiation level is present.

Airborne contamination monitors measure the concentration of radioactive particles in the atmosphere to guard against radioactive particles being deposited in the lungs of personnel.

Personnel exit monitors are used to monitor workers who are exiting a "contamination controlled" or potentially contaminated area. These can be in the form of hand monitors, clothing frisk probes, or whole body monitors. These monitor the surface of the workers body and clothing to check if any radioactive contamination has been deposited. These generally measure alpha or beta or gamma, or combinations of these.

The UK National Physical Laboratory has published a good practice guide through its Ionising Radiation Metrology Forum concerning the provision of such equipment and the methodology of calculating the alarm levels to be used.

[ 5 ] Portable instruments [ edit ] Portable instruments are hand-held or transportable.
The hand-held instrument is generally used as a survey meter to check an object or person in detail, or assess an area where no installed instrumentation exists. They can also be used for personnel exit monitoring or personnel contamination checks in the field. These generally measure alpha, beta or gamma, or combinations of these.

Transportable instruments are generally instruments that would have been permanently installed, but are temporarily placed in an area to provide continuous monitoring where it is likely there will be a hazard. Such instruments are often installed on trolleys to allow easy deployment, and are associated with temporary operational situations.

Instrument types [ edit ] A number of commonly used detection instruments are listed below.

ionization chambers proportional counters Geiger counters Semiconductor detectors Scintillation detectors The links should be followed for a fuller description of each.

Guidance on use [ edit ] In the United Kingdom the HSE has issued a user guidance note on selecting the correct radiation measurement instrument for the application concerned [2] Archived 2020-03-15 at the Wayback Machine . This covers all ionising radiation instrument technologies, and is a useful comparative guide.

Radiation dosimeters [ edit ] Dosimeters are devices worn by the user which measure the radiation dose that the user is receiving.
Common types of wearable dosimeters for ionizing radiation include: Quartz fiber dosimeter Film badge dosimeter Thermoluminescent dosimeter Solid state ( MOSFET or silicon diode) dosimeter Units of measure [ edit ] External dose quantities used in radiation protection and dosimetry Graphic showing relationship of SI radiation dose units Absorbed dose [ edit ] The fundamental units do not take into account the amount of damage done to matter (especially living tissue) by ionizing radiation. This is more closely related to the amount of energy deposited rather than the charge. This is called the absorbed dose .

The gray (Gy), with units J/kg, is the SI unit of absorbed dose, which represents the amount of radiation required to deposit 1 joule of energy in 1 kilogram of any kind of matter.

The rad (radiation absorbed dose), is the corresponding traditional unit, which is 0.01 J deposited per kg.  100 rad = 1 Gy.

Equivalent dose [ edit ] Equal doses of different types or energies of radiation cause different amounts of damage to living tissue. For example, 1 Gy of alpha radiation causes about 20 times as much damage as 1 Gy of X-rays . Therefore, the equivalent dose was defined to give an approximate measure of the biological effect of radiation. It is calculated by multiplying the absorbed dose by a weighting factor W R , which is different for each type of radiation (see table at Relative biological effectiveness#Standardization ). This weighting factor is also called the Q (quality factor), or RBE ( relative biological effectiveness of the radiation).

The sievert (Sv) is the SI unit of equivalent dose. Although it has the same units as the gray, J/kg, it measures something different. For a given type and dose of radiation(s) applied to a certain body part(s) of a certain organism, it measures the magnitude of an X-rays or gamma radiation dose applied to the whole body of the organism, such that the probabilities of the two scenarios to induce cancer is the same according to current statistics.

The rem (Roentgen equivalent man) is the traditional unit of equivalent dose. 1 sievert = 100 rem. Because the rem is a relatively large unit, typical equivalent dose is measured in millirem (mrem), 10 −3 rem, or in microsievert (μSv), 10 −6 Sv. 1 mrem = 10 μSv.

A unit sometimes used for low-level doses of radiation is the BRET ( Background Radiation Equivalent Time ). This is the number of days of an average person's background radiation exposure the dose is equivalent to. This unit is not standardized, and depends on the value used for the average background radiation dose. Using the 2000 UNSCEAR value (below), one BRET unit is equal to about 6.6 μSv.

For comparison, the average 'background' dose of natural radiation received by a person per day, based on 2000 UNSCEAR estimate, makes BRET 6.6 μSv (660 μrem). However local exposures vary, with the yearly average in the US being around 3.6 mSv (360 mrem), [ 6 ] and in a small area in India as high as 30 mSv (3 rem).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The lethal full-body dose of radiation for a human is around 4–5 Sv (400–500 rem).

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] In 1898, The Röntgen Society (Currently the British Institute of Radiology ) established a committee on X-ray injuries, thus initiating the discipline of radiation protection.

[ 10 ] The term "health physics" [ edit ] According to Paul Frame: [ 11 ] "The term Health Physics is believed to have originated in the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago in 1942, but the exact origin is unknown. The term was possibly coined by Robert Stone or Arthur Compton , since Stone was the head of the Health Division and Arthur Compton was the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory.  The first task of the Health Physics Section was to design shielding for reactor CP-1 that Enrico Fermi was constructing, so the original HPs were mostly physicists trying to solve health-related problems. The explanation given by Robert Stone was that '...the term Health Physics has been used on the Plutonium Project to define that field in which physical methods are used to determine the existence of hazards to the health of personnel.' A variation was given by Raymond Finkle, a Health Division employee during this time frame. 'The coinage at first merely denoted the physics section of the Health Division... the name also served security: ' radiation protection ' might arouse unwelcome interest; 'health physics' conveyed nothing.'" Radiation-related quantities [ edit ] The following table shows radiation quantities in SI and non-SI units.

Ionizing radiation related quantities view talk edit Quantity Unit Symbol Derivation Year SI equivalent Activity ( A ) becquerel Bq s −1 1974 SI unit curie Ci 3.7 × 10 10 s −1 1953 3.7 × 10 10 Bq rutherford Rd 10 6 s −1 1946 1 000 000 Bq Exposure ( X ) coulomb per kilogram C/kg C⋅kg −1 of air 1974 SI unit röntgen R esu / 0.001 293 g of air 1928 2.58 × 10 −4 C/kg Absorbed dose ( D ) gray Gy J ⋅kg −1 1974 SI unit erg per gram erg/g erg⋅g −1 1950 1.0 × 10 −4 Gy rad rad 100 erg⋅g −1 1953 0.010 Gy Equivalent dose ( H ) sievert Sv J⋅kg −1 × W R 1977 SI unit röntgen equivalent man rem 100 erg⋅g −1 × W R 1971 0.010 Sv Effective dose ( E ) sievert Sv J⋅kg −1 × W R × W T 1977 SI unit röntgen equivalent man rem 100 erg⋅g −1 × W R × W T 1971 0.010 Sv Although the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission permits the use of the units curie , rad, and rem alongside SI units, [ 12 ] the European Union European units of measurement directives required that their use for "public health ... purposes" be phased out by 31 December 1985.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Health Physics Society Certified Health Physicist Radiological Protection of Patients Radiation protection Society for Radiological Protection The principal UK body concerned with promoting the science and practice of radiation protection. It is the UK national affiliated body to IRPA IRPA The International Radiation Protection Association. The International body concerned with promoting the science and practice of radiation protection.

References [ edit ] ^ Careers in Health Physics ^ Miller, Kenneth L. (July 2005).

"Operational Health Physics" .

Health Physics .

88 (6): 638– 652.

Bibcode : 2005HeaPh..88..638M .

doi : 10.1097/01.hp.0000138021.37701.30 .

PMID 15891458 .

S2CID 8808841 – via ResearchGate.

^ "American Association of Physicists in Medicine" .

^ AAPM – The Medical Physicist ^ Operational Monitoring Good Practice Guide "The Selection of Alarm Levels for Personnel Exit Monitors" Dec 2009 - National Physical Laboratory, Teddington UK [1] Archived 2013-05-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Radioactivity in Nature < http://www.physics.isu.edu/radinf/natural.htm Archived 2015-02-05 at the Wayback Machine > ^ "Background Radiation: Natural versus Man-Made" Archived 2012-05-02 at the Wayback Machine Washington Stet Department of Health ^ "Monazite sand does not cause excess cancer incidence " , The Hindu ^ "Lethal dose" , NRC Glossary (August 2, 2010) ^ Mould R.

A Century of X-rays and Radioactivity in Medicine . Bristol: IOP Publishing, 1993 ^ Origin of "health physics" Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ 10 CFR 20.1004 . US Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 2009.

^ The Council of the European Communities (1979-12-21).

"Council Directive 80/181/EEC of 20 December 1979 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to Unit of measurement and on the repeal of Directive 71/354/EEC" . Retrieved 19 May 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Health physics .

The Health Physics Society ,  a scientific and professional organization whose members specialize in occupational and environmental radiation safety.

[3] - "The confusing world of radiation dosimetry" - M.A. Boyd, 2009, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. An account of chronological differences between USA and ICRP dosimetry systems.

Q&A: Health effects of radiation exposure , BBC News , 21 July 2011.

v t e Radiation protection Main articles Background radiation Dosimetry Health physics Ionizing radiation Internal dosimetry Radioactive contamination Radioactive sources Radiobiology Measurement quantities and units Absorbed dose Becquerel Committed dose Computed tomography dose index Counts per minute Effective dose Equivalent dose Gray Mean glandular dose Monitor unit Rad Roentgen Rem Sievert Instruments and measurement techniques Airborne radioactive particulate monitoring Dosimeter Geiger counter Ion chamber Scintillation counter Proportional counter Radiation monitoring Semiconductor detector Survey meter Whole-body counting Protection techniques Lead shielding Glovebox Potassium iodide Radon mitigation Respirators Organisations Euratom HPS (USA) IAEA ICRU ICRP IRPA SRP (UK) UNSCEAR Regulation IRR (UK) NRC (USA) ONR (UK) Radiation Protection Convention, 1960 Radiation effects Acute radiation syndrome Radiation-induced cancer See also the categories Medical physics , Radiation effects , Radioactivity , Radiobiology , and Radiation protection v t e Radiation (physics and health) Main articles Non-ionizing radiation Acoustic radiation force Infrared Light Starlight Sunlight Microwave Radio waves Ultraviolet Ionizing radiation Radioactive decay Cluster decay Background radiation Alpha particle Beta particle Gamma ray Cosmic ray Neutron radiation Nuclear fission Nuclear fusion Nuclear reactors Nuclear weapons Particle accelerators Radioactive materials X-ray Earth's energy budget Electromagnetic radiation Synchrotron radiation Thermal radiation Black-body radiation Particle radiation Gravitational radiation Cosmic background radiation Cherenkov radiation Askaryan radiation Bremsstrahlung Unruh radiation Dark radiation Radiation exposure Radiation and health Radiation syndrome acute chronic Health physics Dosimetry Electromagnetic radiation and health Laser safety Lasers and aviation safety Medical radiography Radiation protection Radiation therapy Radiation damage Radioactivity in the life sciences Radioactive contamination Radiobiology Biological dose units and quantities Wireless device radiation and health Wireless electronic devices and health Radiation heat-transfer Linear energy transfer Radiation incidents List of civilian radiation accidents 1996 Costa Rica accident 1987 Goiânia accident 1984 Moroccan accident 1990 Zaragoza accident Related articles Half-life Nuclear physics Radioactive source Radiation hardening See also the categories Radiation effects , Radioactivity , Radiobiology , and Radiation protection v t e Occupational safety and health Occupational diseases and injuries Acrodynia Asbestosis Asthma Barotrauma Berylliosis Brucellosis Burnout Byssinosis ("brown lung") Cardiovascular Chalicosis Chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy Chronic stress Chimney sweeps' carcinoma Coalworker's pneumoconiosis ("black lung") Concussions in sport Decompression sickness De Quervain syndrome Erethism Exposure to human nail dust Farmer's lung Fiddler's neck Flock worker's lung Glassblower's cataract Golfer's elbow Hearing loss Hospital-acquired infection Indium lung Laboratory animal allergy Lead poisoning Low back pain Mesothelioma Metal fume fever Mule spinners' cancer Noise-induced hearing loss Phossy jaw Pneumoconiosis Radium jaw Repetitive strain injury Silicosis Silo-filler's disease Sports injury Surfer's ear Tennis elbow Tinnitus Writer's cramp Occupational hygiene Occupational hazard Biological hazard Chemical hazard Physical hazard Psychosocial hazard Occupational stress Hierarchy of hazard controls Prevention through design Exposure assessment Occupational exposure limit Occupational epidemiology Workplace health surveillance Professions Environmental health Industrial engineering Occupational health nursing Occupational health psychology Occupational medicine Occupational therapist Safety engineering Agencies and organizations International European Agency for Safety and Health at Work International Labour Organization World Health Organization National Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (Canada) Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (Germany) Istituto nazionale per l'assicurazione contro gli infortuni sul lavoro (Italy) National Institute for Safety and Health at Work (Spain) Health and Safety Executive (UK) Occupational Safety and Health Administration National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (US) Safe Work Australia (Australia) Standards Bangladesh Accord OHSAS 18001 ISO 45001 Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 Worker Protection Standard (US) Working Environment Convention, 1977 Safety Checklist Code of practice Contingency plan Diving safety Emergency procedure Emergency evacuation Hazard Hierarchy of hazard controls Hazard elimination Administrative controls Engineering controls Hazard substitution Personal protective equipment Job safety analysis Lockout-tagout Permit To Work Operations manual Redundancy (engineering) Risk assessment Safety culture Standard operating procedure Immediately dangerous to life or health Legislation Diving regulations Occupational Safety and Health Act (United States) Potty parity ( United States ) Right to sit ( United States ) Workers' right to access the toilet See also Aerosol Break Break room Drug policy Effects of overtime Environment, health and safety Environmental toxicology Ergonomics Fire Fighter Fatality Investigation and Prevention Program Hawks Nest Tunnel disaster Health physics Hostile work environment Indoor air quality International Chemical Safety Card Job strain National Day of Mourning (Canada) NIOSH air filtration rating Overwork Process safety Public health Quality of working life Risk management Safety data sheet Source control Toxic tort Toxic workplace Workers' compensation Workplace hazard controls for COVID-19 Workplace health promotion Category Occupational diseases Journals Organizations Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Health_physics&oldid=1304895866 " Categories : Nuclear safety and security Medical physics Radiation health effects Health physicists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 20:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Health physics 8 languages Add topic

