Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 Conjectural information 3 Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture 4 Rise of the general theory 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents L -function 17 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meromorphic function on the complex plane You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(March 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,831 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:L-Funktion]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|L-Funktion}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

The Riemann zeta function can be thought of as the archetype for all L -functions.

[ 1 ] In mathematics, an L -function is a meromorphic function on the complex plane , associated to one out of several categories of mathematical objects . An L -series is a Dirichlet series , usually convergent on a half-plane , that may give rise to an L -function via analytic continuation . The Riemann zeta function is an example of an L -function, and some important conjectures involving L -functions are the Riemann hypothesis and its generalizations .

The theory of L -functions has become a very substantial, and still largely conjectural , part of contemporary analytic number theory . In it, broad generalisations of the Riemann zeta function and the L -series for a Dirichlet character are constructed, and their general properties, in most cases still out of reach of proof, are set out in a systematic way.  Because of the Euler product formula there is a deep connection between L -functions and the theory of prime numbers .

The mathematical field that studies L -functions is sometimes called analytic theory of L -functions .

Construction [ edit ] We distinguish at the outset between the L -series , an infinite series representation (for example the Dirichlet series for the Riemann zeta function ), and the L -function , the function in the complex plane that is its analytic continuation . The general constructions start with an L -series, defined first as a Dirichlet series , and then by an expansion as an Euler product indexed by prime numbers. Estimates are required to prove that this converges in some right half-plane of the complex numbers . Then one asks whether the function so defined can be analytically continued to the rest of the complex plane (perhaps with some poles ).

It is this (conjectural) meromorphic continuation to the complex plane which is called an L -function. In the classical cases, already, one knows that useful information is contained in the values and behaviour of the L -function at points where the series representation does not converge. The general term L -function here includes many known types of zeta functions. The Selberg class is an attempt to capture the core properties of L -functions in a set of axioms, thus encouraging the study of the properties of the class rather than of individual functions.

Conjectural information [ edit ] One can list characteristics of known examples of L -functions that one would wish to see generalized: location of zeros and poles; functional equation , with respect to some vertical line Re( s ) = constant; interesting values at integers related to quantities from algebraic K -theory .

Detailed work has produced a large body of plausible conjectures, for example about the exact type of functional equation that should apply. Since the Riemann zeta function connects through its values at positive even integers (and negative odd integers) to the Bernoulli numbers , one looks for an appropriate generalisation of that phenomenon. In that case results have been obtained for p -adic L -functions , which describe certain Galois modules .

The statistics of the zero distributions are of interest  because of their connection to problems like the generalized Riemann hypothesis, distribution of prime numbers, etc. The connections with random matrix theory and quantum chaos are also of interest. The fractal structure of the distributions has been studied using rescaled range analysis.

[ 2 ] The self-similarity of the zero distribution is quite remarkable, and is characterized by a large fractal dimension of 1.9. This rather large fractal dimension is found over zeros covering at least fifteen orders of magnitude for the Riemann zeta function , and also for the zeros of other L -functions of different orders and conductors.

Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture [ edit ] Main article: Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture One of the influential examples, both for the history of the more general L -functions and as a still-open research problem, is the conjecture developed by Bryan Birch and Peter Swinnerton-Dyer in the early part of the 1960s. It applies to an elliptic curve E , and the problem it attempts to solve is the prediction of the rank of the elliptic curve over the rational numbers (or another global field ): i.e. the number of free generators of its group of rational points. Much previous work in the area began to be unified around a better knowledge of L -functions. This was something like a paradigm example of the nascent theory of L -functions.

Rise of the general theory [ edit ] This development preceded the Langlands program by a few years, and can be regarded as complementary to it: Langlands' work relates largely to Artin L -functions , which, like Hecke L -functions , were defined several decades earlier, and to L -functions attached to general automorphic representations .

Gradually it became clearer in what sense the construction of Hasse–Weil zeta functions might be made to work to provide valid L -functions, in the analytic sense: there should be some input from analysis, which meant automorphic analysis. The general case now unifies at a conceptual level a number of different research programs.

See also [ edit ] Generalized Riemann hypothesis Dirichlet L -function Automorphic L -function Modularity theorem Artin conjecture Special values of L -functions Explicit formulae for L-functions Shimizu L -function References [ edit ] ^ Steuding, Jörn (June 2005).

"An Introduction to the Theory of L -functions" .

Preprint .

^ O. Shanker (2006). "Random matrices, generalized zeta functions and self-similarity of zero distributions".

J. Phys. A: Math. Gen .

39 (45): 13983– 13997.

Bibcode : 2006JPhA...3913983S .

doi : 10.1088/0305-4470/39/45/008 .

S2CID 54958644 .

Neukirch, Jürgen (1999).

Algebraische Zahlentheorie .

Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften . Vol. 322. Berlin: Springer-Verlag .

ISBN 978-3-540-65399-8 .

MR 1697859 .

Zbl 0956.11021 .

External links [ edit ] "LMFDB, the database of L-functions, modular forms, and related objects" .

Lavrik, A.F. (2001) [1994].

"L-function" .

Encyclopedia of Mathematics .

EMS Press .

Articles about a breakthrough third degree transcendental L-function "Glimpses of a new (mathematical) world" . Mathematics.

Physorg.com . American Institute of Mathematics. March 13, 2008.

Rehmeyer, Julie (April 2, 2008).

"Creeping Up on Riemann" .

Science News . Archived from the original on February 16, 2012 . Retrieved August 5, 2008 .

"Hunting the elusive L-function" . Mathematics.

Physorg.com . University of Bristol. August 6, 2008.

v t e L -functions in number theory Analytic examples Riemann zeta function Dirichlet L -functions L -functions of Hecke characters Automorphic L -functions Selberg class Algebraic examples Dedekind zeta functions Artin L -functions Hasse–Weil L -functions Motivic L -functions Theorems Analytic class number formula Riemann–von Mangoldt formula Weil conjectures Analytic conjectures Riemann hypothesis Generalized Riemann hypothesis Lindelöf hypothesis Ramanujan–Petersson conjecture Artin conjecture Algebraic conjectures Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture Deligne's conjecture Beilinson conjectures Bloch–Kato conjecture Langlands conjecture p -adic L -functions Main conjecture of Iwasawa theory Selmer group Euler system Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=L-function&oldid=1222695371 " Category : Zeta and L-functions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 7 May 2024, at 11:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents L -function 17 languages Add topic

