Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Reception 3 Translations 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents The Differend 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1983 book by Jean-François Lyotard The Differend: Phrases in Dispute Cover of the first edition Author Jean-François Lyotard Original title Le Différend Translator Georges Van Den Abbeele Language French Subjects Ethics , aesthetics Published 1983 ( Les Éditions de Minuit , in French) 1988 ( University of Minnesota Press , in English) Publication place France Media type Print ( Hardcover and Paperback ) Pages 232 (1988 University of Minnesota Press edition) ISBN 978-0816616114 The Differend: Phrases in Dispute ( French : Le Différend ) is a 1983 book by the French philosopher Jean-François Lyotard .

Summary [ edit ] In The Differend , based on Immanuel Kant 's views on the separation of Understanding, Judgment, and Reason, Lyotard identifies the moment in which language fails as the differend, and explains it as follows: "...the unstable state and instant of language wherein something which must be able to be put into phrases cannot yet be… the human beings who thought they could use language as an instrument of communication, learn through the feeling of pain which accompanies silence (and of pleasure which accompanies the invention of a new idiom)".

[ 1 ] Lyotard undermines the common view that the meanings of phrases can be determined by what they refer to (the referent). The meaning of a phrase—an event (something happens)--cannot be fixed by appealing to reality (what actually happened). Lyotard develops this view of language by defining "reality" in an original way, as a complex of possible senses attached to a referent through a name. The correct sense of a phrase cannot be determined by a reference to reality, since the referent itself does not fix sense, and reality itself is defined as the complex of competing senses attached to a referent. Therefore, the phrase event remains indeterminate.

Lyotard uses the example of Auschwitz and the revisionist historian Robert Faurisson ’s demands for proof of the Holocaust to show how the differend operates as a double bind . Faurisson argued that "the Nazi genocide of 6 million Jewish people was a hoax and a swindle, rather than a historical fact" and that "he was one of the courageous few willing to expose this wicked conspiracy".

[ 2 ] Faurisson will only accept proof of the existence of gas chambers from eyewitnesses who were themselves victims of the gas chambers. However, any such eyewitnesses are dead and are not able to testify. Either there were no gas chambers, in which case there would be no eyewitnesses to produce evidence, or there were gas chambers, in which case there would still be no eyewitnesses to produce evidence, because they would be dead. Since Faurisson will accept no evidence for the existence of gas chambers, except the testimony of actual victims, he will conclude from both possibilities (gas chambers existed and gas chambers did not exist) that gas chambers did not exist. This presents a double bind. There are two alternatives, either there were gas chambers or there were not, which lead to the same conclusion: there were no gas chambers (and no final solution).

[ 3 ] The case is a differend because the harm done to the victims cannot be presented in the standard of judgment upheld by Faurisson.

Reception [ edit ] The Differend is considered, including by Lyotard himself, to be Lyotard's most important work. It has been seen as providing the theoretical basis for much of his later work.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Translations [ edit ] Lyotard, Jean-François (1988).

The Differend: Phrases in Dispute . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0-8166-1611-4 .

See also [ edit ] Paul de Man References [ edit ] ^ Lyotard, Jean-François (1988).

The Differend: Phrases in Dispute.

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, Print. p. 13.

^ Moore, Robert J. (2021-02-22), "The Civil Rights Advocate" , Matthew J. Perry , University of South Carolina Press, pp.

155– 182, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1g4rtwf.15 , S2CID 233936635 , retrieved 2022-03-02 ^ Lyotard, Jean-François (1988).

The Differend: Phrases in Dispute.

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, Print. pp. 16–17.

^ Malpas 1993 , p. 134.

^ Schrift 2017 , p. 619.

Bibliography [ edit ] Books Malpas, Simon (1993).

Jean-François Lyotard . London: Routledge .

ISBN 0-415-25615-1 .

Schrift, Alan D. (2017). "Lyotard, Jean-François". In Audi, Robert (ed.).

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, Third Edition . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-64379-6 .

v t e Jean-François Lyotard Books Discourse, Figure (1971) Libidinal Economy (1974) The Postmodern Condition (1979) The Differend (1983) Lessons on the Analytic of the Sublime (1991) Concepts Metanarrative Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Differend&oldid=1286189247 " Categories : 1983 non-fiction books Aesthetics books Books by Jean-François Lyotard French non-fiction books Les Éditions de Minuit books Political philosophy literature University of Minnesota Press books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Differend 1 language Add topic

