Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The text Toggle The text subsection 1.1 The antepraedicamenta 1.2 The praedicamenta 1.3 The postpraedicamenta 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle External links subsection 5.1 Text and translations 5.2 Commentary Toggle the table of contents Categories (Aristotle) 29 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Text from Aristotle's Organon The Categories ( Ancient Greek : Κατηγορίαι , romanized : Katēgoriai ; Latin : Categoriae or Praedicamenta ) is a text from Aristotle 's Organon that enumerates all the possible kinds of things that can be the subject or the predicate of a proposition .  They are "perhaps the single most heavily discussed of all Aristotelian notions".

[ 1 ] The work is brief enough to be divided not into books, as is usual with Aristotle's works , but into fifteen chapters.

The Categories places every object of human apprehension under one of ten categories (known to medieval writers as the Latin term praedicamenta ). Aristotle intended them to enumerate everything that can be expressed without composition or structure, thus anything that can be either the subject or the predicate of a proposition.

The text [ edit ] The antepraedicamenta [ edit ] The text begins with an explication of what Aristotle means by  " synonymous ", or univocal words, what is meant by " homonymous ", or equivocal words, and what is meant by " paronymous ", or denominative (sometimes translated "derivative") words.

It then divides forms of speech as being: Either simple, without composition or structure, such as "man", "horse", "fights".

Or having composition and structure, such as "a man argued", "the horse runs".

Only composite forms of speech can be true or false.

Next, he distinguishes between what is said "of" a subject and what is "in" a subject.  What is said "of" a subject describes the kind of thing that it is as a whole, answering the question "what is it?"  What is said to be "in" a subject is a predicate that does not describe it as a whole but cannot exist without the subject, such as the shape of something.  The latter has come to be known as inherence .

Of all the things that exist, Some may be predicated (that is, said) of a subject, but are in no subject; as man may be predicated of James or John (one may say "John is a man"), but is not in any subject.

Some are in a subject, but cannot be predicated of any subject. Thus, a certain individual point of grammatical knowledge is in me as in a subject, but it cannot be predicated of any subject; because it is an individual thing.

Some are both in a subject and able to be predicated of a subject, for example science , which is in the mind as in a subject, and may be predicated of geometry as of a subject ("Geometry is science").

Last, some things neither can be in any subject nor can be predicated of any subject. These are individual substances , which cannot be predicated, because they are individuals; and cannot be in a subject, because they are substances.

The praedicamenta [ edit ] Then we come to the categories themselves, whose definitions depend upon these four forms of predication.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Aristotle's own text in Ackrill's standard English version is: [ 4 ] [ page needed ] Of things said without any combination, each signifies either substance or quantity or qualification or a relative or where or when or being-in-a-position or having or doing or being-affected . To give a rough idea, examples of substance are man, horse; of quantity : four-foot, five-foot; of qualification : white, grammatical; of a relative : double, half, larger; of where : in the Lyceum, in the market-place; of when : yesterday, last-year; of being-in-a-position : is-lying, is-sitting; of having : has-shoes-on, has-armour-on; of doing : cutting, burning; of being-affected : being-cut, being-burned. ( 1b25-2a4 ) A brief explanation (with some alternative translations) is as follows: [ 5 ] Substance ( οὐσία , ousia , essence or substance).

[ 6 ] Substance is that which cannot be predicated of anything or be said to be in anything. Hence, this particular man or that particular tree are substances. Later in the text, Aristotle calls these particulars “primary substances”, to distinguish them from secondary substances , which are universals and can be predicated. Hence, Socrates is a primary substance, while man is a secondary substance.

Man is predicated of Socrates, and therefore all that is predicated of man is predicated of Socrates.

Quantity ( ποσόν , poson , how much). This is the extension of an object, and may be either discrete or continuous .  Further, its parts may or may not have relative positions to each other. All medieval discussions about the nature of the continuum, of the infinite and the infinitely divisible, are a long footnote to this text.  It is of great importance in the development of mathematical ideas in the medieval and late Scholastic period. Examples: two cubits long, number, space, (length of) time.

Qualification or quality ( ποιόν , poion , of what kind or quality). This determination characterizes the nature of an object. Examples: white, black, grammatical, hot, sweet, curved, straight.

Relative ( πρός τι , pros ti , toward something). This is the way one object may be related to another. Examples: double, half, large, master, knowledge.

Where or place ( ποῦ , pou , where). Position in relation to the surrounding environment. Examples: in a marketplace, in the Lyceum.

When or time ( πότε , pote , when). Position in relation to the course of events. Examples: yesterday, last year.

Relative position , posture, attitude ( κεῖσθαι , keisthai , to lie). The examples Aristotle gives indicate that he meant a condition of rest resulting from an action: ‘Lying’, ‘sitting’, ‘standing’.

Thus position may be taken as the end point for the corresponding action. The term is, however, frequently taken to mean the relative position of the parts of an object (usually a living object), given that the position of the parts is inseparable from the state of rest implied.

Having or state, condition ( ἔχειν , echein , to have or be). The examples Aristotle gives indicate that he meant a condition of rest resulting from an affection (i.e. being acted on): ‘shod’, ‘armed’.

The term is, however, frequently taken to mean the determination arising from the physical accoutrements of an object: one's shoes, one's arms, etc. Traditionally, this category is also called a habitus (from Latin habere , to have).

Doing or action ( ποιεῖν , poiein , to make or do). The production of change in some other object (or in the agent itself qua other).

Being affected or affection ( πάσχειν , paschein , to suffer or undergo). The reception of change from some other object (or from the affected object itself qua other). Aristotle's name paschein for this category has traditionally been translated into English as "affection" and "passion" (also "passivity"), easily misinterpreted to refer only or mainly to affection as an emotion or to emotional passion .  For action he gave the example, ‘to lance’, ‘to cauterize’; for affection, ‘to be lanced’, ‘to be cauterized.’ His examples make clear that action is to affection as the active voice is to the passive voice — as acting is to being acted on .

The first four are given a detailed treatment in four chapters, doing and being-affected are discussed briefly in a single small chapter, the remaining four are passed over lightly, as being clear in themselves. Later texts by scholastic philosophers also reflect this disparity of treatment.

[ citation needed ] The postpraedicamenta [ edit ] In this part, [ 7 ] Aristotle sets forth four ways things can be said to be opposed. Next, the work discusses five senses wherein a thing may be considered prior to another, followed by a short section on simultaneity. Six forms of movement are then defined: generation, destruction, increase, diminution, alteration, and change of place. The work ends with a brief consideration of the word 'have' and its usage.

See also [ edit ] Categories (Stoic) – Virtue-focused philosophical system Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Categorization – Putting things into categories Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Category (disambiguation) Category (Kant) – Pure concept of the understanding in Kantianism Category of being – In ontology, the highest kinds or genera of entities Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Isagoge – Textbook on Logic by Prophyry Nyaya#Sixteen categories (padārthas) – One of six schools of Hindu philosophy Padārtha – Ontological categories in Indian philosophy the first Schema (Kant) – Rule by which a concept is associated with a sensory input in Kantianism Simplicius of Cilicia – Greek pagan philosopher (c. 480 – c. 540) Vaisheshika#The Categories or Padārtha – Ancient Indian philosophy Notes [ edit ] ^ Smith, Robin 1995 "Logic". In J. Barnes (ed) The Cambridge companion to Aristotle , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 55.

^ The forms of predication were called by the medieval scholastic philosophers the antepraedicamenta .

^ Note, however, that although Aristotle has apparently distinguished between “being in a subject”, and “being predicated truly of a subject”, in the Prior Analytics these are treated as synonymous. This has led some to suspect that Aristotle was not the author of the Categories [ citation needed ] .

^ Ackrill (1963) .

^ Thomasson, Amie (2019), Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), "Categories" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-01-17 ^ Note that while Aristotle's use of ousia is ambiguous between 'essence' and substance' there is a close link between them. See his Metaphysics ^ This part was probably not part of the original text, but added by some unknown editor, Ackrill (1963) pp. 69—70 References [ edit ] Ackrill, John (1963).

Aristotle, Categories and De Interpretatione (pdf) . Oxford: At the Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0198720866 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Aristotle (2014). "Categories". In Barnes, Jonathan (ed.).

The Complete Works of Aristotle, 2 vols (One-Volume Digital Edition) . Transl.

J. L. Ackrill . Princeton: Princeton University Press . p. 2510.

ISBN 9781400852765 .

Aristotle (1936). L. Minio-Paluello (ed.).

Categoriae et Liber de Interpretatione . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198145073 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Aristotle (1938). H. P. Cooke, Hugh Tredennick (ed.).

Categories; On Interpretation; Prior Analytics . Loeb Classical Library 325. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674993594 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Categories (Aristotle) .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Category ".

Text and translations [ edit ] Works related to Categories (Owen) at Wikisource Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Κατηγορίαι 1930 "Oxford" translation by E. M. Edghill Classical Library HTML MIT Classical Archive HTML 1963 translation by J. L. Ackrill, Chapters 1-5 PDF Categories public domain audiobook at LibriVox Commentary [ edit ] Aristotle's Theory of Categories with an extensive bibliography Studtmann, Paul.

"Aristotle's Categories" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Greece Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7d5d5cd5fb‐hs8j5
Cached time: 20250818161325
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.594 seconds
Real time usage: 0.794 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3753/1000000
Revision size: 13024/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 82665/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3235/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34595/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.406/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16394972/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  722.539      1 -total
 13.94%  100.709      1 Template:Reflist
 13.51%   97.646      3 Template:Navbox
 13.50%   97.509      2 Template:Langx
 13.24%   95.638      1 Template:Aristotelianism
 13.08%   94.499     11 Template:Annotated_link
 10.46%   75.610      1 Template:Citation
  7.82%   56.485      1 Template:Short_description
  6.76%   48.853      1 Template:Commonscat
  6.51%   47.073      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1692652:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818161325 and revision id 1304618211. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Categories_(Aristotle)&oldid=1304618211 " Categories : Works by Aristotle Logic literature Philosophical categories Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2025 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 04:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Categories (Aristotle) 29 languages Add topic

