Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Proposed payload 2 Impact of Beagle 2 discovery 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Beagle 3 7 languages Français Italiano Lietuvių Magyar Português Русский Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cancelled Mars lander mission Diagram of the proposed Beagle 3 Beagle 3 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] (also called Beagle 2: Evolution ) was a proposed Mars lander mission to search for life on Mars , past or present.

Beagle 3 was the proposed successor to the failed British Beagle 2 Mars lander , with which communication was lost.

Beagle 3 was promoted by Professor Colin Pillinger , lead scientist on the Beagle 2 .

EADS Astrium also played a part in funding and early development of the project. Pillinger dreamed of launching up to two landing craft from an orbiter in 2009 as part of the European Space Agency 's Aurora Programme .  The putative Beagle 3 would be named after the ship HMS Beagle that took Charles Darwin around the world.

After the Beagle 3 project was rejected by ESA in 2004, Pillinger proposed to the NASA to hitch a ride on the Mars Science Laboratory Mars lander, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] but the proposal was not accepted.

One of the goals of Beagle 3 was to support the ESA Aurora programme if chosen.

[ 5 ] Proposed payload [ edit ] Advanced solar cell technology, meaning two disc-shaped solar arrays (as opposed to the previous four) [ 1 ] A gas analysis package (Gap) to test soil and rock for biosignatures and biomolecules [ 1 ] Powerful X-band (8.0 to 12.0 GHz) antenna for direct vehicle-to-Earth radio link on the vehicle's main shell, to provide real-time descent data.

New lithium-ion battery technology—to be able to operate at lower temperatures, meaning less power wasted on heating—a possible 60% capacity boost to that of Beagle 2 .

Deadbeat airbags, which inflate just before touch-down, and gently deflate during landing, so that the probe could come to a stop where it lands, and not bounce to a stop.

Life-chips , which detect the presence of amino acids .

[ 1 ] Impact of Beagle 2 discovery [ edit ] Beagle 2 was found in 2015, which overturned a previous theory that it hit thin air and collided with Mars at high speed, however it was not known for sure because it did not transmit any data during descent.

[ 6 ] When the Beagle 2 leader tried to raise money for Beagle 3, the EDL system used on Beagle 2 was an unknown.

[ 6 ] However, after its discovery there was realization that the EDL must have worked as it was found on the surface with several panels deployed, even though it did not transmit.

[ 6 ] One of the goals of Beagle 3 was to use lessons learned from Beagle 2 to improve the spacecraft, and also take advantage of newer technology.

[ 5 ] However, since it was not clear what happened to Beagle 2, it was not obvious what should be changed.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Beagle 2 ExoMars ExoMars Schiaparelli EDM lander Life on Mars Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter Mars Science Laboratory rover British space programme References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Scientists lift veil on Beagle 3 ^ Beagle 3 To The Moon? No Chance.

^ Rincon, Paul (26 July 2004).

" 'Beagle 3' looks to American ride" .

BBC News . Retrieved 16 November 2008 .

^ Highfield, Roger (25 August 2004).

"Beagle 'may go to Mars on Nasa's flying bedstead' " .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 16 November 2008 .

^ a b c "Scientists lift veil on Beagle 3" . 3 November 2004.

^ a b c "What We Can Learn from a Mars Mutt Named Beagle 2" . 8 February 2015.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Beagle 3 at Wikimedia Commons Rincon, Paul (3 November 2004).

"Scientists lift veil on Beagle 3" .

BBC News .

v t e Spacecraft missions to Mars List of missions to Mars List of Mars orbiters List of artificial objects on Mars Active Flybys Psyche ‡ (2023, flyby in 2026) Orbiters 2001 Mars Odyssey Mars Express Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter timeline MAVEN ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter Hope Tianwen-1 orbiter Rovers Curiosity Mars Science Laboratory timeline Perseverance Mars 2020 timeline Past Flybys Mars 1 † Mariner 4 Zond 2 † Mariner 6 and 7 Mars 6 Mars 7 Rosetta ‡ Dawn ‡ Mars Cube One Europa Clipper ‡ Hera ‡ Orbiters Mars 2 Mars 3 Mariner 9 Mars 4 † Mars 5 Viking program Viking 1 Viking 2 Phobos program Phobos 1 † Phobos 2 † Mars Observer † Mars Global Surveyor Nozomi † Mars Climate Orbiter † Mangalyaan Landers Mars 2 † Mars 3 † Mars 6 † Mars 7 † Viking 1 Viking 2 Mars Pathfinder Mars Polar Lander † / Deep Space 2 † Beagle 2 † Phoenix ExoMars Schiaparelli † InSight Tianwen-1 lander Rovers PrOP-M † Sojourner Mars Exploration Rover Spirit timeline Opportunity timeline Zhurong Aircraft Ingenuity helicopter flights Mars 2020 Failed launches Mars 1M No.1 1M No.2 2MV-4 No.1 2MV-3 No.1 Mariner 3 Mars 2M No.521 2M No.522 Mariner 8 Mars 3MS No.170 Mars 96 Fobos-Grunt / Yinghuo-1 Future Planned EscaPADE (2025) Tera-hertz Explorer (TEREX) (mid 2020s) Martian Moons eXploration (MMX) (2026) Mangalyaan-2 (2026) Tianwen-3 (2028) Rosalind Franklin (2028) MBR Explorer ‡ (2028, flyby in 2031) NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return Mars Sample Recovery Helicopters Kazachok Proposed MAGGIE SpaceX Mars program Mars-Grunt Cancelled or not developed Aerial Regional-scale Environmental Survey Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection DePhine Icebreaker Life Marsokhod Mars 4NM & 5NM Mars 5M (Mars-79) Mars-Aster Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C) Mars Geyser Hopper Mars Exploration Ice Mapper Mars One Mars Micro Orbiter Mars Surveyor Lander Mars Telecommunications Orbiter MELOS rover MetNet NetLander Northern Light Next Mars Orbiter PADME Phootprint Sample Collection for Investigation of Mars (SCIM) Sky-Sailor SpaceX Red Dragon Vesta Voyager Mars Exploration Concepts Flyby Orbiter Landing Atmospheric entry Rover Aircraft Sample return Human mission Permanent settlement Colonization Terraforming Strategies Mars Scout Program Mars Exploration Program Mars Exploration Joint Initiative Mars Next Generation Advocacy The Mars Project The Case for Mars Inspiration Mars Mars Institute Mars Society Mars race Missions are ordered by launch date. Sign † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned.

‡ indicates use of the planet as a gravity assist en route to another destination.

v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beagle_3&oldid=1282315894 " Categories : Missions to Mars Cancelled astrobiology space missions Space programme of the United Kingdom Cancelled space probes Astronomy projects Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata Use British English from January 2014 This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 17:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Beagle 3 7 languages Add topic

