Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Observation techniques 3 References Toggle the table of contents R-hadron Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia R-hadrons are hypothetical particles composed of a supersymmetric particle and at least one quark .

Theory [ edit ] Only a few of the current supersymmetry theories predict the existence of R-hadrons, since in most of the parameter space all the supersymmetric particles are so separated in mass that their decays are very fast (with the exception of the LSP , which is stable in all the SUSY theories with R-parity ).

R-hadrons are possible when a colored (in the sense of QCD ) supersymmetric particle (e.g., a gluino or a squark ) has a mean lifetime longer than the typical hadronization time scale, and so QCD bound states are formed with ordinary partons ( quarks and gluons ), in analogy with the ordinary hadrons .

One example of a theory predicting observable R-hadrons is Split SUSY .
Its main feature is, in fact, that all the new bosons are at a very high mass scale, and only the new fermions are at the TeV scale, i.e. accessible by the ATLAS and CMS experiments in p p {\displaystyle pp} collisions at LHC .
One of such new fermions would be the gluino ( spin 1/2, as dictated for the supersymmetric partner of a spin 1 boson, the gluon ).
The gluino, being colored, can only decay to other colored particles. But R-parity prevents a direct decay to quarks and/or gluons, and on the other hand the only other colored supersymmetric particles are the squarks , that being bosons (spin 0, being the partners of the spin 1/2 quarks) have a much higher mass in Split SUSY.

All this, together, implies that the decay of the gluino can only go through a virtual particle , a high-mass squark. The mean decay time depends on the mass of the intermediate virtual particle, and in this case can be very long.
This gives a unique opportunity to observe a SUSY particle directly, in a particle detector , instead of deducing it by reconstructing its decay chain or by the momentum imbalance (as in the case of the LSP ).

In other theories belonging to the SUSY family, the same role can be played by the lightest squark (usually the stop , i.e. the partner of the top quark ).

In the following, for sake of illustration, the R-hadron will be assumed to originate from a gluino created in a p p {\displaystyle pp} collision at LHC , but the observational features are completely general.

Observation techniques [ edit ] If the lifetime of an R-hadron is of the order of the picosecond , it decays before reaching the first sensitive layers of a tracking detector but can be recognized by the secondary vertex technique, particularly efficient in ATLAS and CMS thanks to their precise vertex detectors (both experiments use pixel detectors ). In this case, the signature is a charged particle (from the decay of the R-hadron) whose trajectory is incompatible with the hypothesis of coming from the interaction vertex .

If the lifetime is such that the R-hadron can at least partially traverse a detector, more signatures are available: Energy loss : if the hadronization of the gluino has produced a charged R-hadron, it will lose energy by ionization when traversing the detector material. The specific energy loss ( dE/dx ) follows the Bethe-Bloch formula and depends on the mass and the charge (as well as the momentum) of the particle, making a striking difference between a R-hadron and the background of ordinary particles produced normally in p p {\displaystyle pp} collisions.

Time of flight : since the gluino mass is expected to be of the order of the TeV , the same holds for the R-hadrons. Such a high mass makes them non-relativistic even at these high energies. While ordinary particles, at LHC , have velocities very well approximable with the speed of light , the velocity of a R-hadron can be significantly less. The time that it takes to reach the outer sub-detectors of a very large detector like ATLAS or CMS can be then measurably longer than for the other particles produced in the same p p {\displaystyle pp} collision.

Charge exchange : while the previous two techniques can be applied to any other stable or quasi-stable heavy charged particle, this is specific of R-hadrons, making use of the fact that, being a composed particle , the R-hadron can change sub-structure through nuclear interactions with the traversed material. For example, a R-hadron can exchange quarks with the nuclei of the detector, and any trade of an up quark with a down quark or vice versa will result in a variation of 1 in the charge.

Since some of the sub-detectors of a typical high-energy experiment are only sensitive to charged particles, one possible signature is the disappearance of the particle (going from charge +1 or -1 to 0) or vice versa its appearance, while keeping the same trajectory (since most of the momentum is carried by the heaviest component, i.e. the supersymmetric particle inside the R-hadron). 
Another signature with very little background would come from the complete inversion of the charge (+1 into -1 or vice versa). Almost all tracking detectors at high-energy colliders make use of a magnetic field and are then able to identify the charge of the particle by its curvature; a change of curvature along the trajectory would be recognized unambiguously as a flipper , i.e. a particle whose charge has flipped.

References [ edit ] Interactions of R-hadrons in ATLAS Arkani-Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Giudice, G.F.; Romanino, A. (2005). "Aspects of Split Supersymmetry".

Nuclear Physics B .

709 ( 1– 2): 3– 46.

arXiv : hep-ph/0409232 .

Bibcode : 2005NuPhB.709....3A .

doi : 10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2004.12.026 .

S2CID 16632949 .

This article incorporates material from the Citizendium article " R-hadron ", which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License but not under the GFDL .

v t e Particles in physics Elementary Fermions Quarks Up (quark antiquark) Down (quark antiquark) Charm (quark antiquark) Strange (quark antiquark) Top (quark antiquark) Bottom (quark antiquark) Leptons Electron Positron Muon Antimuon Tau Antitau Neutrino Electron neutrino Electron antineutrino Muon neutrino Muon antineutrino Tau neutrino Tau antineutrino Bosons Gauge Photon Gluon W and Z bosons Scalar Higgs boson Ghost fields Faddeev–Popov ghosts Hypothetical Superpartners Gauginos Gluino Gravitino Photino Others Axino Chargino Higgsino Neutralino Sfermion ( Stop squark ) Others Axion Curvaton Dilaton Dual graviton Graviphoton Graviton Inflaton Leptoquark Magnetic monopole Majoron Majorana fermion Dark photon Preon Sterile neutrino Tachyon W′ and Z′ bosons X and Y bosons Composite Hadrons Baryons Nucleon Proton Antiproton Neutron Antineutron Delta baryon Lambda baryon Sigma baryon Xi baryon Omega baryon Mesons Pion Rho meson Eta and eta prime mesons Bottom eta meson Phi meson J/psi meson Omega meson Upsilon meson Kaon B meson D meson Quarkonium Exotic hadrons Tetraquark ( Double-charm tetraquark ) Pentaquark Others Atomic nuclei Atoms Exotic atoms Positronium Muonium Tauonium Onia Pionium Protonium Antihydrogen Superatoms Molecules Hypothetical Baryons Hexaquark Heptaquark Skyrmion Mesons Glueball Theta meson T meson Others Mesonic molecule Pomeron Diquark R-hadron Quasiparticles Anyon Davydov soliton Dropleton Exciton Fracton Hole Magnon Phonon Plasmaron Plasmon Polariton Polaron Roton Trion Lists Baryons Mesons Particles Quasiparticles Timeline of particle discoveries Related History of subatomic physics timeline Standard Model mathematical formulation Subatomic particles Particles Antiparticles Nuclear physics Eightfold way Quark model Exotic matter Massless particle Relativistic particle Virtual particle Wave–particle duality Particle chauvinism Physics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐85b4576944‐qwf6d
Cached time: 20250731141916
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.196 seconds
Real time usage: 0.278 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 474/1000000
Revision size: 6451/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70902/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 0/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 10594/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.124/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3847288/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  181.038      1 -total
 66.13%  119.711     10 Template:Navbox
 55.46%  100.397      1 Template:Particles
 43.10%   78.030      1 Template:Cite_journal
  5.06%    9.156      1 Template:Icon
  1.32%    2.397      1 Template:Citizendium Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23453370:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250731141916 and revision id 1160195243. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=R-hadron&oldid=1160195243 " Categories : Hypothetical composite particles Supersymmetric quantum field theory Hidden category: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from Citizendium This page was last edited on 15 June 2023, at 00:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents R-hadron Add languages Add topic

