Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Other names 3 Function 4 References Toggle the table of contents Geosynthetic clay liner 2 languages فارسی Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of hydraulic barrier This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Geosynthetic clay liner" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Different types of fabric used for geosynthetic clay liners Geosynthetic clay liners ( GCLs ) are factory manufactured hydraulic barriers consisting of a layer of bentonite or other very low-permeability material supported by geotextiles and/or geomembranes , mechanically held together by needling, stitching, or chemical adhesives.  Due to environmental laws, any seepage from landfills must be collected and properly disposed of, otherwise contamination of the surrounding ground water could cause major environmental and/or ecological problems.  The lower the hydraulic conductivity the more effective the GCL will be at retaining seepage inside of the landfill.  Bentonite composed predominantly (>70%) of montmorillonite or other expansive clays , are preferred and most commonly used in GCLs.  A general GCL construction would consist of two layers of geosynthetics stitched together enclosing a layer of natural or processed sodium bentonite .  Typically, woven and/or non-woven textile geosynthetics are used, however polyethylene or geomembrane layers or geogrid geotextiles materials have also been incorporated into the design or in place of a textile layer to increase strength.  GCLs are produced by several large companies in North America, Europe, and Asia.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency currently regulates landfill construction and design in the US through several legislations.

[ 1 ] [ self-published source ] History [ edit ] The origin of GCLs can be traced back to 1962 when Arthur G. Clem filed a patent for preformed moisture impervious panels which combined bentonite clay with corrugated paperboard.

[ 2 ] In 1982, Arthur J. Clem filed a patent for a what would today be recognized as a GCL which combined bentonite clay, adhesive, and a geotextile.

[ 3 ] In that same year, Arthur J. Clem established Clem Environmental Corp to put his invention into production.

[ 4 ] The use of GCLs as a separate category of geosynthetics appears to have been in the United States in 1988 in solid waste containment as a backup to a geomembrane. The product was Claymax which is bentonite mixed with an adhesive so as to bond the clay between two geotextiles; one below (the carrier textile) and the other above (the cover textile) the bentonite in the center.  About the same time a different product in Germany , Bentofix, was manufactured by placing bentonite powder between two geotextiles and then needle punching the three-components system together.  The needle punching method of manufacture (US patent filed in 1989) gave the resulting composite material shear strength , a critical feature for installation on slopes.

[ 5 ] Other names [ edit ] Other names used for GCLs since their initiation are "clay blankets", "bentonite blankets", "bentonite mats", "prefabricated bentonite clay blankets" and "clay geosynthetic barriers", the latter currently favored by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO).

Function [ edit ] The engineering function of a GCL is containment as a hydraulic barrier to water, leachate or other liquids and sometimes gases. As such, they are used as replacements for either compacted clay liners or geomembranes, or they are used in a composite manner to augment the more traditional liner materials. The ultimate in liner security is probably a three component composite geomembrane/geosynthetic clay liner/compacted clay liner which has seen use as a landfill liner on many occasions.

Differences between geosynthetic clay liners (GCL) and compacted clay liners (CCL) Characteristic Geosynthetic Clay Liners (GCL) Compacted Clay Liners (CCL) Material Bentonite clay, adhesives, geotextiles and/or geomembranes Native soils or blends of soil and bentonite clay Construction Factory manufactured and then installed in the field Construction and/or amended in the field Thickness ~ 6 mm 300 to 900 mm Hydraulic conductivity of clay [ 6 ] 10 −10 to 10 −12 m/s 10 −9 to 10 −10 m/s Speed and ease of construction Rapid, simple installation Slow, delicate and complicated compaction works Installed cost $0.05 to $0.10 per m 2 Highly variable (estimated range $0.07 to $0.30 per m 2 ) Experience Construction quality assurance and quality control are critical Highly workforce dependent References [ edit ] ^ EPA (2001).

"Geosynthetic Clay Liners Used in Municipal Solid Waste Landfills" (PDF) .

EPA 530-F-97-002 Fact Sheet Revised December 2001 . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 25, 2010.

^ US patent 3186896 ^ US patent 4501788 ^ "James Clem Corp. 1990 "E" Award" . Journal of Commerce. Maritime News. 1990.

^ US patent 5041330 ^ Shackelford, C.D.; Sevick, G.W.; Eykholt, G.R. (2010). "Hydraulic conductivity of geosynthetic clay liners to tailings impoundment solutions".

Geotextiles and Geomembranes .

28 (2): 149– 162.

doi : 10.1016/j.geotexmem.2009.10.005 .

ISSN 0266-1144 .

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geosynthetic_clay_liner&oldid=1299001571 " Categories : Geosynthetics Landfill Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from December 2017 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geosynthetic clay liner 2 languages Add topic

