Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 1.1 John Muir's birthplace 2 Land management Toggle Land management subsection 2.1 List of properties 2.2 Working in partnership 3 John Muir Award 4 Financial and governance problems in 2022-2024 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents John Muir Trust 2 languages Français Gàidhlig Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from John Muir Lifetime Achievement Award ) Scottish charity John Muir Trust Formation 1983 Type charitable NGO Headquarters Pitlochry Website John Muir Trust website The John Muir Trust (JMT) is a Scottish charity, [ 1 ] established in 1983 to conserve wild land and wild places for the benefit of all. The Trust runs an environmental award scheme, manages several estates, mainly in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland and campaigns for better protection of wild land. In 2017, it took on a lease to manage Glenridding Common in the English Lake District.

Activities [ edit ] The John Muir Trust was founded in 1983 by Denis Mollison, Nicholas Luard , Nigel Hawkins and Chris Brasher .

[ 2 ] The organisation was inspired by the work of Scottish-born conservationist John Muir – a key figure in the modern conservation movement, particularly in the USA where he worked to save Yosemite National Park and other areas of wilderness. Building on Muir's reputation there, the Trust has links with the Sierra Club , which John Muir founded in California in 1892.

[ 3 ] The Trust is a membership organization with more than 11,000 members (December 2017).

[ 4 ] It works to raise awareness of the benefits of wild land and campaigns for better protection of wild land, challenging inappropriate developments when these threaten an area. In 2014, the Scottish Government adopted the Wild Land Areas map into planning policy.

[ 5 ] In February 1997, Environment Minister Lord Lindsay launched a new environmental award scheme, the John Muir Award, which has grown steadily over 21 years.

[ 6 ] John Muir's birthplace [ edit ] In 1998, together with East Lothian Council, Dunbar 's John Muir Association and Dunbar Community Council, the Trust formed a new organisation called the John Muir Birthplace Trust. The following year JMBT purchased John Muir's Birthplace at 126 High Street, Dunbar. They have turned it into a centre which tells the story of John Muir's early years in Dunbar where he established his passion for wild places and creatures.

In 2013, the Trust opened the Wild Space visitor centre below its existing offices in the centre of Pitlochry.

[ 7 ] Land management [ edit ] Blà Bheinn The John Muir Trust owns and manages some of the finest wild land in the highlands and islands of Scotland. As well as protecting landscapes, the Trust works to restore natural habitats and encourage native species. It works with local people and communities, and seeks to increase awareness and understanding of wild places.

In Perthshire , the Trust restored and realigned the main footpath to the summit of Schiehallion . The Trust has carried out major restoration work on the Steall Gorge footpath in Glen Nevis, Sandwood Bay in Sutherland, Blà Bheinn and Druim Hain on Skye and Suilven in Assynt. In a number of locations it works to protect and restore ancient woodland and native woodlands .

List of properties [ edit ] The south side and summit of Ben Nevis , the highest mountain in the British Isles Glenlude near Traquair in the Scottish Borders Li & Coire Dhorrcail on the north coast of the Knoydart peninsula Quinag , the three peak mountain in Assynt Sandwood Bay in north west Sutherland East Schiehallion in Highland Perthshire, which includes the summit and the main footpath Strathaird , Torrin and Sconser , Skye which include the Red Cuillin and part of the Black Cuillin Working in partnership [ edit ] As owner of the Ben Nevis Estate, JMT plays a key role in the Nevis Partnership , which covers care of the Ben itself and the wider Nevis area including Glen Nevis and the Allt a' Mhuilinn leading to the North Face. The Trust helped establish the Knoydart Foundation, which purchased the 17,000-acre (69 km 2 ) Knoydart Estate in 1999. The purchase brought the " rough bounds " into community and conservation ownership. The Trust is the only external representative on the North Harris Trust, which aims to manage, develop and conserve the North Harris Estate ( Outer Hebrides ) in a sustainable manner. In 2005, JMT purchased the Quinag Estate in Sutherland and joined the Assynt Foundation ( Lochinver ) to assist them in purchasing and managing the neighbouring Glencanisp and Drumrunie Estates.

The Trust has given support to the Carrifran Wildwood project, initiated by the Borders Forest Trust .

[ 8 ] The Wildwood group purchased land in the Carrifran valley in the Moffat Hills of Southern Scotland in 1999 and has started to recreate a large tract of woodland wilderness that will be used as an educational resource.

At the end of 2017, JMT signed a three-year lease to manage Glenridding Common in the Lake District, which includes most of Helvellyn (England's third highest peak), Striding Edge and Red Tarn.

[ 4 ] John Muir Award [ edit ] The John Muir Trust established an environmental award scheme in 1997.  The John Muir Award encourages people of all backgrounds to enjoy and care for wild places. The award is free, inclusive, non-competitive and flexible. The Trust works with hundreds of partners on the ground throughout the UK to deliver the Award on the ground, including schools, outdoor groups, environmental organisations, and rehabilitation charities. In Scotland it is part of the Curriculum for Excellence and is delivered in all 32 local authority areas.

The John Muir Lifetime Achievement Award is occasionally bestowed on individuals who have demonstrated outstanding work relating to the protection and enjoyment of wild land. Recipients have been: 2000 Tom Weir , mountaineer and broadcaster [ 9 ] 2004 Adam Watson , ecologist, mountaineer and author [ 10 ] 2006 Doug Scott , mountaineer [ 11 ] 2008 Irvine Butterfield , writer, photographer and mountain enthusiast [ 12 ] 2018 Larry Downing , American environmental campaigner [ 13 ] Financial and governance problems in 2022-2024 [ edit ] The organisation encountered a series of problems in 2022, 2023 and 2024 relating to its finances, the behaviour of executives, and the resignations of trustees.

[ 14 ] A dossier was published on the John Muir Trust in Crisis website.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Glamaig , Isle of Skye Ladhar Bheinn , Knoydart John Muir Way References [ edit ] ^ "John Muir Trust, Registered Charity no. SC002061" .

Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator .

^ Annual Report (PDF) , John Muir Trust, 2004, p. 2 , retrieved 8 October 2018 ^ "John Muir" . California Legacy. Archived from the original on 23 May 2004.

^ a b Annual Report (PDF) , John Muir Trust, 2017 , retrieved 8 October 2018 ^ "Landscape policy: wild land" .

Scottish Natural Heritage . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .

^ "John Muir Award turns 21" . John Muir Award . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .

^ Helen Webster (22 April 2013).

"Wild Space opens in Pitlochry" . Walk Highlands . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .

^ "Carrifran Wildwood Project" . Carrifran Wildwood . Retrieved 4 July 2011 .

^ "Top Award for Scotland's Best-Loved "Mountain Man" " . 24 November 2000. Archived from the original on 5 September 2014 . Retrieved 6 June 2007 .

^ "Lifetime Achievement Award for Dr Adam Watson" . 2 November 2004. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012 . Retrieved 6 June 2007 .

^ "The path over the mountains – Doug Scott" . 24 March 2006. Archived from the original on 22 March 2012 . Retrieved 6 June 2007 .

^ "Irvine Butterfield Receives Lifetime Achievement Award at Dundee Mountain Festival" . 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 22 March 2012 . Retrieved 28 November 2008 .

^ "Trust gives Lifetime Achievement Award to US environmental campaigner" . John Muir Trust. 24 April 2018 . Retrieved 4 May 2018 .

^ "Exclusive: the "downward spiral" of a Scots conservation charity" . Third Force News (TFN), The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. 12 September 2024 . Retrieved 28 December 2024 .

^ "Inside story of the John Muir Trust crisis" . 2024 JMT crisis. 3 November 2024 . Retrieved 28 December 2024 .

External links [ edit ] John Muir Trust John Muir Award v t e Protected areas of Scotland Environmental designations National parks National nature reserves National scenic areas Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) Special Areas of Conservation Special Protection Areas Marine Protected Areas Ramsar sites Historic and cultural designations Listed buildings ( list ) Scheduled monuments ( list ) Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes Inventory of Historic Battlefields Mixed and non-statutory designations World Heritage Sites Local nature reserves ( list ) Conservation areas Forest parks Regional parks Organisations Historic Environment Scotland NatureScot National Trust for Scotland ( list ) John Muir Trust Scottish Wildlife Trust RSPB Scotland ( list ) Woodland Trust Scotland portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Muir_Trust&oldid=1304352880 " Categories : Charities based in Scotland Nature conservation in Scotland Sierra Club Scottish coast and countryside Organizations established in 1983 1983 establishments in Scotland Native plant societies Organisations based in Perth and Kinross John Muir Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from May 2018 Use dmy dates from May 2018 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 14:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Muir Trust 2 languages Add topic

