Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 Examples 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ground freezing 8 languages Deutsch Հայերեն Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Construction technique Ground freezing allowed tunnels to be excavated under an active railyard during Boston's Big Dig.  Each white lump marks the top of a deep ground-freezing tap.

Cross section of a ground freezing pipe as used in the Big Dig.

Ground freezing is a construction technique used in circumstances where soil needs to be stabilized so it will not collapse next to excavations, or to prevent contaminants spilled into soil from being leached away.

[ 1 ] Ground freezing has been used for at least one hundred years.

Pipes are run through the soil to be frozen, and then refrigerants are run through the pipes, freezing the soil.

[ 1 ] Frozen soil can be as hard as concrete.

Design [ edit ] Some ground freezing projects use common salt brine as the refrigerant, [ 2 ] but other projects benefit from using more exotic refrigerants, like liquid nitrogen .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] or solid carbon dioxide ('dry ice') .

[ 4 ] Examples [ edit ] Soil contaminated with radioactive elements that leaked from Japan 's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant was contained through ground freezing.

[ 1 ] A project in Boston known as the Big Dig used ground freezing during some of its tunneling, to allow its wide tunnels to be built under or through soil that supported existing infrastructure that would have been difficult or expensive to support using more traditional excavation methods.

[ 1 ] In northern Canada and arctic Alaska, passive pipe systems are used that do not require any external power to keep the ground frozen.

[ 5 ] These systems use in-ground evaporators and above-ground radiators filled with liquid refrigerant. When ambient temperatures fall below ground temperatures, the liquid vapor starts condensing in the radiator, reducing the pressure in the system causing the liquid in the evaporator to boil and evaporate. This process results in heat transfer from the ground to the air and keeps the ground in a permanent frozen state.

[ 6 ] Hani and Evirgen (2023) introduced a new method for sampling granular soils without disturbing their natural state; they suggest using artificial ground freezing, a ground enhancement technique, as an on-site option for deep excavation applications.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Pykrete , a composite building material which utilizes similar properties in frozen sawdust, Hani and Evirgen investigated the mechanical and microstructural properties of an artificially frozen Sawdust-Ice mixture (Pykrete) and its usability as a retaining structure.

[ 8 ] In addition, they developed an uncoupled thermo-hydro-mechanical approach to simulate a pykrete diaphragm wall for numerical analysis using finite element methods.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Jessica Morrison (2013-10-30).

"How Engineers Use Ground Freezing to Build Bigger, Safer, and Deeper" .

PBS .

Archived from the original on 2014-04-11 . Retrieved 2014-07-22 .

The basic premise behind ground freezing is that soil—made up of bits of minerals and organic matter, water, and air—becomes stronger and less penetrable when its water freezes and expands.

^ "Technical Manual for Design and Construction of Road Tunnels - Civil Elements" .

US Department of Transport .

Archived from the original on 2013-12-05 . Retrieved 2014-07-22 .

In order to maintain support to the tunnel face, excavation and jacking normally carried out alternately in small increments, typically in the range of 2 to 4 feet. In most cases, the soft ground must be treated by means of ground improvement techniques such as ground freezing, jet grouting, etc. as discussed in Chapter 7 Soft Ground Tunneling to enhance its stand up time.

^ "Ground Freezing: Freezing soil with liquid nitrogen" .

The Linde Group . 2014.

Archived from the original on 2014-02-26 . Retrieved 2014-07-22 .

During the last two decades soil freezing with liquid nitrogen (LIN) has developed from an exotic gas application with many uncertainties into a standard procedure for treating unstable soil and leakages.

^ Nikolaev, Petr; Sedighi, Majid; Rajabi, Hamid; Pankratenko, Alexander (1 December 2022).

"Artificial ground freezing by solid carbon dioxide – Analysis of thermal performance" .

Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology .

130 : 104741.

doi : 10.1016/j.tust.2022.104741 .

^ Igor Holubec, Ph.D., P.Eng (2014).

"Flat Loop Thermosyphon Foundations in Warm Permafrost" (PDF) . Government of the NT Asset Management Division Public Works and Services.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-04-02 . Retrieved 2015-06-12 .

Passive cooling by means of pressured heat exchange pipes was developed in Alaska by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in 1965 to preserve foundations in 'warm' permafrost.

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Thermosyphon Technology for Ground Freezing" . 2014.

Archived from the original on 2014-11-26 . Retrieved 2015-06-12 .

The basis of thermosyphon thechnology is a heat transfer device (thermosyphon) which extracts the heat from the soil during winter and passes it to the environment.

^ Hani, Mostefa; Evirgen, Burak (2023). "A frozen soil sampling technique for granular soils and thermal modeling".

Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment .

82 (9): 354.

doi : 10.1007/s10064-023-03372-4 .

^ Hani, Mostefa; Evirgen, Burak (2023). "The Mechanical and Microstructural Properties of Artificially Frozen Sawdust–Ice Mixture (Pykrete) and Its Usability as a Retaining Structure".

International Journal of Civil Engineering .

21 : 119– 134.

doi : 10.1007/s40999-022-00751-y .

^ Hani, Mostefa; Evirgen, Burak (2024). "Uncoupled thermo-hydro-mechanical modeling of a pykrete diaphragm wall for an alternative artificial ground freezing application".

Computers and Geotechnics .

169 : 106243.

doi : 10.1016/j.compgeo.2024.106243 .

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ground_freezing&oldid=1294780409 " Category : Ground freezing Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 19:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ground freezing 8 languages Add topic

