Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Bibliography 3 Videos 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Stephen Resnick 6 languages Deutsch فارسی مصرى Српски / srpski Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist (1938–2013) Stephen A. Resnick Born ( 1938-10-24 ) October 24, 1938 Died January 2, 2013 (2013-01-02) (aged 74) Nationality American Academic background Alma mater University of Pennsylvania (B.S., 1960) MIT (Ph.D., 1964) [ 1 ] Influences Marx , Althusser , Balibar Academic work School or tradition Marxian economics Institutions Yale University (1965–71) City College of New York (1971–73) University of Massachusetts Amherst (1973–2013) [ 1 ] Notable ideas Marxian economics , economic methodology , class analysis Stephen Alvin Resnick ( / ˈ r ɛ z n ɪ k / ; October 24, 1938 – January 2, 2013) was an American Marxist economist .

[ 2 ] He was well known for his work (much of it written together with Richard D. Wolff ) on Marxian economics , economic methodology , and class analysis . His work, along with that of Wolff, is especially associated with a post- Althusserian perspective on political economy.

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Resnick earned a B.S. in economics from the University of Pennsylvania in 1960. He received his Ph.D. in 1964 from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . His dissertation was an econometric analysis of the European Common Market .

[ 1 ] His early work (during his tenure at Yale University between 1965 and 1971) was with Stephen Hymer and focused on issues of economic development and international political economy .

After a brief period at the City College of New York (1971–1973), Resnick began teaching at the Economics Department of the University of Massachusetts Amherst in 1973. He began working with Richard D. Wolff in this period, and from then until Resnick's death they published numerous articles and books together, formulating a nondeterminist, class analytical approach. Topics included Marxian theory and value analysis, overdetermination, radical economics, international trade , business cycles , social formations, the Soviet Union , and comparing and contrasting Marxian and non-Marxian economic theories.

Resnick's work with Wolff took Louis Althusser and Étienne Balibar 's Reading Capital as its point of departure and developed a very subtle reading of Karl Marx 's Capital Volumes II and III in their influential Knowledge and Class . In Resnick's work, Marxian class analysis entails the detailed study of the conditions of existences of concrete forms of performance, appropriation, and distribution of surplus labor . While there could be an infinite number of forms of surplus appropriation, the Marxist canon refers to ancient (independent), slave , feudal , capitalist , and communist class processes.

In 1989, Resnick joined efforts with a group of colleagues, ex- and then current students to launch Rethinking Marxism , an academic journal that aims to create a platform for rethinking and developing Marxian concepts and theories within economics as well as other fields of social inquiry. He remained a member of the editorial board of the journal until 1994, and continued thereafter to serve as a member of the advisory board of the journal.

Resnick continued to teach graduate seminars and undergraduate courses and direct dissertation research in economics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst until 2013. He received multiple teaching awards and taught classes in economic theory, economic development, and economic history. Resnick listed his primary research interests as Marxian theory and economic history and development .

[ 1 ] Resnick died on January 2, 2013, as a result of leukemia.

[ 4 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Notable works of Stephen Resnick include: Hymer, S.

, & Resnick, S. (1969). A model of an agrarian economy with nonagricultural activities. The American Economic Review, 59(4), 493–506.

Richard D. Wolff and Stephen A. Resnick.

Economics: Marxian versus Neoclassical (Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1987).

Stephen A. Resnick and Richard D. Wolff.

Knowledge and Class: A Marxian Critique of Political Economy (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1987).

J.K. Gibson-Graham , Stephen A. Resnick and Richard D. Wolff.

Class and Its Others (Minnesota University Press, Minneapolis, 2000).

J.K. Gibson-Graham, Stephen A. Resnick and Richard D. Wolff.

Re/Presenting Class: Essays in Postmodern Marxism (Duke University Press, Durham NC, 2001).

Stephen A. Resnick and Richard D. Wolff.

Class Theory and History: Capitalism and Communism in the USSR (Routledge, NY, 2002).

Stephen A. Resnick and Richard D. Wolff.

New Departures in Marxian Theory (Economics as Social Theory (Routledge, NY, 2006).

Stephen A. Resnick and Richard D. Wolff.

Contending Economic Theories: Neoclassical, Keynesian, and Marxian (The MIT Press, 2012).

Videos [ edit ] "Course on Marxian Economics" "Course on Socialist Economics" "Past Present and Future of the Economics Department" Round table with Resnick, Katzner, Bowles "Memorial for Stephen Resnick" Remarks of Richard D. Wolff "The POLITICS of OUR 40-YEAR COLLABORATION" See also [ edit ] Paul Hirst Barry Hindess J. K. Gibson-Graham References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Resnick, Stephen A.

"Resnick CV" (PDF) . Retrieved 2011-10-07 .

^ Okerman, Jeffrey (January 22, 2013).

"UMass economics professor Stephen Resnick dies of Leukemia at age 74" .

The Daily Collegian . Retrieved 6 February 2013 .

^ Ozselcuk, Ceren (2009).

"Post-Marxism After Althusser: A Critique of the Alternatives" .

Dissertation . University of Massachusetts Amherst . Retrieved 5 November 2015 .

^ "Stephen Resnick, professor of economics at UMass-Amherst, dies at age 74" . masslive.com. 2011-11-01 . Retrieved 2013-01-06 .

External links [ edit ] Stephen A Resnick's website with Richard D. Wolff Rethinking Marxism: A Journal of Economics, Culture and Society Re-centering Class in Critical Theory: A Tribute to Stephen A. Resnick (1938-2013) Obituary article on Umass.edu Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stephen_Resnick&oldid=1283635433 " Categories : 1938 births 2013 deaths American economists Marxist theorists Marxian economists University of Pennsylvania alumni MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences alumni Yale University faculty City College of New York faculty University of Massachusetts Amherst faculty Socialist economists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 18:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stephen Resnick 6 languages Add topic

