Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background 2 Literature 3 Painting and sculpture Toggle Painting and sculpture subsection 3.1 Painters 3.1.1 Paintings 3.2 Sculptors 4 Architecture 5 Music 6 Science 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Spanish Renaissance 14 languages العربية Català Español Esperanto Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Nederlands Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cultural and societal movement on the Iberian peninsula during the 15th and 16th centuries This article is about the Spanish Renaissance of the 15th–16th centuries. For the earlier Renaissance in Spain, see Renaissance of the 12th century .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Spanish Renaissance" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e Santa Cruz Palace (1486–1491) in Valladolid is considered to be the earliest extant building of the Spanish Renaissance.

The Spanish Renaissance was a movement in Spain , emerging from the Italian Renaissance in Italy during the 14th century, that spread to Spain during the 15th and 16th centuries.

[ 1 ] This new focus in art , literature , quotes and science inspired by the Greco-Roman tradition of Classical antiquity , received a major impulse from several events in 1492: Unification of the longed-for Christian kingdom with the definitive taking of Granada , the last Islamic controlled territory in the Iberian Peninsula, and the successive expulsions of thousands of Muslim and Jewish believers, The official discovery of the western hemisphere, the Americas , The publication of the first grammar of a vernacular European language in print , the Gramática ( Grammar ) by Antonio de Nebrija .

Historical background [ edit ] Image of Isabella I of Castile in the Rimado de la Conquista de Granada The beginning of the Renaissance in Spain is closely linked to the historical-political life of the monarchy of the Catholic Monarchs . Its figures are the first to leave the medieval approaches that secured a feudal scheme of weak monarch over a powerful and restless nobility. The Catholic Monarchs unite the forces of the incipient state and ally with the principal families of the nobility to maintain their power. One of these families, the Mendoza , use the new style like distinction of its clan and, by extension, of the protection of the monarchy.

Little by little, the novel esthetic was introduced into the rest of the court and the clergy, mixing with purely Iberian styles, like the Nasrid art of the dying kingdom of Granada, the exalted and personal Gothic Castilian queen, and the Flemish tendencies in the official painting of the court and the Church. The assimilation of elements gave way to a personal interpretation of the orthodox Renaissance, which came to be called Plateresque . Therefore, secondary artists were brought in from Italy, apprentices were sent to the Italian shops, they brought designs, architectural plans, books and engravings, paintings, etc., of which portraits, themes and composition were copied.

King Charles V was more predisposed to the new art, paradoxically called the old way , remitted to the Classical antiquity. His direct patronage achieved some of the most beautiful works of the special and unique Spanish Renaissance style : the patronage of Almazan de Covarrubias, his commissions for Titian , who never agreed to relocate to Spain. Painters of great quality were, far from the courtier nucleus, Pedro Berruguete , Juan de Juanes , Paolo da San Leocadio , of whom the delicate Virgin of the Caballero de Montesa is highlighted, Yáñez de la Almazan and Gerardo de los Llanos.

The painting of the Spanish Renaissance is normally completed in oil . It realizes interiors perfectly subject to the laws of perspective, without over-emphasis of the people. The figures are all of the same size and anatomically correct.

The colors and the shading are applied in tonal ranges, according to the Italian teachings. To accentuate the Italian style, in addition, it is common to add elements directly copied from it, like the adornments a candelieri (borders of vegetables and cupids that surround the frames), or Roman ruins in the countrysides, including in scenes of the life of Christ.

Literature [ edit ] Main article: Spanish Renaissance literature See also: Spanish Golden Age § Literature Vida del Lazarillo de Tormes, de sus fortunas y adversidades published in 1554. Front page.

Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra , author of El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha Jorge Manrique author of the Coplas por la muerte de su padre Garcilaso de la Vega , poet.

San Juan de la Cruz and Santa Teresa de Jesús , mystic poets .

Fernando de Rojas , author of La Celestina Tomás Fernández de Medrano , lord of Valdeosera, author of the political treatise República Mista Fray Luis de León Juan Boscán Ausiàs March Alonso de Ercilla , author of La Araucana Lope de Rueda Fray Luis de Granada Marqués de Santillana Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Juan Latino , born Juan de Sessa, poet and humanist.

Alonzo de Santa Cruz Francisco de la Torre Juan de Valdés Lucio Marineo Siculo , Sicilian humanist and historian.

Anonymous writers of the Romancero and of the Masterpiece of picaresque literature Vida de Lazarillo de Tormes Painting and sculpture [ edit ] Diego Velázquez , self-portrait The Nobleman with his Hand on his Chest by El Greco Painters [ edit ] Pedro Berruguete Alonso Berruguete Alonso Cano Juan de Flandes Fernando Gallego El Greco Luis de Morales Juan Pantoja de la Cruz Alonso Sánchez Coello Sofonisba Anguissola Fernando Yáñez de la Almedina Bartolomé González y Serrano Diego Velázquez Paintings [ edit ] The Burial of the Count of Orgaz by El Greco The Nobleman with his Hand on his Chest by El Greco Laocoön by El Greco Annunciation by Pedro Berruguete Pieta by Fernando Gallego Portrait of Isabel Clara Eugenia by Alonso Sánchez Coello Virgin of the Milk or Virgin with Child (Luis de Morales).

Sculptors [ edit ] Juan de Ancheta Gaspar Becerra Alonso Berruguete Felipe Bigarny Damià Forment Esteban Jordán Juan de Juni Bartolomé Ordóñez Diego Siloe Architecture [ edit ] Main article: Architecture of the Spanish Renaissance The Royal Monastery of San Lorenzo del Escorial , by Herrera and Juan Bautista de Toledo Juan de Herrera Juan Bautista de Toledo Gil de Hontañón Diego Siloe Enrique Egas Alonso de Covarrubias Pedro Machuca Andrés de Vandelvira Diego de Riaño Juan de Álava Hernán Ruiz the Younger Music [ edit ] Francisco de Salinas Arpa de dos ordenes (Spanish cross-strung harp) Juan de Anchieta Antonio de Cabezón (organist) Juan del Encina (also poet and playwright) Bartolomé de Escobedo Juan de Esquivel Barahona Juan Pérez de Gijón Francisco Guerrero Mateo Flecha Alonso Lobo Luis de Milán (vihuelist) Cristóbal de Morales Alonso Mudarra Juan Navarro Diego Ortiz Francisco de Peñalosa Joan Pau Pujol Melchior Robles Francisco de Salinas (theorist) Tomás de Santa María Francisco de la Torre Juan de Triana Juan Vásquez Tomás Luis de Victoria Sebástian de Vivanco Luis de Narvaez Science [ edit ] Miguel Servet School of Salamanca Jerónimo Muñoz Fernán Pérez de Oliva See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Renaissance in Spain .

Spanish art Renaissance of the 12th century Portuguese Renaissance Al-Andalus Portals : Spain Architecture References [ edit ] ^ Le Hir, Marie-Pierre (2022).

French immigrants and pioneers in the making of America . Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers. p. 12.

ISBN 978-1-4766-8442-0 .

v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment Authority control databases National United States Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5zltw
Cached time: 20250812022236
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.431 seconds
Real time usage: 0.555 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 957/1000000
Revision size: 8965/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 49071/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1361/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34547/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.286/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6008294/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  454.672      1 -total
 18.18%   82.649      1 Template:Reflist
 16.92%   76.915      1 Template:Renaissance
 16.41%   74.630      1 Template:Sidebar
 16.01%   72.803      1 Template:Cite_book
 12.90%   58.656      1 Template:Short_description
 12.67%   57.601      1 Template:Refimprove
 11.51%   52.352      1 Template:Ambox
 10.11%   45.951      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.78%   44.476      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3254781:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022236 and revision id 1280476072. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spanish_Renaissance&oldid=1280476072 " Categories : Spanish Renaissance 16th century in Spain Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 20:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spanish Renaissance 14 languages Add topic

