Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Nuclear physics 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Shake (unit) 5 languages العربية Deutsch 日本語 Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Informal unit of time equal to 10 nanoseconds A nuclear fission reaction. The process takes about 1 shake.

A shake is an informal metric unit of time equal to 10 nanoseconds , or 10 −8 seconds .

[ 1 ] It was originally coined for use in nuclear physics , helping to conveniently express the timing of various events in a nuclear reaction.

Etymology [ edit ] Like many informal units having to do with nuclear physics, it arose from top secret operations of the Manhattan Project during World War II . The word "shake" was taken from the idiomatic expression "in two shakes of a lamb's tail" , which indicates a very short time interval.

The phrase "a couple of shakes", in reference to the measurement of time, may have been popularized by Richard Barham 's Ingoldsby Legends (1840); [ 2 ] however, the phrase was already part of vernacular language long before that.

[ 3 ] Nuclear physics [ edit ] For nuclear-bomb designers, the term was a convenient name for the short interval, rounded to 10 nanoseconds, which was frequently seen in their measurements and calculations: The typical time required for one step in a chain reaction (i.e. the typical time for each neutron to cause a fission event, which releases more neutrons) is of the order of 1 shake, and a chain reaction is typically complete by 50 to 100 shakes.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Barn , a companion unit of cross-sectional area created by the same people, for the same general purposes, at the same time (the measured value of nuclear-reaction cross section was larger than expected, hence deemed " as big as a barn ").

List of humorous units of measurement References [ edit ] ^ Rowlett, Russ (ed.).

" [Letter] S " . How many? A dictionary of units of measurement. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina . Archived from the original on 2007-06-29.

^ a b Richard Harris Barham (1840). "The Babes in the Wood".

The Ingoldsby Legends . p. 191.

I'll be back in a couple of shakes.

Also on page 212 ("A Row in an Omnibus") "in a brace of shakes" and on page 247 ("The Lay of St. Alois") "in a couple of shakes". But the phrase appeared in print before Barham; see for example James Edward Alexander (1833).

Transatlantic Sketches . p. 284.

^ a b Elyse Bruce (2011).

"Two shakes of a lamb's tail" .

idiomation.wordpress.com .

Archived from the original on 2012-05-02 . Retrieved 2012-06-28 .

^ Cochran, Thomas B. (10 April 1994).

"Hydronuclear Testing or a Comprehensive Test Ban?" (PDF) . Washington, DC: Natural Resources Defense Council. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-12-06.

The period, 10 −8 seconds, turns out to be a convenient unit of time, and it was defined during the Manhattan Project as one 'shake'.

v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shake_(unit)&oldid=1292821569 " Category : Units of time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 01:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shake (unit) 5 languages Add topic

