Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Philosophical work 3 Selected publications 4 Festschriften 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Adolf Grünbaum 15 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית مصرى Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosopher Adolf Grünbaum Born ( 1923-05-15 ) May 15, 1923 Cologne , Prussia Died November 15, 2018 (2018-11-15) (aged 95) Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania , U.S.

Education Alma mater Wesleyan University (BA) Yale University (PhD) Thesis The Philosophy of Continuity: A Philosophical Interpretation of the Metrical Continuum of Physical Events in the Light of Contemporary Mathematical Conceptions (1951) Doctoral advisors Carl Gustav Hempel Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Doctoral students Bas van Fraassen Main interests Philosophy of science , philosophy of physics , philosophy of psychoanalysis Notable ideas Mind -dependence of temporal becoming Adolf Grünbaum ( / ˈ ɡ r uː n b ɔː m / ; [ 1 ] German: [ˈɡʁyːnbaʊm] ; May 15, 1923 – November 15, 2018) was a German-American philosopher of science and a critic of both psychoanalysis and Karl Popper 's philosophy of science.  He was the first Andrew Mellon Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pittsburgh from 1960 until his death, and also served as co-chairman of its Center for Philosophy of Science (from 1978), research professor of psychiatry (from 1979), and primary research professor in the department of history and philosophy of science (from 2006). His works include Philosophical Problems of Space and Time (1963), The Foundations of Psychoanalysis (1984), and Validation in the Clinical Theory of Psychoanalysis (1993).

Life and career [ edit ] Being Jewish , Adolf Grünbaum's family left Nazi Germany in 1938 and emigrated to the United States.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Grünbaum received a B.A. with twofold High Distinction in philosophy and in mathematics from Wesleyan University , Middletown , Connecticut , in 1943.

During the Second World War, Grünbaum was trained at Camp Ritchie, Maryland, and thus was one of the Ritchie Boys . He was stationed in Berlin and interrogated highly placed Nazis, returning to the United States in 1946.

[ 4 ] Grünbaum obtained both his M.S. in physics (1948) and his PhD in philosophy (1951) from Yale University . He was a chaired professor of philosophy at Lehigh University , Bethlehem, Pennsylvania (1956–1960), after rising through the ranks there, starting in 1950, becoming a full professor in 1955.

In the fall of 1960, Grünbaum left Lehigh University to join the faculty of the University of Pittsburgh , where he became the first Andrew Mellon Professor of Philosophy.  In that year, he also became the founding director of that University's Center for Philosophy of Science, serving as director until 1978.  He and the colleagues he recruited then built world-class philosophy and history and philosophy of science departments at the university. Several of these colleagues had come from Yale University 's philosophy department, starting in 1962. During this recruitment period the University of Pittsburgh appointed Nicholas Rescher , Wilfrid Sellars , Richard Gale, Nuel Belnap , Alan Ross Anderson , and Gerald Massey, among others.

Grünbaum served as president of both the American Philosophical Association (Eastern Division) and the Philosophy of Science Association (two terms). He was the director of the Center for Philosophy of Science from 1960 to 1978.

[ 5 ] He was the president of the Division of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science of the International Union of History and Philosophy of Science (IUHPS) in 2004–2005 and then automatically became president of the IUHPS from 2006 to 2007. He was also a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

He received the Senior U.S. Scientist Prize from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (Germany, 1985), the Fregene Prize for science from the Italian Parliament (1998) and the Wilbur Lucius Cross Medal for outstanding achievement from Yale University (1990). Also, in May 1995, he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Konstanz in Germany . In 2013, he received an honorary doctorate of philosophy from the University of Cologne and the Großes Bundesverdienstkreuz from the Federal Republic of Germany .

[ 2 ] In April 2013 Grünbaum resigned from the department of philosophy at the University of Pittsburgh, while retaining his lifetime tenured Mellon Chair and all of his other affiliations at that university.

[ 6 ] He died in November 2018 at the age of 95.

[ 7 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Grünbaum was the author of nearly 400 articles and book chapters as well as books on space-time and the critique of psychoanalysis. He is often viewed as part of the American brand of logical empiricism , associated especially with Hans Reichenbach .

[ 8 ] Grünbaum did not embrace the prevailing — especially among physical scientists — Popperian philosophy of science, leading to some notoriety in the 1960s after he was ridiculed in print by the physicist Richard Feynman .

[ 9 ] A much-quoted exchange followed Grünbaum's neo- Leibnizian suggestion that the flow of time might be an illusion only in conscious entities, in which Feynman asked whether dogs, then cockroaches, were sufficiently conscious entities.

[ 10 ] Reportedly as a mark of further disdain, [ 11 ] Feynman refused to let his name be printed, becoming instead the easily recognizable "Mr. X".

[ 9 ] Some 40 years later, writer Jim Holt would characterize Grünbaum as, in the 1950s, "the foremost thinker about the subtleties of space and time," and as, by the 2000s, "arguably the greatest living philosopher of science." Holt portrays a rationalist Grünbaum who rejects any hint of mysteriousness in the cosmos (a "great rejector").

[ 12 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Modern Science and Zeno's Paradoxes (first edition, 1967; second edition, 1968) [ 13 ] Geometry and Chronometry in Philosophical Perspective (1968) [ 14 ] Philosophical Problems of Space and Time (first edition, 1963; second edition, 1973) [ 15 ] The Foundations of Psychoanalysis (1984) [ 16 ] Validation in the Clinical Theory of Psychoanalysis: A Study in the Philosophy of Psychoanalysis (1993) [ 17 ] Collected Works, Volume 1 (ed. by Thomas Kupka): Scientific Rationality, the Human Condition, and 20th Century Cosmologies , Oxford University Press 2013.

[ 18 ] Volume 2: The Philosophy of Space & Time (ed. by Thomas Kupka), forthcoming Volume 3: Lectures on Psychoanalysis (ed. by Thomas Kupka & Leanne Longwill), forthcoming.

For more complete publication details see the Full Bibliography of Prof. Adolf Grünbaum (2017).

Festschriften [ edit ] Three celebratory books (" Festschrift " volumes) dealing with his work have been published to date: (1983) Physics, Philosophy and Psychoanalysis: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum . R.S. Cohen and L. Lauden (eds.). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing Co.

(1993) Philosophical Problems of the Internal and External Worlds: Essays on the Philosophy of Adolf Grünbaum . J. Earman, A.I. Janis, G.J. Massey, and N. Rescher (eds.). Pittsburgh, PA/Konstanz, Germany: University of Pittsburgh Press/University of Konstanz Press.

(2009) Philosophy of Religion, Physics, and Psychology: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum . Proceedings of the international conference, "The Adolf Grünbaum Symposium in Honor of the Works of Professor Adolf Grünbaum," Santa Barbara, CA, October 2002. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.

References [ edit ] ^ Adolf Grünbaum Memorial Lecture: Michael Strevens, Nov. 22, 2019 on YouTube ^ a b "Pitt Philosophy Professor Adolf Grünbaum Is Honored by German Ministry of Foreign Affairs" .

Pitt Chronicle . University of Pittsburgh. September 23, 2013 . Retrieved September 25, 2013 .

^ Togyer, Jason (March 2002).

"Paving the Way" .

University of Pittsburgh: Pitt Magazine . Archived from the original on 2016-10-04 . Retrieved 2016-04-11 .

^ "Oral history interview with Adolf Grünbaum" .

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Collections .

^ "Center for Philosophy of Science ::: Past officers" .

^ Steele, Bruce (May 1, 2013).

"Grünbaum resigns from philosophy department faculty" .

University Times .

University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved January 9, 2015 .

^ University of Pittsburgh: Adolf Grünbaum death notice ^ "Logical Empiricism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

^ a b James Gleick, Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992, pp. 123-4) ^ Thomas Gold (ed.), The Nature of Time (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1967).

^ Hermann Bondi, "Thomas Gold. 22 May 1920 — 22 June 2004," Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, 2006 52, 117-35 ^ Jim Holt, Why Does the World Exist? An Existential Detective Story (New York: Norton, 2012) ^ (1967) "Modern Science and Zeno's Paradoxes of Motion," in: R.M. Gale (ed.), The Philosophy of Time. A Collection of Essays . New York: Anchor Doubleday Books, pp. 422–494. (1968) Modern Science and Zeno's Paradoxes . London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd.

^ (1968) Geometry and Chronometry in Philosophical Perspective . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

^ (1963) Philosophical Problems of Space and Time . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. A British edition was published by Routledge & Kegan Paul, London (1964). (1973) "Philosophical Problems of Space and Time," Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science , vol. XII. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing Co.

^ (1984) The Foundations of Psychoanalysis: A Philosophical Critique . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. This book also appears in French, German, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, and Polish translations.

^ (1993) Validation in the Clinical Theory of Psychoanalysis, A Study in the Philosophy of Psychoanalysis . Madison, CT: International Universities Press.

^ Hardcastle, Gary L. (2014-11-14).

"Collected Works Volume 1: Scientific Rationality, the Human Condition, and 20th Century Cosmologies" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

Archived from the original on 2024-08-21 . Retrieved 2025-01-26 .

Further reading [ edit ] Carrier, M., Wolters, G. Inquiring into Space-Time, the Human Mind, and Religion: The Life and Work of Adolf Grünbaum (1923–2018).

J Gen Philos Sci 50 , 409–427 (2019).

doi : 10.1007/s10838-019-09489-z External links [ edit ] Grünbaum's University of Pittsburgh web page Interview - Testing Freud: Adolf Grünbaum On The Scientific Standing of Psychoanalysis Oral history interview with Adolf Grünbaum United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Collections .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette obituary v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH PhilPeople MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adolf_Grünbaum&oldid=1285998131 " Categories : 1923 births 2018 deaths Atheist philosophers Wesleyan University alumni Philosophers of cosmology Philosophers of science Philosophers of time University of Pittsburgh faculty German male writers Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States Jewish atheists Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Ritchie Boys Yale University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 02:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adolf Grünbaum 15 languages Add topic

