Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Last years 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Anselm Feuerbach 31 languages Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German painter (1829–1880) Anselm Feuerbach Self-portrait (1873) Born Anselm Feuerbach ( 1829-09-12 ) 12 September 1829 Speyer , Kingdom of Bavaria Died 4 January 1880 (1880-01-04) (aged 50) Venice , Kingdom of Italy Nationality German Known for Painting Movement Neoclassicism Signature Anselm Feuerbach (12 September 1829 – 4 January 1880) was a German painter . He was the leading neoclassical painter of the German 19th-century school.

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Anselm Feuerbach (1852) by Thomas Couture Francesca da Rimini und Paolo Malatesta c. 1864 Plato's Symposium , 1869 Nanna , 1861, Germanisches Nationalmuseum Feuerbach was born at Speyer , the son of the archaeologist Joseph Anselm Feuerbach and the grandson of the legal scholar Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach . The house of his birth is now a small museum.

[ 1 ] Between 1845 and 1848 he attended the Düsseldorf Academy , where he was taught by Johann Wilhelm Schirmer , Wilhelm von Schadow , and Carl Sohn . He went on to the Munich Academy, but in 1850, along with a number of other dissatisfied students, he moved to the academy at Antwerp , where he studied under Gustav Wappers . Feuerbach moved to Paris in 1851, where he was a pupil of Thomas Couture until 1854.

[ 2 ] It was in Paris that he produced his first masterpiece, Hafiz at the Fountain (1852).

[ 3 ] In 1854, funded by Grand Duke Friedrich of Baden he visited Venice , [ 2 ] where he fell under the spell of the greatest school of colourists, several of his works demonstrating a close study of the Italian masters.

[ 3 ] From there he continued to Florence and then to Rome. He remained in Rome until 1873, making brief visits back to Germany.

[ 2 ] In 1861 he met Anna Risi (known as "Nanna"),  who sat as his model for the next four years.

[ 2 ] : 270 In 1866 she was succeeded as his principal model by Lucia Brunacci, an innkeeper's wife who posed for his pictures of Medea .

[ 2 ] In 1862 Feuerbach met Count Adolf Friedrich von Schack , who commissioned copies of Italian old masters from him. The count introduced him to Arnold Böcklin and Hans von Marées . The three artists became known as the Deutschrömer ("German Romans") because of their preference for Italian over German art.

[ 2 ] Between 1869 and 1874 he painted two versions of Plato's Symposium .

[ 4 ] In 1873 Feuerbach moved to Vienna , having been appointed professor of history painting at the Academy .

[ 2 ] Among his students were Ludwig Deutsch , Rudolf Ernst and Jean Discart . Later, Feuerbach developed a disagreement with architect Theophil Hansen over his ceiling mural The Fall of the Titans , painted for the Great Hall of the new academy building on the Ringstrasse .  While in Vienna he came to know Johannes Brahms . After Feuerbach's death, Brahms composed Nänie , a piece for chorus and orchestra, in his memory.

Last years [ edit ] Iphigenia , first (1862) version ( Hessisches Landesmuseum Darmstadt ) In 1877 Feuerbach resigned from his post at the Vienna Academy and moved to Venice, where he died in 1880.

[ 2 ] Following his death, his step-mother Henriette , to whom he had always been close, and who had always done much to promote his career, wrote a book entitled Ein Vermächtnis ("A Testament" or "A Legacy"), including his letters and autobiographical notes. It proved enormously successful and greatly enhanced his posthumous reputation.

[ 5 ] According to the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica : He was steeped in classic knowledge, and his figure compositions have the statuesque dignity and simplicity of Greek art. He was the first to realize the danger arising from contempt of technique, that mastery of craftsmanship was needed to express even the loftiest ideas, and that an ill-drawn coloured cartoon can never be the supreme achievement in art.

[ 3 ] His works are housed at leading public galleries in Germany. Stuttgart has the second version of Iphigenia ; Karlsruhe, the Dante at Ravenna ; Munich, the Medea ; and Berlin, The Concert , his last important painting. Other major works include The Battle of the Amazons , Pietà , The Symposium of Plato , Orpheus and Eurydice and Ariosto in the Park of Ferrara .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] List of German painters References [ edit ] ^ "Home - Feuerbachhaus Speyer" .

feuerbachhaus.de .

^ a b c d e f g h Artist biography in German Masters of the Nineteenth Century , p.268 ^ a b c d Encyclopædia Britannica , 1911 ^ J.G. Lesher.

"Some Notable Afterimages of Plato's Symposium" .

Harvard University . Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 30 January 2018 .

^ Schiff, Gert, "An Epoch of longing" in German Masters of the Nineteenth Century , pp.24–7 Sources [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Feuerbach, Anselm" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Feuerbach, Anselm" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anselm Feuerbach .

Links to works German masters of the nineteenth century: paintings and drawings from  the Federal Republic of Germany , a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on Anselm Feuerbach (no. 25–28) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Artists ULAN RKD Artists Musée d'Orsay ADK Städel National Gallery of Canada FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anselm_Feuerbach&oldid=1306500245 " Categories : 1829 births 1880 deaths Artists from the Kingdom of Bavaria German neoclassical painters 19th-century German painters German male painters People from Speyer German Orientalist painters Academic staff of the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna Kunstakademie Düsseldorf alumni 19th-century German male artists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2023 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 02:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anselm Feuerbach 31 languages Add topic

