Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 "Master of none" 3 Other quotation variants 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Jack of all trades 10 languages العربية Boarisch Deutsch فارسی Français Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Jack of all trades, master of none ) Figure of speech For the Greek film, see Polytehnitis kai erimospitis .

Jack of Spades with a jackknife " Jack of all trades, master of none, but oftentimes better than a master of one.

" is a figure of speech used in reference to a person who has dabbled in many skills, rather than gaining expertise by focusing on only one.

The original version, " a jack of all trades ", is often used as a compliment for a person who is good at fixing things and has a good level of broad knowledge.  They may be a master of integration: an individual who knows enough from many learned trades and skills to be able to bring the disciplines together in a practical manner.  This person is a generalist rather than a specialist. A jack of all trades that is highly skilled in many disciplines is known as a polymath .

Origins [ edit ] Robert Greene used the phrase "absolute Johannes Factotum" rather than "Jack of all trades" in his 1592 booklet Greene's Groats-Worth of Wit , [ 1 ] to dismissively refer to actor-turned-playwright William Shakespeare ; [ 2 ] this is the first published mention of Shakespeare.

[ 3 ] Some scholars believe Greene was referring not to Shakespeare, but to "Resolute" Johannes Florio, known as John Florio .  They have pointed out how "Johannes" was the Latin version of John (Giovanni), and the name by which Florio was known among his contemporaries.

[ 4 ] The term "absolute" is thought to be a rhyme for the nickname used by Gregorio in his signature ("resolute"), and the term "factotum" is thought to be used as a disparaging word for secretary, John Florio's job.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] In 1612, the phrase appeared in the book "Essays and Characters of a Prison" by English writer Geffray Mynshul (Minshull), [ 7 ] originally published in 1618, [ 8 ] and was probably based on the author's experience while held at Gray's Inn , London , when imprisoned for debt.

[ citation needed ] "Master of none" [ edit ] The "master of none" element appears to have been added in the late 18th century; [ 2 ] it made the statement less flattering to the person receiving it.  Today, "Jack of all trades, master of none" generally describes a person whose knowledge, while covering a number of areas, is superficial in all of them.  When abbreviated as simply "jack of all trades", it is an ambiguous statement – the user's intention is then dependent on context.  However, when "master of none" is added (sometimes in jest), this is unflattering.

[ 9 ] In the United States and Canada , the phrase has been in use since 1721.

[ 10 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 11 ] Other quotation variants [ edit ] The phrase with the "master of none" element is sometimes expanded into a less unflattering couplet with the second line: "but oftentimes better than a master of one" (or variants thereof), with some sources stating that such a couplet is the "original" version, with the second line having been dropped.
Online discussions attempting to find instances of this second line dated to before the twenty-first century have resulted in no response, however.

See also [ edit ] Amateur Competent man Generalist (disambiguation) Multipotentiality Philomath Polymath References [ edit ] ^ "There is an upstart crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his tiger's heart wrapped in a player's hide supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you: and being an absolute Johannes Factotum, is in his own conceit the only Shake-scene in a country." -- Groats-Worth of Wit; cited from William Shakespeare--The Complete Works, Stephen Orgel and A. R. Braunmuller, editors, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2002, p. xlvii.

^ a b Martin, Gary.

" 'Jack of all trades' – the meaning and origin of this phrase" .

www.phrases.org.uk . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ Van Es, Bart (2010).

" "Johannes fac Totum"?: Shakespeare's First Contact with the Acting Companies" .

Shakespeare Quarterly .

61 (4): 551– 577.

doi : 10.1093/sq/61.4.551 .

JSTOR 40985630 .

^ Iannaccone, Marianna (26 January 2021).

"John or Giovanni Florio? Johannes Florius!" .

www.resolutejohnflorio.com . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ Gerevini, Saul.

"Shakespeare and Florio" (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ Gerevini, Saul (2008).

William Shakespeare ovvero John Florio (in Italian). Pilgrim.

^ "Geffray Minshull (Mynshul), English miscellaneous writer (1594? - 1668)" . Giga-usa.com . Retrieved 2 April 2014 .

^ Minshull, Geffray (1821).

Essayes and characters of a Prison and Prisoners originally published in 1618 . Retrieved 2 April 2014 .

^ Morris Dictionary of Word and Phrase Origins , compiled by William and Mary Morris. HarperCollins, New York, 1977, 1988.

^ The OED notes appearance in The Boston News-Letter in August 1721 as "Jack of all Trades; and it would seem, Good at none." ^ "Random House Dictionary of Popular Proverbs and Sayings" by Gregory Y. Titelman (Random House, New York, 1996) External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of jack of all trades at Wiktionary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jack_of_all_trades&oldid=1306469737 " Categories : English-language idioms Jack tales Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2022 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jack of all trades 10 languages Add topic

