Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 Difference from plays 1.3 Contribution toward digital media 1.4 Around the world 1.5 Philosophy 2 Festivals as happenings 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Happening 34 languages Alemannisch Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of performance artwork For other uses, see Happening (disambiguation) .

A happening is a performance, event, or situation art , usually as performance art . The term was first used by Allan Kaprow in 1959 to describe a range of art-related events.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] Survival Research Laboratories performance in Chinatown , Los Angeles, January 2006 Allan Kaprow first coined the term "happening" in the spring of 1959 at an art picnic at George Segal 's farm to describe the art pieces being performed.

[ 2 ] The first appearance in print about one was in Kaprow's famous "Legacy of Jackson Pollock " essay that was published in 1958 but primarily written in 1956. "Happening" also appeared in print in one issue of the Rutgers University undergraduate literary magazine, Anthologist .

[ 3 ] The form was imitated and the term was adopted by artists across the U.S.

, Germany , and Japan .

Happenings are difficult to describe, in part because each one is unique. One definition comes from Wardrip-Fruin and Montfort in The New Media Reader , "The term 'happening' has been used to describe many performances and events, organized by Allan Kaprow and others during the 1950s and 1960s, including a number of theatrical productions that were traditionally scripted and invited only limited audience interaction." [ 4 ] : 83 Another definition is "a purposefully composed form of theatre in which diverse alogical elements, including nonmatrixed performing, are organized in a compartmented structure".

[ 5 ] However, Canadian theatre critic and playwright Gary Botting , who himself had "constructed" several happenings, wrote in 1972: "Happenings abandoned the matrix of story and plot for the equally complex matrix of incident and event." [ 6 ] Kaprow was a student of John Cage , who had experimented with "musical happenings" at Black Mountain College as early as 1952.

[ 7 ] Kaprow combined the theatrical and visual arts with discordant music. "His happenings incorporated the use of huge constructions or sculptures similar to those suggested by Artaud ," wrote Botting, who also compared them to the "impermanent art" of Dada. "A happening explores negative space in the same way Cage explored silence. It is a form of symbolism: actions concerned with 'now' or fantasies derived from life, or organized structures of events appealing to archetypal symbolic associations." [ 8 ] Happenings can be a form of participatory new media art, emphasizing an interaction between the performer and the audience. In his Water , Robert Whitman had the performers drench each other with colored water. "One girl squirmed between wet inner tubes, ultimately struggling through a large silver vulva." [ 9 ] Claes Oldenburg , best known for his innovative sculptures, used a vacant house, his own store, and the parking lot of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Los Angeles for Injun , World's Fair II and AUT OBO DYS .

[ 10 ] The idea was to break down the fourth wall between performer and spectator; with the involvement of the spectator as performer, objective criticism is transformed into subjective support. For some happenings, everyone present is included in the making of the art and even the form of the art depends on audience engagement, for they are a key factor in where the performers' spontaneity leads.

[ 11 ] Later happenings had no set rules, only vague guidelines that the performers follow based on surrounding props. Unlike other forms of art, happenings that allow chance to enter are ever-changing. When chance determines the path the performance will follow, there is no room for failure. As Kaprow wrote in his essay, "'Happenings' in the New York Scene", "Visitors to a Happening are now and then not sure what has taken place, when it has ended, even when things have gone 'wrong". For when something goes 'wrong', something far more 'right,' more revelatory, has many times emerged".

[ 4 ] : 86 Kaprow's piece 18 Happenings in 6 Parts (1959) is commonly cited as the first happening, although that distinction is sometimes given to a 1952 performance of Theater Piece No. 1 at Black Mountain College by John Cage , one of Kaprow's teachers in the mid-1950s.

[ 7 ] Cage stood reading from a ladder, Charles Olson read from another ladder, Robert Rauschenberg showed some of his paintings and played wax cylinders of Édith Piaf on an Edison horn recorder, David Tudor performed on a prepared piano and Merce Cunningham danced.

[ 12 ] All these things took place at the same time, among the audience rather than on a stage. Cage credited a collaborative close reading of Antonin Artaud 's The Theatre and Its Double with M.C. Richards and David Tudor as the impetus for the event.

[ 13 ] Happenings flourished in New York City in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Key contributors to the form included Carolee Schneemann , Red Grooms , Robert Whitman , Jim Dine Car Crash , [ 14 ] Claes Oldenburg , Robert Delford Brown , Lucas Samaras , and Robert Rauschenberg . Some of their work is documented in Michael Kirby's book Happenings (1966).

[ 15 ] Kaprow claimed that "some of us will become famous, and we will have proven once again that the only success occurred when there was a lack of it".

[ 4 ] : 87 In 1963 Wolf Vostell made the happening TV-Burying at the Yam Festival in coproduction with the Smolin Gallery and in 1964 the happening You in Great Neck, New York which is on Long Island .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] During the summer of 1959, Red Grooms along with others (Yvonne Andersen, Bill Barrell, Sylvia Small and Dominic Falcone) staged the non-narrative "play" Walking Man , which began with construction sounds, such as sawing. Grooms recalls, "The curtains were opened by me, playing a fireman wearing a simple costume of white pants and T-shirt with a poncholike cloak and a Smokey Stoverish fireman's helmet. Bill, the 'star' in a tall hat and black overcoat, walked back and forth across the stage with great wooden gestures. Yvonne sat on the floor by a suspended fire engine. She was a blind woman with tin-foil covered glasses and cup. Sylvia played a radio and pulled on hanging junk. For the finale, I hid behind a false door and shouted pop code words. Then the cast did a wild run around and it ended".

[ 18 ] Dubbing his 148 Delancey Street studio The Delancey Street Museum, Grooms staged three more happenings there, A Garden , The Burning Building and The Magic Trainride (originally titled Fireman's Dream ). No wonder Kaprow called Grooms "a Charlie Chaplin forever dreaming about fire".

[ 18 ] On the opening night of The Burning Building , Bob Thompson solicited an audience member for a light, since none of the cast had one, and this gesture of spontaneous theater recurred in eight subsequent performances.

[ 18 ] The Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama staged nude happenings during the late '60s in New York City.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Difference from plays [ edit ] Argentine artist Marta Minujín in a 1965 happening, Reading the news , in which she got into the Río de La Plata wrapped in newspapers.

[ 21 ] Happenings emphasize the organic connection between art and its environment. Kaprow supports that "happenings invite us to cast aside for a moment these proper manners and partake wholly in the real nature of the art and life. It is a rough and sudden act, where one often feels "dirty", and dirt, we might begin to realize, is also organic and fertile, and everything including the visitors can grow a little into such circumstances." 
Happenings have no plot or philosophy, but rather are materialized in an improvisatory fashion. There is no direction thus the outcome is unpredictable. "It is generated in action by a headful of ideas...and it frequently has words but they may or may not make literal sense. If they do, their meaning is not representational of what the whole element conveys. Hence they carry a brief, detached quality. If they do not make sense, then they are acknowledgement of the sound of the word rather than the meaning conveyed by it." [ 22 ] Due to the convention's nature, there is no such term as "failure" which can be applied. "For when something goes "wrong", something far more "right", more revelatory may emerge. This sort of sudden near-miracle presently is made more likely by chance procedures." As a conclusion, a happening is fresh while it lasts and cannot be reproduced.

[ 4 ] : 86 Regarding happenings, Red Grooms has remarked, "I had the sense that I knew it was something. I knew it was something because I didn't know what it was. I think that's when you're at your best point. When you're really doing something, you're doing it all out, but you don't know what it is." [ 18 ] The lack of plot as well as the expected audience participation can be likened to Augusto Boal's Theater of the Oppressed , which also claims that "spectator is a bad word". Boal expected audience members to participate in the theater of the oppressed by becoming the actors. His goal was to allow the downtrodden to act out the forces oppressing them in order to mobilize the people into political action. Both Kaprow and Boal are reinventing theater to try to make plays more interactive and to abolish the traditional narrative form to make theater something more free-form and organic.

[ 23 ] The combine performance mixes the four-dimensional elements of performance with the three-dimensional elements of happening; much us is the case with performance "living" sculptures.

[ 24 ] Contribution toward digital media [ edit ] Allan Kaprow 's and other artists of the 1950s and 1960s that performed these happenings helped put "new media technology developments into context".

[ 4 ] : 83 The happenings allowed other artists to create performances that would attract attention to the issue they wanted to portray.

Around the world [ edit ] In 1959 the French artist Yves Klein first performed Zone de Sensibilité Picturale Immatérielle . The work involved the sale of documentation of ownership of empty space (the Immaterial Zone), taking the form of a cheque, in exchange for gold ; if the buyer wished, the piece could then be completed in an elaborate ritual in which the buyer would burn the cheque, and Klein would throw half of the gold into the Seine .

[ 25 ] The ritual would be performed in the presence of an art critic or distinguished dealer, an art museum director and at least two witnesses.

[ 25 ] In 1960, Jean-Jacques Lebel supervised and participated in the first European happening L'enterrement de la Chose in Venice . For his performance there – called Happening Funeral Ceremony of the Anti-Process – Lebel invited the audience to attend a ceremony in formal dress. In a decorated room within a grand residence, a draped 'cadaver' rested on a plinth which was then ritually stabbed by an 'executioner' while a 'service' was read consisting of extracts from the French décadent writer Joris-Karl Huysmans and le Marquis de Sade . Then pall-bearers carried the coffin out into a gondola and the 'body'–which was a mechanical sculpture by Jean Tinguely –was ceremonially slid into the canal.

[ 26 ] Jean-Jacques Lebel–at Exhibition Beat Generation, November 2013 Poet and painter Adrian Henri claimed to have organized the first happenings in England in Liverpool in 1962, [ 27 ] taking place during the Merseyside Arts Festival.

[ 28 ] The most important event in London was the Albert Hall " International Poetry Incarnation " on June 11, 1965, where an audience of 7,000 people witnessed and participated in performances by some of the leading avant-garde young British and American poets of the day (see British Poetry Revival and Poetry of the United States ). One of the participants, Jeff Nuttall , went on to organize a number of further happenings, often working with his friend Bob Cobbing , sound poet and performance poet .

In Tokyo in 1964, Yoko Ono created a happening by performing her Cut Piece at the Sogetsu Art Center . She walked onto the stage draped in fabric, presented the audience with a pair of scissors, and instructed the audience to cut the fabric away gradually until the performer decided they should stop.

[ 29 ] This piece was presented again in 1966 at the Destruction in Art Symposium in London, this time allowing the cutting away of her street cloths.

Beuys Felt TV performance by Lothar Wolleh in 1971 In Belgium , the first happenings were organized around 1965–1968 in Antwerp , Brussels and Ostend by artists Hugo Heyrman and Panamarenko .

In the Netherlands , the first documented happening took place in 1961, with the Dutch artist and performer Wim T. Schippers emptying a bottle of soda water in the North Sea near Petten. Later on, he organized random walks in the Amsterdam city centre.

Provo organized happenings around the a statue Het Lieverdje on the Spui, a square in the centre of Amsterdam , from 1966 till 1968.

Police often raided these events. In the 1960s Joseph Beuys , Wolf Vostell , Nam June Paik , Charlotte Moorman , Dick Higgins , and HA Schult staged happenings in Germany.

In Canada, Gary Botting created or "constructed" happenings between 1969 (in St. John's, Newfoundland) and 1972 (in Edmonton, Alberta), including The Aeolian Stringer in which a "captive" audience was entangled in string emanating from a vacuum cleaner as it made its rounds (similar to Kaprow's "A Spring Happening", where he used a power lawnmower and huge electric fan to similar effect); Zen Rock Festival in which the central icon was a huge rock with which the audience interacted in unpredictable ways; Black on Black held in the Edmonton Art Gallery; and "Pipe Dream," set in a men's washroom with an all-female "cast".

[ 11 ] In Australia , the Yellow House Artist Collective in Sydney housed 24-hour happenings throughout the early 1970s.

Behind the Iron Curtain in Poland , artist and theater director Tadeusz Kantor staged the first happenings beginning in 1965. In the second half of 1970s painter and performer Krzysztof Jung ran the Repassage gallery, which promoted performance art in Poland.

[ 30 ] Also in the second half of the 1980s, a student-based happening movement Orange Alternative founded by Major Waldemar Fydrych became known for its much attended happenings (over 10 thousand participants at one time) aimed against the military regime led by General Jaruzelski and the fear blocking the Polish society ever since martial law had been imposed in December 1981.

Since 1993 the artist Jens Galschiøt has had political happenings all over the world . In November 1993 he held the happening my inner beast where twenty sculptures were erected within 55 hours without the knowledge of the authorities all over Europe .

Pillar of Shame is a series of Galschiøt's sculptures. The first happening was erected in Hong Kong on 4 June 1997, ahead of the handover from British to Chinese rule on 1 July 1997, as a protest against China's crackdown of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 . On 1 May 1999, a Pillar of Shame was set up on the Zócalo [ 31 ] in Mexico City and it stood for two days in front of the Parliament to protest the oppression of the region's indigenous people.

The non-profit, artist-run organization, iKatun, [ 32 ] artist group, The Institute of Infinitely Small Things, has reflected the use of "happenings" influence while incorporating the medium of internet. Their aim is one which "fosters public engagement in the politics of information".

[ full citation needed ] Their project entitled The International Database of Corporate Commands presents a scrutinizing look at the super-saturating advertisements slogans, and "commands" of companies. "The Institute for Infinitely Small Things" uses the commands to conduct research performances, performances in which we attempt to enact, as literally as possible, what the command tells us to do and where it tells us to do it.

[ 33 ] Starting around 2010, a world-wide group called The Order of the Third Bird started creating flashmob style art appreciation happenings.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] In 2018 the Prague -based performance and poetics collective OBJECT:PARADISE was established by writers Tyko Say and Jeff Milton.

[ 36 ] The collective has since aimed to make poetry readings more similar to language happenings which involve a variety of interdisciplinary acts and performances occurring at the same time.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Kaprow explains that happenings are not a new style, but a moral act, a human stand of great urgency, whose professional status as art is less critical than their certainty as an ultimate existential commitment. He argues that once artists have been recognized and paid, they also surrender to the confinement, rather the tastes of the patrons (even if that may not be the intention on both ends). "The whole situation is corrosive, neither patrons nor artists comprehend their role...and out of this hidden discomfort comes a stillborn art, tight or merely repetitive and at worst, chic." Though the we may easily blame those offering the temptation, Kaprow reminds us that it is not the publicist's moral obligation to protect the artist's freedom, and artists themselves hold the ultimate power to reject fame if they do not want its responsibilities.

[ 4 ] : 86 Festivals as happenings [ edit ] Art and music festivals play a large role in positive and successful happenings. Some of the festivals include Burning Man and the Oregon Country Fair near Veneta, Oregon .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] References [ edit ] ^ Chilvers, I.; Glaves-Smith, J. (2009).

"Kaprow, Allan (1927–2006)" .

A Dictionary of Modern and Contemporary Art . Oxford University Press. p. 358.

ISBN 978-0-19-923965-8 .

^ Christopher W. Bigsby (1985).

A Critical Introduction to Twentieth-Century American Drama: Volume 3 Beyond Broadway . Cambridge University Press. p. 45.

ISBN 9780521278966 . Retrieved September 5, 2012 .

^ Joan M. Marter and Simon Anderson, Off Limits: Rutgers University and the Avant-Garde , 1957–1963 , Rutgers University Press, 1999, p. 10.

ISBN 0-8135-2610-8 ^ a b c d e f Wardrip-Fruin, Noah; Montfort, Nick, eds. (14 February 2003).

The New Media Reader . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-23227-2 .

^ Michael Kirby, Happenings: An Illustrated Anthology , scripts and productions by Jim Dine, Red Grooms, Allan Kaprow, Claes Oldenburg, Robert Whitman (New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1965), p. 21.

^ Botting, Gary (1972). "Happenings".

The Theatre of Protest in America . Edmonton: Harden House. pp.

12– 17.

^ a b Botting 1972 , p. 13.

^ Botting 1972 , p. 12–13.

^ Botting 1972 , p. 17.

^ Botting 1972 , p. 16-17.

^ a b Botting 1972 , p. 12-17.

^ Stuart Dale Hobbs, The End of the American Avant Garde , NYU Press, 1997, p. 109.

ISBN 0-8147-3539-8 ^ Richards, Mary Caroline.

M.C. Richards : centering : life + art -- 100 years .

ISBN 978-1-5323-0998-4 .

OCLC 958078561 .

^ Performance Descriptions Archived 2010-07-09 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 10, 2010 ^ Michael Kirby, Happenings: An Illustrated Anthology , scripts and productions by Jim Dine, Red Grooms, Allan Kaprow, Claes Oldenburg, Robert Whitman (New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., 1965).

^ Net, Media Art (25 September 2017).

"Media Art Net – Vostell, Wolf: TV Burying" .

www.medienkunstnetz.de . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

^ Happening You , Great Neck, New York, 1964 ^ a b c d Judith Stein, "The Early Years: 1937–1960", Red Grooms: A Retrospective (Philadelphia: Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, 1985) ^ Pilling, David (20 January 2012).

"The world according to Yayoi Kusama" .

Financial Times . Archived from the original on 2 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Scream Against the Sky: Yayoi Kusama's Self-Obliteration, avant garde weirdness, 1967" . 15 July 2013 . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

^ "HAPPENINGS AND PERFORMANCES" .

Marta-minujin.com . Archived from the original on 27 June 2018 . Retrieved 25 July 2013 .

^ Kaprow, Allan (2003).

"Happenings in the New York Scene (1961)" .

Essays on the Blurring of Art and Life: Expanded Edition . University of California Press. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0-520-24079-7 .

^ Augusto Boal, "Theater of the Oppressed", in Wardrip-Fruin & Montfort 2003 , pp. 341–52 ^ RoseLee Goldberg, Performance Now: Live Art for the Twenty-First Century (Thames & Hudson, 2018): p. 137.

ISBN 0500021252 .

^ a b Yves Klein, Stich, Cantz 1995, p. 156 ^ Joseph Nechvatal , Immersive Ideals / Critical Distances .

LAP Lambert Academic Publishing , 2009. p. 323 ^ B. J. Moore-Gilbert, Cultural Revolution?: The Challenge of the Arts in the 1960s , Routledge, 1992, p. 90.

ISBN 0-415-07824-5 ^ Günter Berghaus, "Happenings in Europe: Trends, Events and Leading Figures", in Happenings and Other Acts , edited by Mariellen R. Sandford, [ page needed ] (London and New York: Routledge, 1995): p. 368.

ISBN 0-415-09935-8 (cloth); ISBN 0-415-09936-6 (pbk).

^ Kevin Concannon, " Yoko Ono's Cut Piece : From Text to Performance and Back Again " PAJ—A Journal of Performance and Art 30, no. 3 (September 2008): 81–93, citation on 81–82. doi:0.1162.

[ clarification needed ] Retrieved July 31, 2012.

^ Krzysztof Jung . Catalogue of the exhibition edited by Grzegorz Kowalski and Maryla Sitkowska, Warsaw 2001 ^ Subcomandante Marcos (2005).

Conversations with Durito . Autonomedia.

ISBN 9781570271182 . Retrieved 29 January 2010 .

^ ikatun.com ^ D'Ignazio, Catherine.

"Corporate Commands" .

ikatun.org . kanarinka projects. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 .

^ Heller, Nathan (2024-05-06).

"The Battle for Attention" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 2024-04-29 . Retrieved May 2, 2024 .

^ In Search of The Third Bird: Exemplary Essays from The Proceedings of ESTAR(SER) 2001–2021 |editor-last=Burnett |editor-first=D. Graham |editor2-last= Hansen |editor2-first=Catherine L. |editor-first=D. Graham |editor3-last= Smith |editor2-first=Justin E.|year=2021 |publisher=Strange Attractor Press |location=London ISBN 978-1913689360 , 1913689360 ^ "About — OBJECT:PARADISE" .

^ "Poetics collective OBJECT:PARADISE celebrates Žižkov » Prague Monitor / Czech News in English" . 9 June 2021.

^ "Manifesto — OBJECT:PARADISE" .

^ "FAQs « Oregon Country Fair" .

www.oregoncountryfair.org . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

^ "Event FAQ – Burning Man" .

www.burningman.com . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Allan Kaprow, Happenings in the New York Scene . Art News, May, 1961 Jürgen Becker und Wolf Vostell, Happenings, Fluxus, Pop Art, Nouveau Réalisme . Eine Dokumentation. Rowohlt Verlag, Reinbek 1965.

Michael Kirby, Happenings: An Illustrated Anthology . E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc., New York, 1965.

Allan Kaprow, Assemblage, Environments and Happenings , 1966.

Happening & Fluxus . Materialien zusammengestellt von Hans Sohm, Kölnischer Kunstverein, 1970.

Happening. Die Geschichte einer Bewegung . Materialien zusammengestellt von Hans Sohm, Kölnischer Kunstverein, 1970.

Wolf Vostell, Aktionen, Happenings und Demonstrationen seit 1965 . Rowohlt Verlag, Reinbek 1970, ISBN 3-498-07053-3 .

Geoffrey Hendricks, Critical Mass: Happenings, Fluxus, Performance, Intermedia and Rutgers University , 1958–1972. New Brunswick, N.J., Mason Gross Art Galleries, Rutgers University, 2003.

Jeff Kelley, Childsplay. The Art of Allan Kaprow . University of California Press, Berkeley, 2004, ISBN 0-520-23671-8 .

Nie wieder störungsfrei! Aachen Avantgarde seit 1964 , Kerber Verlag, 2011, ISBN 978-3-86678-602-8 . (see "Gerda Henkel Stiftung" .

www.gerda-henkel-stiftung.de . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

) Beuys Brock Vostell. Aktion Demonstration Partizipation 1949–1983 . ZKM – Zentrum für Kunst und Medientechnologie, Hatje Cantz , Karlsruhe, 2014, ISBN 978-3-7757-3864-4 . (see "Beuys Brock Vostell – 2016 – ZKM" .

zkm.de . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

) External links [ edit ] Happenings in Belgium Happenings by Orange Alternative in Poland Archived 2006-04-09 at the Wayback Machine Allan Kaprow on Ubuweb Interview with Kaprow Report on a Happening, 1963 Happenings Worldwide v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Hippies History of the hippie movement Etymology Beat Generation / Beatniks Central Park be-ins Counterculture of the 1960s Red Dog Experience San Francisco sound Drop City Sunset Strip curfew riots Love Pageant Rally Haight-Ashbury Human Be-In Mantra-Rock Dance Summer of Love Fantasy Fair Monterey Pop Festival Newport Pop Festival Sky River Rock Festival People's Park Woodstock Glastonbury Festival The Farm Piedra Roja Festival Rock y Ruedas de Avándaro Nambassa People and groups Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters Acid Tests Furthur bus Electrohippies Diggers San Francisco Oracle Haight Ashbury Free Clinic Haight-Ashbury Switchboard Yippies Wavy Gravy Hog Farm The Brotherhood of Eternal Love Rainbow Family Politics and ethics Back-to-the-land movement Free love Anti-authoritarianism Simple living Environmentalism Pacifism Communalism Counterculture Bohemianism Make love, not war Turn on, tune in, drop out Vegetarianism Veganism Culture and fashion Psychedelia Flower power Hippie trail Hippie exploitation films Happening Peace symbols Bell-bottoms Love beads Long hair Tie-dye Intentional community communal living Free festival Music festival Flower child Music Folk music Folk rock Protest song Psychedelic music Psychedelic folk Psychedelic rock Psychedelic soul Psychedelic pop Psychedelic trance Acid rock Space rock Progressive rock Raga rock World music New-age music Jam bands List of jam band music festivals List of historic rock festivals Psychedelics and other drugs Cannabis DMT LSD Psilocybin mushroom Mescaline Peyote Hippie related subcultures Deadhead Feral Flower child Freak scene Housetrucker Jesus freak Jipitecas La Onda Lebensreform Mánička New Age New Age travellers Radical Faeries Rave UK underground Woodstock Nation Zippie Related List of films List of books and other publications Subculture Cannabis culture Cyberdelic Head shop Underground press press syndicate list Legend of the Rainbow Warriors Free Speech Movement Anti-war movement Civil rights movement Protests of 1968 Chicago Seven New Left New social movements Postmaterialism Neotribalism Hungry generation Sexual revolution Second Summer of Love Neo-psychedelia Baby boomers v t e Guerrilla theatre and derivations Derivations Guerrilla theatre (1965) Semiological guerrilla (1967) Spaßguerilla (1967) Guerrilla television (1971) Invisible theater (1974) Guerrilla marketing (1984) Culture jamming (1985) Tactical media (1996) Flash mob (2003) Groups San Francisco Mime Troupe (1959) Diggers (1966) Yippies (1967) Precursors Theatre of Situations (1947) Situationist prank (1958) Theoreticians Edward Bernays (1891–1995) Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) Guy Debord (1931–1994) Umberto Eco (1932–2016) Jay Conrad Levinson (1933–) Abbie Hoffman (1936–1989) Peter Coyote (1941–) Emmett Grogan (1943–1978) Jerry Rubin (1938–1994) Paul Ryan (1943–) Michael Shamberg (1945–) Mark Dery (1959–) v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Happening&oldid=1304785263 " Categories : 1950s neologisms Performance art Hippie movement Contemporary art Avant-garde art Arts events Social events Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2012 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2010 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 04:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Happening 34 languages Add topic

