Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Collaborations and activities 3 Awards 4 Journals 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Liverpool University Press 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British publisher Liverpool University Press Parent company University of Liverpool Founded 1899 Founder John Sampson (linguist) Country of origin United Kingdom Headquarters location Liverpool Distribution Wiley (UK and most of world) Longleaf (Americas) Ta Tong Book Company (Taiwan) Overleaf (India) [ 1 ] Publication types Books , academic journals Imprints Liverpool University Press, Modern Languages Open, Pavilion Poetry No.

of employees 33 Official website www .liverpooluniversitypress .co .uk Liverpool University Press ( LUP ), founded in 1899, is the third oldest university press in England after Oxford University Press and Cambridge University Press . As the press of the University of Liverpool , it specialises in modern languages , literatures , history , and visual culture and currently publishes more than 160 books a year, as well as 50 academic journals .

[ 2 ] LUP's books are distributed in North America by Longleaf.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] One of the earliest heads of LUP was Lascelles Abercrombie , the first poetry lecturer at the university.

[ citation needed ] . Across its history a number of distinguished scholars have published with the Press, including the Nobel Prize winner Ronald Ross and the literary critic Hermione Lee .

In 2004, the Press was restructured, changing from a department of the University of Liverpool to a subsidiary.

Alongside its academic publishing, LUP is known for the Pavilion Poetry imprint. Inaugural poet Mona Arshi 's collection, Small Hands , won The Felix Dennis Prize for Best First Collection at the 2015 Forward Prizes for Poetry .

[ 4 ] How to Wash a Heart by Bhanu Kapil won the 2020 T. S. Eliot Prize .

In 2024, the Chief Executive of Liverpool University Press, Anthony Cond, became the first President of the Association of University Presses from outside of the Americas.

Collaborations and activities [ edit ] Although well known for publishing under its own imprint, Liverpool University Press also provides publishing for a number of other organisations including The British Academy , Historic England and the Voltaire Foundation .

The Press has been a strong supporter of Open Access and was the first publisher to sign up to Knowledge Unlatched , a global library consortium approach to funding open access books .

[ when?

] [ 5 ] In 2014, LUP launched Modern Languages Open , its peer-reviewed open access online platform publishing research from across the modern languages.

[ 6 ] Awards [ edit ] Liverpool University Press has won Academic Publisher of the Year awards from both the Independent Publishers Guild [ 7 ] and The Bookseller .

[ 7 ] Journals [ edit ] Journals published by LUP include: Bulletin of Hispanic Studies (since 1923) [ citation needed ] Town Planning Review (TPR) (since 1910) [ 8 ] Extrapolation (journal) French Studies The Journal of Literary & Cultural Disability Studies , [ 9 ] an academic journal covering cultural and especially literary representations of disability , containing a wide variety of textual analyses that are informed by disability theory and, by extension, experiences of disability. It was established in 2006 and launched at the Inaugural Conference of the Cultural Disability Studies Research Network, Liverpool John Moores University , 2007. It moved to Liverpool University Press in 2009. The editor-in-chief is David Bolt ( Liverpool Hope University ).

References [ edit ] ^ "For Booksellers" .

^ "Liverpool University Press" .

Liverpool University Press .

^ "Information for Booksellers" . Liverpool University Press.

^ "Upcoming Events" .

Homepage . Forward Arts Foundation . Retrieved 3 November 2015 .

^ "Good for publishers" . Knowledge Unlatched.

^ "Modern Languages Open" . Liverpool University Press.

^ a b "Awards and Nominations" . Liverpool University Press.

^ "Town Planning Review" .

JSTOR .

ISSN 0041-0020 . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ "Project MUSE - Journal of Literary & Cultural Disability Studies" .

muse.jhu.edu .

Further reading [ edit ] Droop, J. P.

The University Press of Liverpool: A Record of Progress, 1899–1946, with a Catalogue of All Publications.

Liverpool University Press, 1947 External links [ edit ] Official website Modern Languages Open v t e University of Liverpool People Chancellor: Wendy Beetlestone Vice-Chancellor: Professor Tim Jones Gladstone Professor of Greek King Alfred Chair of English Literature Schools and research Archaeology, Classics and Egyptology Architecture Centre for Genomic Research Centre for Manx Studies Dentistry Mathematics School Medical School Veterinary Science Buildings Central Teaching Hub Greenbank House Harold Cohen Library Johnston Laboratories Ness Botanic Gardens Victoria Building Victoria Gallery & Museum Waterhouse Building Yoko Ono Lennon Centre Student life Guild of Students' Liverpool Medical Students Society Christie Cup Affiliates Broadgreen Hospital Liverpool Life Sciences UTC Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine Liverpool University Press N8 Research Partnership Royal Liverpool University Hospital UK Centre for Materials Education Victoria University Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University Category Commons Portal : Books Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liverpool_University_Press&oldid=1299222175 " Categories : University presses of the United Kingdom University of Liverpool Publishing companies established in 1899 Book publishing companies of the United Kingdom 1899 establishments in England Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2022 Use British English from March 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from March 2022 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 04:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liverpool University Press 9 languages Add topic

