Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origin 2.2 Ahl al-kalām 2.3 Historical development 2.4 Mihna 2.5 Post-Mihna 3 Beliefs Toggle Beliefs subsection 3.1 The Five Principles 3.1.1 1. Monotheism 3.1.2 2. Divine justice 3.1.3 3. The Promise and the Threat [ al-wa'd wa l-wa'id ] 3.1.4 4. The Intermediate Position [ Al-Manzilah bayn al-manzilatayn ] 3.1.5 5. The enjoining of right and prohibiting of wrong 4 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 4.1 Methodology of interpretation 4.2 The first obligation 4.3 Reason and revelation 4.4 Validity of hadith 4.5 Causality 4.6 Atomism 4.7 Eschatology 5 Legacy 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mu'tazilism 49 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Slovenčina Soomaaliga کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mu'tazilites ) Early Islamic rationalist theological sect Part of a series on Aqidah Sunni Six Articles of Iman God Prophets Holy books Angels The Last Judgement Predestination Five Pillars of Islam Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj Schools of theology Ahl al-Hadith Athari 1 Ahl al-Ra'y Ash'ari 2 Maturidi 3 Shi'a Basic Tenets of Faith Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj Khums Jihad Commanding what is just Forbidding what is evil Tawalla Tabarra Theology of the Twelvers 4, 5 Tawhid Adalah Prophecy Imamah Qiyamah Theology of the Ismailis 6 Walayah Tawhid Salah Zakat Sawm Hajj Jihad Theology of the Zaydis Muhakkima Theology of the Ibadis Other variants Jabriyya Jahmiyya Mujassimah Murji Mu'tazila Qadariyya Quraniyya Ahmadiyya Nation of Islam Unaffiliated Including: 1 Hanbali school Zahiri school 2 Maliki school Shafi'i school 3 Hanafi school 4 Ja'fari school ( Usuli Akhbari Shaykhi ) 5 Ghulat ( Alawi Alevi Bektashi Qizilbash Ishiki ) 6 Nizari ( Khoja Satpanth ) Mustali ( Dawoodi Bohra Sulaymani Bohra Alavi Bohra Hebtiahs Bohra Atba-i-Malak Bohra Qutbi Bohra ) Islam portal v t e Mu'tazilism ( Arabic : المعتزلة , romanized : al-muʿtazila , singular Arabic : معتزلي , romanized : muʿtazilī ) is an Islamic theological school that appeared in early Islamic history and flourished in Basra and Baghdad . Its adherents, the Mu'tazilites, were known for their neutrality in the dispute between Ali and his opponents after the death of the third caliph , Uthman . By the 10th century the term al-muʿtazilah had come to refer to a distinctive Islamic school of speculative theology ( kalām ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] This school of theology was founded by Wasil ibn Ata .

[ 4 ] The later Mu'tazila school developed an Islamic type of rationalism , partly influenced by ancient Greek philosophy , based around three fundamental principles: the oneness ( Tawhid ) and justice ( Al-'adl ) of God , [ 5 ] human freedom of action, and the creation of the Quran .

[ 6 ] The Mu'tazilites are best known for rejecting the doctrine of the Quran as uncreated and co-eternal with God , [ 7 ] asserting that if the Quran is the literal word of God, he logically "must have preceded his own speech".

[ 8 ] This went against a common Sunni position (followed by the Ashʿarī and Māturīdī ) which argued that with God being all-knowing, his knowledge of the Quran must have been eternal, hence uncreated just like him.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The school also worked to resolve the theological " problem of evil ", [ 10 ] arguing that since God is just and wise, he cannot command what is contrary to reason or act with disregard for the welfare of His creatures; consequently evil must be regarded as something that stems from errors in human acts, arising from man's divinely bestowed free will .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The Mu'tazila opposed secular rationalism, but believed that human intelligence and reason allowed Man to understand religious principles; that good and evil are rational categories that could be "established through reason ".

[ 10 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] The movement reached its political height during the Abbasid Caliphate during the " mihna ", an 18-year period (833–851 CE) of religious persecution instituted by the Abbasid caliph al-Ma'mun where Sunni scholars [ 17 ] were punished, imprisoned, or even killed unless they conformed to Mu'tazila doctrine, until it was reversed by al-Mutawakkil .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The Aghlabids (800–909 CE) also adhered to Mu'tazilism, which they imposed as the state doctrine of Ifriqiya .

[ 20 ] Similarly, the leading elite figures of the Graeco-Arabic translation movement during the reign of the Umayyad caliph of Córdoba al-Hakam II (r. 961–976) were followers of the Mu'tazila.

[ 21 ] Mu'tazilism also flourished to some extent during the rule of the Buyids (934–1062 CE) in Iraq and Persia .

[ 22 ] Today, Mu'tazilism persists mainly in the Maghreb among those who call themselves the Wasiliyah.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Mu'tazilism has also influenced the Quranist movement and the Neo-Mu'tazila literary approach to the interpretation of the Qur'an.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Etymology [ edit ] The name Mu'tazili is derived from the reflexive stem VIII ( iftaʿala ) of the triconsonantal root ع-ز-ل "separate, segregate, retire", as in اعتزل iʿtazala "to separate (oneself); to withdraw from".

[ 28 ] The name is derived from the founder's "withdrawal" from the study circle of Hasan al-Basri over a theological disagreement: Wāṣil ibn ʿAṭā' asked about the legal state of a sinner: is a person who has committed a serious sin a believer or an unbeliever? Hasan answered the person remains a Muslim. Wasil dissented, suggesting that a sinner was neither a believer nor an unbeliever and withdrew from the study circle. Others followed to form a new circle, including ʿAmr ibn ʿUbayd . Hasan's remark, "Wāṣil has withdrawn from us", is said to be the origin of the movement's name.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] The group later referred to themselves as Ahl al-Tawḥīd wa al-ʿAdl ( أهل التوحيد و العدل , "people of monotheism and justice") [ 31 ] and the name Mu'tazili was first used by its opponents.

The verb iʿtazala is also used to designate a neutral party in a dispute (as in "withdrawing" from a dispute between two factions). According to the Encyclopædia Britannica , "The name [Mu'tazila] first appears in early Islāmic history in the dispute over Ali's leadership of the Muslim community after the assassination of Uthman , the third caliph, in 656 CE. Those who would neither condemn nor sanction Ali or his opponents but took a middle position were termed the Muʿtazilah." Carlo Alfonso Nallino argued that the theological Mu'tazilism of Wasil and his successors was merely a continuation of this initial political Mu'tazilism.

[ 32 ] History [ edit ] Origin [ edit ] The Mu'tazili appeared in early Islāmic history in the dispute over Alī 's leadership of the Muslim community after the death of the third caliph, Uthman . Those who would neither condemn nor sanction Ali or his opponents but took a middle position between him and his opponents at the battle of Siffin and the battle of Jamal were termed the Mu'tazila.

[ 32 ] By the 10th century CE the term had also come to refer to an Islamic school of speculative theology (kalām) that flourished in Basra and Baghdad (8th–10th century).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 33 ] According to Sunni sources, Mu'tazili theology originated in the eighth century in Basra (now in Iraq) when Wāṣil ibn ʿAṭā' (died 131 AH/748 AD) left the teaching lessons of Hasan al-Basri after a theological dispute regarding the issue of al-Manzilah bayna al-Manzilatayn ( a position between two positions ).

[ 29 ] Though Mu'tazilis later relied on logic and different aspects of early Islamic philosophy and ancient Greek philosophy . The basics of Islam were their starting point and ultimate reference.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The accusations leveled against them by rival schools of theology that they gave absolute authority to extra-Islamic paradigms reflect more the fierce polemics between various schools of theology than any objective reality. For instance, most Mu'tazilis adopted the doctrine of creation ex nihilo , contrary to certain Muslim philosophers who, with the exception of al-Kindi , believed in the eternity of the world in some form or another.

[ 35 ] Mu'tazili theology faced implacable opposition from Hanbali and Zahiri traditionalists, on the one hand, and from the Ash'ari school (founded by a former Mu'tazili, Abu al Hasan al-Ash'ari) and Maturidi theologians on the other.

[ 36 ] Ahl al-kalām [ edit ] Scholar Daniel W. Brown describes the Mu'tazila as "the later ahl al-kalām ", suggesting the ahl al-kalām were forerunners of the Mu'tazili.

[ 37 ] The ahl al-kalām are remembered in Islamic history as opponents of Al-Shafi‘i and his principle that the final authority of Islam was the hadith of Muhammad , [ 38 ] so that even the Qur'an was "to be interpreted in the light of [the hadith], and not vice versa." [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Historical development [ edit ] Abu al-Hudhayl al-'Allaf (died 235 AH/849 AD), who lived a few generations after Wāṣil ibn ʿAtāʾ (واصل بن عطاء) and ʿAmr ibn ʿUbayd , is considered the theologian who systematized and formalized Mu'tazilism in Basra.

[ 41 ] Another branch of the school found a home in Baghdad under the direction of Bishr ibn al-Mu'tamir (died 210 AH/825 AD); [ 41 ] the instigators thought it was the Caliph's own scheme: [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] under al-Ma'mun (813–833) "Mu'tazilism became the established faith." Umayyad Caliphs who were known for supporting the Mu'tazila include Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik [ 46 ] and Yazid III .

The Mu'tazilites maintained man's creation [ 47 ] of free will , as did the Qadarites of the later Umayyad period. The Mu'tazilites also maintained that justice and reason must form the foundation of the action God takes toward men. Both of these doctrines were repudiated by the later orthodox school of the Ashʿarites .

[ 48 ] Mihna [ edit ] The persecution campaign, nonetheless, cost them their theology and generally, the sympathy of the Muslim masses in the Abbasid state. As the number of Muslims increased throughout the Abbasid Caliphate , and in reaction to the excesses of this newly imposed rationalism, theologians began to lose ground. The problem was exacerbated by the Mihna , the inquisition launched under the Abbasid Caliph al-Ma'mun (died 218 AH/833 AD).

The movement reached its political height during the Mihna, the period of religious persecution instituted by the 'Abbasid Caliph al-Ma'mun in AD 833 in which religious scholars (such as Sunnis and Shias ) were punished, imprisoned, or even killed unless they conformed to Mu'tazila doctrine. The policy lasted for 18 years (833–851 CE) as it continued through the reigns of al-Ma'mun's immediate successors, al-Mu'tasim and al-Wathiq , and the first four years of the reign of al-Mutawakkil , who reversed the policy in 851.

[ 18 ] [ 49 ] Ahmad ibn Hanbal , the Sunni jurist and founder of the Hanbali school of thought was a victim of al-Ma'mun's Mihna. Due to his rejection of al-Ma'mun's demand to accept and propagate the Mu'tazila creed, ibn Hanbal was imprisoned and tortured by the Abbasid rulers.

[ 50 ] Post-Mihna [ edit ] Under Caliph al-Mutawakkil (847–861), "who sought to reestablish the traditional Muslim's faith" (he intentionally wanted to restore his legitimacy due to the backlash towards Ahmad ibn Hanbal's persecution under previous Caliphs), Mu'tazilite doctrine was repudiated and Mu'tazilite professors were persecuted in the Abbasid Caliphate; Shia Muslims , Christians and Jews were also persecuted.

[ 51 ] The Aghlabids , an Arab dynasty centered in Ifriqiya from 800 to 909, also adhered to Mu'tazilism, which they imposed as the state doctrine of Ifriqiya.

[ 52 ] Similarly, the leading elite figures of the Graeco-Arabic translation movement during the reign of al-Hakam II were followers of the Mu'tazila.

[ 21 ] Mu'tazilism also flourished to some extent during the rule of the Buyids in Iraq and Persia .

[ 53 ] Severe persecution against the Mu'tazilites occurred during the reign of al-Qadir (991–1031), who issued a decree to kill anyone who openly adhered to the Mu'tazilism.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] This trend of persecution continued and became stronger with the emergence of the Seljuk Turk rulers who made Sunni Islam the official state religion, and their support for Sunni madrasa and scholars further excluded Mu'tazilite influence.

[ 56 ] At that time the Mu'tazilism were banned, their books were burned, and their teachings began to be unknown except through the texts of Sunni theologians who attacked them.

[ 57 ] Until at the end of the Islamic Golden Age due to the Mongol Invasion , the Mu'tazilite influence disappeared for a long time from Islamic society .

[ 58 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Part of a series on Aqidah Sunni Six Articles of Iman God Prophets Holy books Angels The Last Judgement Predestination Five Pillars of Islam Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj Schools of theology Ahl al-Hadith Athari 1 Ahl al-Ra'y Ash'ari 2 Maturidi 3 Shi'a Basic Tenets of Faith Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj Khums Jihad Commanding what is just Forbidding what is evil Tawalla Tabarra Theology of the Twelvers 4, 5 Tawhid Adalah Prophecy Imamah Qiyamah Theology of the Ismailis 6 Walayah Tawhid Salah Zakat Sawm Hajj Jihad Theology of the Zaydis Muhakkima Theology of the Ibadis Other variants Jabriyya Jahmiyya Mujassimah Murji Mu'tazila Qadariyya Quraniyya Ahmadiyya Nation of Islam Unaffiliated Including: 1 Hanbali school Zahiri school 2 Maliki school Shafi'i school 3 Hanafi school 4 Ja'fari school ( Usuli Akhbari Shaykhi ) 5 Ghulat ( Alawi Alevi Bektashi Qizilbash Ishiki ) 6 Nizari ( Khoja Satpanth ) Mustali ( Dawoodi Bohra Sulaymani Bohra Alavi Bohra Hebtiahs Bohra Atba-i-Malak Bohra Qutbi Bohra ) Islam portal v t e The Five Principles [ edit ] According to a "leading Mu'tazilite authority" of the end of the ninth century (al-Khayyat), [ 59 ] and "clearly enunciated for the first time by Abu al-Hudhayl ", [ 2 ] five basic tenets make up the Mu'tazilite creed: monotheism, [ 60 ] justice and unity, [ 60 ] the inevitability of the threats and promises of God (or "the warning and the promise"), [ 60 ] the intermediary position (i.e. Muslims who die without repentance after committing a grave sin are neither mu'mineen (believers), nor kuffar (non-believers), but in an intermediate position known as fasiq ), [ 60 ] the injunction of right, and the prohibition of wrong.

[ 60 ] 1. Monotheism [ edit ] All Muslim schools of theology faced the dilemma of affirming divine transcendence and divine attributes , without falling into anthropomorphism on the one hand or emptying scriptural references to those attributes of all concrete meaning.

[ 61 ] The doctrine of Tawhīd, in the words of the prominent Mu'tazili scholar Chief Justice Qadi Abd al-Jabbar (died 415 AH/1025 AD) [ 62 ] is: the knowledge that God, being unique, has attributes that no creature shares with him. This is explained by the fact that you know that the world has a creator who created it and that: he existed eternally in the past and he cannot perish while we exist after being non-existent and we can perish. And you know that he was and is eternally all-powerful and that impotence is not possible for him. And you know that he is omniscient of the past and present and that ignorance is not possible for him. And you know that he knows everything that was, everything that is, and how things that are not would be if they were. And you know that he is eternally in the past and future living, and that calamities and pain are not possible for him. And you know that he sees visible things, and perceives perceptibles, and that he does not have need of sense organs. And you know that he is eternally past and in future sufficient and it is not possible for him to be in need. And you know that he is not like physical bodies, and that it is not possible for him to get up or down, move about, change, be composite, have a form, limbs and body members. And you know that he is not like the accidents of motion, rest, color, food or smells. And you know that he is One throughout eternity and there is no second beside him, and that everything other than he is contingent, made, dependent, structured, and governed by someone/thing else. Thus, if you know all of that you know the oneness of God.

[ 63 ] 2. Divine justice [ edit ] Facing the problem of existence of evil in the world, the Mu'tazilis pointed at the free will of human beings, so that evil was defined as something that stems from the errors in human acts. God does nothing ultimately evil, and he demands not from any human to perform any evil act. If man's evil acts had been from the will of God, then punishment would have been meaningless, as man performed the will of God no matter what he did. Mu'tazilis did not deny the existence of suffering that goes beyond human abuse and misuse of their free will granted to them by God. In order to explain this type of "apparent" evil, Mu'tazilis relied on the Islamic doctrine of taklif : "God does not order/give the soul of any of his creation, that which is beyond its capacity." [Qur'an 2:286]. In conclusion, it comprised life is an ultimate "fair test" of coherent and rational choices, having a supremely just accountability in one's current state, as well as the hereafter.

[ 64 ] Humans are required to have belief, iman , secure faith and conviction in and about God, and do good works, amal saleh , to have iman reflected in their moral choices, deeds, and relationship with God, fellow humans, and all of the creation in this world. If everyone is healthy and wealthy, then there will be no meaning for the obligations imposed on humans to, for example, be generous, help the needy, and have compassion for the deprived and trivialized. The inequalities in human fortunes and the calamities that befell them are, thus, an integral part of the test of life. Everyone is being tested. The powerful, the rich, and the healthy are required to use all their powers and privileges to help those who suffer and to alleviate their suffering. In the Qiyamah (Judgment Day), they will be questioned about their response to Divine blessings and bounties they enjoyed in their lives. The less fortunate are required to patiently persevere and are promised a compensation for their suffering that, as the Qur'an puts it in 39:10, and as translated by Muhammad Asad , is "beyond all reckoning".

[ 65 ] The test of life is specifically for adults in full possession of their mental faculties. Children may suffer, and are observed to suffer, given the nature of life but they are believed to be completely free from sin and liability. Divine justice is affirmed through the theory of compensation. All sufferers will be compensated. This includes non-believers and, more importantly, children, who are destined to go to Paradise .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The doctrine of ' Adl in the words of ʿAbd al-Jabbar: [ 68 ] It is the knowledge that God is removed from all that is morally wrong ( qabih ) and that all his acts are morally good ( hasana ). This is explained by the fact that you know that all human acts of injustice ( zulm ), transgression ( jawr ), and the like cannot be of his creation ( min khalqihi ). Whoever attributes that to him has ascribed to him injustice and insolence ( safah ) and thus strays from the doctrine of justice. And you know that God does not impose faith upon the unbeliever without giving him the power ( al-qudra ) for it, nor does he impose upon a human what he is unable to do, but he only gives to the unbeliever to choose unbelief on his own part, not on the part of God. And you know that God does not will, desire or want disobedience. Rather, he loathes and despises it and only wills obedience, which he wants and chooses and loves. And you know that he does not punish the children of polytheists ( al- mushrikin ) in Hellfire because of their fathers' sin, for he has said: "Each soul earns but its own due" (Qur'an 6:164); and he does not punish anyone for someone else's sin because that would be morally wrong ( qabih ), and God is far removed from such. And you know that he does not transgress his rule ( hukm ) and that he only causes sickness and illness in order to turn them to advantage. Whoever says otherwise has allowed that God is iniquitous and has imputed insolence to him. And you know that, for their sakes, he does the best for all of his creatures, upon whom he imposes moral and religious obligations ( yukallifuhum ), and that He has indicated to them what he has imposed upon them and clarified the path of truth so that we could pursue it, and he has clarified the path of falsehood ( tariq l-batil ) so that we could avoid it. So, whoever perishes does so only after all this has been made clear. And you know that every benefit we have is from God; as he has said: "And you have no good thing that is not from Allah" (Qur'an 16:53); it either comes to us from him or from elsewhere. Thus, when you know all of this you become knowledgeable about justice from God.

[ 69 ] 3. The Promise and the Threat [ al-wa'd wa l-wa'id ] [ edit ] This comprised questions of the Last day, or in Arabic, the Qiyamah ( Day of Judgment ). According to 'Abd al-Jabbar, [ 70 ] The doctrine of irreversible Divine promises and warnings, is fashioned out the Islamic philosophy of human existence. Humans, (or insan in Arabic) are created with an innate need in their essence to submit themselves to something. Also, it is seen as an innate need of all humans to pursue an inner peace and contentment within the struggles of an imperfect world. Knowledge of God, truth, and choices, in relation to one's innate need of submission is seen in Islam as the promise and recompense of God ( al-thawab ) to those who follow. His warning is looked at as a conscious decision by a human submitting themselves, and choosing a varying principle which he had given a clear warning to. He will not go back on his word, nor can he act contrary to his promise and warning, nor lie in what he reports, in contrast to what the Postponers ( Murjites ) hold.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] 4. The Intermediate Position [ Al-Manzilah bayn al-manzilatayn ] [ edit ] That is, Muslims who commit grave sins and die without repentance are not considered as mu’minīn (believers), nor are they considered kafirs (non-believers), but in an intermediate position between the two, ( fasiq ). The reason behind this is that a mu’min is, by definition, a person who has faith and conviction in and about God, and who has their faith reflected in their deeds and moral choices. Any shortcoming on any of these two fronts makes one, by definition, not a mu’min. On the other hand, one does not become a kafir (i.e. rejecter; non-believer), for this entails, inter alia, denying the Creator—something not necessarily done by a committer of a grave sin. The fate of those who commit grave sins and die without repentance is Hell. Hell is not considered a monolithic state of affairs but as encompassing many degrees to accommodate the wide spectrum of human deeds and choices, and the lack of comprehension associated to The Ultimate Judge (one of the other names in Islam of God.) Consequently, those in the intermediate position, though in Hell, would have a lesser punishment because of their belief and other good deeds. Mu'tazilites adopted this position as a middle ground between Kharijites and Murjites . In the words of ʿAbd al-Jabbar, the doctrine of the intermediate position is [ 73 ] the knowledge that whoever murders, or commits zina , or commits serious sins is a grave sinner ( fasiq ) and not a believer, nor is his case the same that of believers with respect to praise and attributing greatness, since he is to be cursed and disregarded. Nonetheless, he is not an unbeliever who cannot be buried in our Muslim cemetery, or be prayed for, or marry a Muslim. Rather, he has an intermediate position, in contrast to the Seceders ( Kharijites ) who say that he is an unbeliever, or the Murjites who say that he is a believer.

[ 74 ] 5. The enjoining of right and prohibiting of wrong [ edit ] These two tenets, like the "intermediate position", follow logically (according to scholar Majid Fakhry) from the basic Mu'tazilite concepts of divine unity, justice and free will, of which they are the logical conclusion.

[ 59 ] Even though they are accepted by most Muslims , Mu'tazilites give them a specific interpretation in the sense that, even though God enjoins what is right and prohibits what is wrong, the use of reason allows a Muslim in most cases to identify for himself what is right and what is wrong, even without the help of revelation. Only for some acts is the revelation necessary to determine whether a certain act is right or wrong.

[ 75 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Methodology of interpretation [ edit ] Mu'tazila relied on a synthesis between reason and revelation . That is, their rationalism operated in the service of scripture and Islamic theological framework. They, as the majority of Muslim jurist-theologians, validated allegorical readings of scripture whenever necessary. Justice ʿAbd al-Jabbar (935–1025) said in his Sharh al-Usul al-Khamsa (The Explication of the Five Principles): [ 71 ] إن الكلام متى لم يمكن حمله على ظاهره و حقيقته، و هناك مجازان أحدهما أقرب و الآخر أبعد، فإن الواجب حمله على المجاز الأقرب دون الأبعد، لأن المجاز الأبعد من الأقرب كالمجاز مع الحقيقة، و كما لا يجوز فى خطاب الله تعالى أن يحمل على المجاز مع إمكان حمله على الحقيقة، فكذلك لا يحمل على المجاز الأبعد و هناك ما هو أقرب منه (When a text cannot be interpreted according to its truth and apparent meaning, and when (in this case) two metaphoric interpretations are possible, one being proximal and the other being distal; then, in this case, we are obligated to interpret the text according to the proximal metaphoric interpretation and not the distal, for (the relationship between) the distal to the proximal is like unto (the relationship between) the metaphor to the truth, and in the same way that it is not permissible, when dealing with the word of God, to prefer a metaphoric interpretation when a discernment of the truth is possible, it is also not permissible to prefer the distal interpretation over the proximal interpretation) The hermeneutic methodology proceeds as follows: if the literal meaning of an ayah (verse) is consistent with the rest of scripture, the main themes of the Qur'an , the basic tenets of the Islamic creed , and the well-known facts, then interpretation , in the sense of moving away from the literal meaning, is not justified. If a contradiction results from adopting the literal meaning, such as a literal understanding of the "hand" of God that contravenes his transcendence and the Qur'anic mention of his categorical difference from all other things, then an interpretation is warranted. In the above quote, Justice 'Abd al-Jabbar emphatically mentioned that if there are two possible interpretations, both capable of resolving the apparent contradiction created by literal understanding of a verse, then the interpretation closer to the literal meaning should take precedence, for the relationship between the interpretations, close and distant, becomes the same as the literal understanding and the interpretation.

[ 71 ] The first obligation [ edit ] Mu'tazilis believed that the first obligation on humans, specifically adults in full possession of their mental faculties, is to use their intellectual power to ascertain the existence of God, and to become knowledgeable of his attributes. One must wonder about the whole existence, that is, about why something exists rather than nothing. If one realises that there is a being who caused this universe to exist, not reliant on anything else and absolutely free from any type of need, then one realizes that this being is all-wise and morally perfect. If this being is all-wise, then his very act of creation cannot be haphazard or in vain. One must then be motivated to ascertain what this being wants from humans, for one may harm oneself by simply ignoring the whole mystery of existence and, consequently, the plan of the Creator. This paradigm is known in Islamic theology as wujub al-nazar , i.e., the obligation to use one's speculative reasoning to attain ontological truths. About the "first duty," ʿAbd al-Jabbar said it is "speculative reasoning ( al-nazar ) which leads to knowledge of God, because he is not known by the way of necessity ( daruratan ) nor by the senses ( bi l-mushahada ). Thus, he must be known by reflection and speculation." [ 76 ] The difference between Mu'tazilis and other Muslim theologians is that Mu'tazilis consider al-nazar an obligation even if one does not encounter a fellow human being claiming to be a messenger from the Creator, and even if one does not have access to any alleged God-inspired or God-revealed scripture. On the other hand, the obligation of nazar towards other Muslim theologians is realized when encountering prophets or scripture . In this case, it was realized with the sending of the last prophet Muhammad and the last holy book, the Quran . In this way, the obligation to nazar is only carried out by studying the Quran and hadith of the prophet Muhammad, and also using the wisdom of the theologians and philosophers who followed him.

[ 77 ] Reason and revelation [ edit ] Averroes insisted that all natural phenomena followed laws that God created.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] The Mu'tazilis had a nuanced theory regarding reason, Divine revelation, and the relationship between them. They celebrated power of reason and human intellectual power . To them, it is the human intellect that guides a human to know God, his attributes, and the very basics of morality. Once this foundational knowledge is attained and one ascertains the truth of Islam and the Divine origins of the Qur'an, the intellect then interacts with scripture such that both reason and revelation come together to be the main source of guidance and knowledge for Muslims. Harun Nasution in the Mu'tazila and Rational Philosophy, translated in Martin (1997), commented on Mu'tazili extensive use of rationality in the development of their religious views saying: "It is not surprising that opponents of the Mu'tazila often charge the Mu'tazila with the view that humanity does not need revelation, that everything can be known through reason, that there is a conflict between reason and revelation, that they cling to reason and put revelation aside, and even that the Mu'tazila do not believe in revelation. But is it true that the Mu'tazila are of the opinion that everything can be known through reason and therefore that revelation is unnecessary? The writings of the Mu'tazila give exactly the opposite portrait. In their opinion, human reason is not sufficiently powerful to know everything and for this reason humans need revelation in order to reach conclusions concerning what is good and what is bad for them." [ 81 ] The Mu'tazili position on the roles of reason and revelation is well captured by what Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari (died 324 AH/935 AD), the eponym of the Ashʿari school of theology, attributed to the Mu'tazili scholar Ibrahim an-Nazzam (died 231 AH/845 AD) (1969): كل معصية كان يجوز أن يأمر الله سبحانه بها فهي قبيحة للنهي، وكل معصية كان لا يجوز أن يبيحها الله سبحانه فهي قبيحة لنفسها كالجهل به والاعتقاد بخلافه، وكذلك كل ما جاز أن لا يأمر الله سبحانه فهو حسن للأمر به وكل ما لم يجز إلا أن يأمر به فهو حسن لنفسه No sin may be ordered by God as it is wrong and forbidden, and no sin shall be permitted by God, as they are wrong by themselves. To know about it and believe otherwise, and all that God commands is good for the ordered and all that it is not permissible except to order it is good for himself In the above formulation, a problem emerged, which is rendering something obligatory on the Divine being—something that seems to directly conflict with Divine omnipotence. The Mu'tazili argument is predicated on absolute Divine power and self-sufficiency, however. Replying to a hypothetical question as to why God does not do that which is ethically wrong ( la yaf`alu al-qabih ), 'Abd al-Jabbar replied: [ 82 ] Because he knows the immorality of all unethical acts and that he is self-sufficient without them...For one of us who knows the immorality of injustice and lying, if he knows that he is self-sufficient without them and has no need of them, it would be impossible for him to choose them, insofar as he knows of their immorality and his sufficiency without them. Therefore, if God is sufficient without need of any unethical thing it necessarily follows that he would not choose the unethical based on his knowledge of its immorality. Thus every immoral thing that happens in the world must be a human act, for God transcends doing immoral acts. Indeed, God has distanced himself from that with his saying: "But Allah wills no injustice to his servants" (Qur'an 40:31), and his saying: "Verily Allah will not deal unjustly with humankind in anything" ( Qur'an 10:44).

[ 83 ] [ 72 ] The thrust of ʿAbd al-Jabbar's argument is that acting immorally or unwisely stems from need and deficiency. One acts in a repugnant way when one does not know the ugliness of one's deeds, i.e., because of lack of knowledge, or when one knows but one has some need, material, psychological, or otherwise. Since God is absolutely self-sufficient (a result from the cosmological "proof" of his existence), all-knowing, and all-powerful, he is categorically free from any type of need and, consequently, he never does anything that is ridiculous, unwise, ugly, or evil.

[ 72 ] The conflict between Mu'tazilis and Ash'aris concerning this point was a matter of focus. Mu'tazilis focused on divine justice, whereas the Ashʿaris focused on divine omnipotence. Nevertheless, Divine self-restraint in Mu'tazili discourse is part of divine omnipotence, not a negation of it.

[ 33 ] [ 84 ] Validity of hadith [ edit ] During the Abbasid dynasty, the poet, theologian, and jurist, Ibrahim an-Nazzam founded a madhhab called the Nazzamiyya that rejected the authority of Hadiths by Abu Hurayra .

[ 85 ] His famous student, Al-Jahiz , was also critical of those who followed such Hadiths, referring to his Hadithist opponents as al-nabita ("the contemptible").

[ 86 ] According to Racha El Omari, early Mu'tazilites believed that hadith were susceptible to "abuse as a polemical ideological tool"; that the matn (content) of the hadith—not just the isnad —ought to be scrutinized for doctrine and clarity; that for hadith to be valid they ought to be mutawatir , i.e. supported by tawātur or many isnād (chains of oral transmitters), each beginning with a different Companion.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] In writing about mutawatir (multi-isnād Hadith) and ahad (single-isnad hadith, i.e. almost all hadith) and their importance from the legal theoretician's point of view, Wael Hallaq notes the medieval scholar Al-Nawawi (1233–1277) argued that any non- mutawatir hadith is only probable and can not reach the level of certainty that a mutawatir hadith can. However, these mutawir were extremely scarce. Scholars like Ibn al-Salah (died 1245 CE), al-Ansari (died 1707 CE), and Ibn ‘Abd al-Shakur (died 1810 CE) found "no more than eight or nine" hadiths that fell into the mutawatir category.

[ 89 ] Wāṣil ibn ʿAṭāʾ (700–748 CE, by many accounts a founder of the Mu'tazilite school of thought), held that there was evidence for the veracity of a report when it had four independent transmitters. His assumption was that there could be no agreement between all transmitters in fabricating a report. Wāṣil's acceptance of tawātur seems to have been inspired by the juridical notion of witnesses as proof that an event did indeed take place. Hence, the existence of a certain number of witnesses precluded the possibility that they were able to agree on a lie, as opposed to the single report which was witnessed by one person only, its very name meaning the "report of one individual" (khabar al-wāḥid). Abū l-Hudhayl al-ʿAllāf (died 227/841) continued this verification of reports through tawātur, but proposed that the number of witnesses required for veracity be twenty, with the additional requirement that at least one of the transmitters be a believer.

[ 88 ] For Ibrahim an-Nazzam (c. 775 – c. 845), both the single and the mutawātir hadith reports as narrated by Abu Hurayra, the most prolific hadith narrater, could not be trusted to yield knowledge.

[ 90 ] He recounted contradictory ḥadīth from Abu Hurayra and examined their divergent content (matn) to show why they should be rejected: they relied on both faulty human memory and bias, neither of which could be trusted to transmit what is true. Al-Naẓẓām bolstered his strong refutation of the trustworthiness of ḥadīths narrated by Abu Hurayra within the larger claim that his ḥadīths circulated and thrived to support polemical causes of various theological sects and jurists, and that no single transmitter could by himself be held above suspicion of altering the content of a single report. Al-Naẓẓām's skepticism involved far more than excluding the possible verification of a report narrated by Abu Hurayra, be it single or mutawātir. His stance also excluded the trustworthiness of consensus, which proved pivotal to classical Mu'tazilite criteria devised for verifying the single report (see below). Indeed, his shunning of both consensus and tawātur as narrated by Abu Hurayra earned him a special mention for the depth and extent of his skepticism.

[ 91 ] Causality [ edit ] Mu'tazilism prioritizes the principle of causality in answering all causes that occur in the universe and the world . So for Mu'tazilah all events that occur in the universe are not destiny that is solely driven entirely by God, as a rejection of Jabriyya theology. This is correlated with humans, whose deeds will be counted based on their actions and behavior, so humans themselves create their actions and behavior through free will that is formulated and run by the brain and nervous system .

[ 92 ] So in this case Mu'tazilism opposes forms of fatalism , occasionalism , and submission that are often mixed with elements of Islamic religion by other Islamic theological schools. Some elements of the concept of fatalism, occasionalism and submission are adopted by many Islamic theological schools such as Ash'arism and Atharism who are opponents of Mu'tazilite.

[ 93 ] Atomism [ edit ] Mu'tazilite view of the universe is supported by the doctrine of atomism . This is the belief that all things and processes can be reduced to fundamental physical particles and their composition. Mu'tazilite atomism however did not imply determinism. Mu'tazila atomism also basically has several differences with Greek atomism, in this case the Mu'tazilah uses atomism to strengthen the concept of responsibility, causality, divine justice and monotheism within the framework of kalām.

[ 94 ] Abu al-Ḥudhayl al-ʿAllāf asserted that a single atom could aggregate with two or more atoms through the mediation of an accident (taʾlīf) that gives rise to a physical dimension that can be seen and measured. Each atom is essentially homogeneous (there is no intrinsic difference between atoms), but they can differ in quantity and spatial position. The concept of accidents (ḥalq) in Muʿtazilite atomism is understood as entities that are separate from the atoms themselves. That is, when an atom appears to move or undergo a change in quality, it is not due to any internal force within the atom, but rather because of the presence of the accident of “ motion ” (ḥaraka) in the source atom and the accident of “ rest ” (sukūn) in the destination atom at each moment in time. Furthermore, to explain how atoms combine to form cohesive bodies, the Muʿtazilah proposed the concept of the accident taʾlīf (junction), which adheres to a group of atoms and thereby distinguishes between unified entities that are hard to separate (e.g., solid bodies) and those that are easily disassembled (e.g., water). However, there was disagreement among them as to whether this accident adheres to a single atom or to the aggregate of atoms as a whole.

[ 95 ] Another debate concerned the nature of space and void. The Muʿtazilah questioned whether there exists a vacuum between two adjacent atoms. Some schools, such as the Basrian Muʿtazilite, asserted that internal void is necessary to allow atomic motion, since atoms cannot penetrate each other without “ space ” between them. Other views held that a medium such as air (which is also composed of fine atoms) suffices to explain movement without the need for absolute void. In this context, they also debated whether space itself is continuous or distributed like matter: some argued that space must be distributed similarly to atoms, so that an atom cannot occupy the junction point of two other atoms; others accepted the possibility of the continuity of space to explain how “two atoms can be adjacent to another atom” without invoking a void.

[ 96 ] Eschatology [ edit ] One of the "most sharply defined" issues where the Mu'tazila disagreed with "their theological opponents" was whether Paradise and hell ( Jahannam ) had already been created or if their existence was waiting for Judgement Day . The "majority of the Mu'tazila rejected categorically" the idea that God had already created the Garden and the Fire on the grounds that "the physical universe does not allow for their existence yet". They also argued that because the Qur'an described everything in the universe except God being destroyed (the great fanāʾ ) "between the trumpet blasts" before Judgement Day, it would be more sensible to assume that the two abodes of the afterlife would be created after the great fanāʾ.

[ 97 ] A number of ḥadīth promise that viewing that face of God ( wajh Allah ) will be part of the reward of the faithful in paradise. However, the Mu'tazila, aside from their skepticism of ḥadīth, argued that if "God is an immaterial transcendent being", as they believed he was, He was "by definition" not visible.

[ 98 ] Legacy [ edit ] Today, Mu'tazilism persists mainly in the Maghreb among those who call their aqidah the Wasili . Referring to Wasil ibn Ata , the reputed founder of Mu'tazila, the movement primarily uses the mantle of the Mu'tazila as an identity marker.

[ 23 ] [ 99 ] Mu'tazilism has also influenced the Quranist movement and the Neo-Mu'tazila literary approach to the interpretation of the Qur'an.

[ 25 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] The "Ankara School" was characterised by historical criticism and a revivification of Mu'tazilite rationality. The origin of its approach is traced to the 1980s, when Edip Yüksel , invoking critical hadith studies to question the reliability of the sunnah 's transmission, proposed a Quran-only formula.

[ 102 ] The Arab Islamic philosopher Ismail al-Faruqi , widely recognised by his peers as an authority on Islam and comparative religion , was deeply influenced by the Mu'tazila.

[ 103 ] The pan-Islamist revolutionary Jamal al-Din al-Afghani was noted for embracing Mu'tazilite views.

[ 104 ] His student Muhammad Abduh (1849–1905) was one of the key founding figures of Islamic Modernism that contributed to a revival of Mu'tazilite thought in Egypt , although he himself does not seem to have called himself a Mu'tazilite.

[ 105 ] After he was appointed Grand Mufti of Egypt in 1899, he attempted to adapt Islam to the modern times and to introduce changes in the teachings at Al-Azhar University .

[ 106 ] Although his reforms were disputed by traditional Sunni establishment as well as his immediate successors such as Muhammad Rashid Rida (1865–1935 C.E), 'Abduh would become the chief source of inspiration for later modernist and reformist scholars and philosophers [ 107 ] such as Fazlur Rahman (1919–1988), [ 108 ] Farid Esack (born 1959), [ 109 ] and in particular Harun Nasution (1919–1998) [ 110 ] and Nasr Abu Zayd (1943–2010).

[ 111 ] The Association for the Renaissance of Mu'tazilite Islam ( French : Association pour la renaissance de l’Islam mutazilite , ARIM ) was founded in France in February 2017 by Eva Janadin and Faker Korchane.

[ 112 ] In contemporary Salafi jihadism , "Mu'tazilite" is used as an epithet by rival groups hoping to undermine each other's credibility. The North African "Institute for the Faith Brigades" denounced Bin Laden 's "misguided errors" and accused Abu Hafs al Mawritani , a leading figure in Al-Qaeda 's juridical committee, of being a Mu'tazilite.

[ 113 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b " Muʿtazilah Archived 2018-06-21 at the Wayback Machine ", Encyclopaedia Britannica .

^ a b c NEAL ROBINSON (1998).

"Ash'ariyya and Mu'tazila" .

muslimphilosophy.com .

Archived from the original on 2011-11-20 . Retrieved 2012-11-05 .

^ "Different views on human freedom – Mu'tazilites and Asharites – Authority in Islam – GCSE Religious Studies Revision – OCR" .

BBC Bitesize .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-21 . Retrieved 2021-06-19 .

^ Ellwood, Robert S.; McGraw, Barbara A. (30 September 2022).

Many Peoples, Many Faiths: Women and Men in the World Religions . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780429844584 .

^ Fakhry, Majid (1983).

A History of Islamic Philosophy (second ed.). New York: Columbia University Press. p. 46.

Almost all authorities agree that the speculation of the Muʿtazilah centers around the two crucial concepts of divine justice and unity, of which they claim to be the exclusive, genuine exponents.

^ Campanini, Massimo (2012).

"The Mu'tazila in Islamic History and Thought" .

Religion Compass .

6 : 41– 50.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8171.2011.00273.x .

Archived from the original on 2021-07-19 . Retrieved 2021-01-09 .

^ Abdullah Saeed.

The Qur'an: an introduction . 2008, page 203 ^ a b Kadri, Sadakat (2012).

Heaven on Earth: A Journey Through Shari'a Law from the Deserts of Ancient Arabia to the Streets of the Modern Muslim World . macmillan. p. 77.

ISBN 9780099523277 .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-25 . Retrieved 2015-09-16 .

^ Watt, W. Montgomery (1985).

Islamic philosophy and theology : an extended survey . Edinburgh.

ISBN 0-85224-487-8 .

OCLC 13360530 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Fakhry, Majid (1983).

A History of Islamic Philosophy (second ed.). New York: Columbia University Press. p. 47.

The early Muslim theologians had naturally been unanimous in denying that God could be unjust, but the problem of reconciling the justice of God and the glaring reality of evil in the world does not appear to have disturbed them particularly. And it was precisely this problem that became, from Wasil's time on the crucial issue with which the Muʿtazilah and their adversaries grappled.... [According to the Muʿtazila,] good and evil are not conventional or arbitrary concepts whose validity is rooted in the dictates of God, as the Traditionists and later the Ashʿarites held, but are rational categories which can be established through unaided reason ^ Al-Shahrastani, al-Milal , p.31 f ^ Al-Baghdadi, Usul al Din , pp.150f ^ Al-Baghdadi, A.Q., Usul al Din, Istanbul, 1928, pp.26f ^ Al-Shahrastani, M., al-Milal wa'l-Nihal , London, 1892, p.31 ^ al-Ash'ari, Maqalat , p.356 ^ Oussama Arabi.

Studies in Modern Islamic Law and Jurisprudence . page 27–28 ^ "The Baghdad Manifesto (402 AH / 1011 CE) - A Re-Examination of Fatimid-Abbasid Rivalry" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-02-26.

^ a b Muhammad Qasim Zaman (1997).

Religion and Politics Under the Early ?Abbasids: The Emergence of the Proto-Sunni Elite . BRILL. pp.

106– 112.

ISBN 978-90-04-10678-9 .

Archived from the original on 2019-12-17 . Retrieved 2019-05-03 .

^ [1] Archived 2021-06-14 at the Wayback Machine (PDF) ^ Abun-Nasr, Jamil (1987).

A history of the Maghrib in the Islamic period . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 57.

ISBN 0521337674 .

^ a b Julio Samsó; Maribel Fierro (23 October 2019).

"&pg=PR27 The Formation of al-Andalus, Part 2: Language, Religion, Culture and the Sciences . Taylor & Francis. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-351-88957-5 .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2021 . Retrieved 14 October 2021 .

^ "The People of Monotheism and Justice: Muʿtazilism in Islam and Judaism" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-08-30 . Retrieved 2020-10-29 .

^ a b Byrd, Anthony Robert (27 November 2007).

A Euro-American 'Ulama? Mu 'tazilism, (Post)Modernity, and Minority Islam .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 4 June 2020 .

^ Van Ess, Joseph (2005). Jones, Lindsay (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion . Vol. 9 (2nd ed.). Detroit: Macmillian Reference USA. p. 6322.

^ a b Jafarli, D. "The rise of the quranist movement in Egypt (19th to 20th ctnturies): a historical approach." Гілея: науковий вісник 126 (2017): 181-185.

^ Kersten, Carool (17 June 2019).

Contemporary Thought in the Muslim World: Trends, Themes, and Issues - Carool Kersten - Google Books . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-00893-2 . Retrieved 2025-06-28 .

^ Bihishtī, Nargis (January 2021).

"The Similarities and Differences Between Mu'tazila and Neo-Mu'tazila Literary Approaches to the Qur'ān" .

Classical and Contemporary Islamic Studies .

3 (1): 85– 97.

^ For example, Quran 18:16, 19:48 and 4:90). According to Sarah Siroumsa, "The verb i'tazala means "to withdraw", and in its most common use, as given in the dictionaries and attested in Hadith literature, it denotes some sort of abstinence from sexual activity, from worldly pleasures, or, more generally, from sin.

Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-'Arab, s.v oy.':/ : wensirck, Concordance a indices de la tradition musulmatle, vol Iv, p. 11)7. 'Amr taught his followers to be "the party which abstains" (i.e., from evil: al-firqa al-muʿtazila ), asceticism was their most striking characteristic. They were given the name "Mu'tazila" in reference to their pious asceticism, and they were content with this name," http://pluto.huji.ac.il/~stroums/files/MuTazila_Reconsidered.pdf Archived 2011-06-10 at the Wayback Machine [ clarification needed ] ^ a b Dhanani, Alnoor (1994).

The physical theory of Kalām : atoms, space, and void in Basrian Muʻtazilī cosmology . Leiden: Brill. p.

7 .

ISBN 978-9004098312 .

^ Martin 1997 , p. ?.

^ Damayanty, Putry (2023-09-01).

"Mengenal 7 Aliran dengan Pandangan Berbeda dalam Islam" .

liputan6.com (in Indonesian) . Retrieved 2024-03-26 .

^ a b Muʿtazilah Archived 2010-02-02 at the Wayback Machine at the Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Accessed 13 March 2014. Some of the Companions of Muhammad such as Sa`d ibn Abi Waqqas and Abdullah ibn Umar were neutral in the dispute between ʿAlī and his opponents ( Muawiyah I ).

Encyclopaedia of Islam s.v. "Mu'tazila" Archived 2010-04-25 at the Wayback Machine , Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands (1999):
"It is an explanation of this kind which today, in particular as a result of the studies undertaken by Nallino ("Sull'origine del nome dei Mu'taziliti", in RSO , vii [1916]), is generally accepted: i'tizal would designate a position of neutrality in the face of opposing factions. Nallino drew support for the argument from the fact that at the time of the first civil war, some of the Companions ('Abd Allah b. 'Umar, Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, etc.), who had chosen to side neither with ʿAli nor with his adversaries, were for that reason called muʿtazila. He even drew the conclusion that the theological Mu'tazilism of Wasil and his successors was merely a continuation of this initial political Mu'tazilism; in reality, there does not seem to have been the least connection between one and the other. But, in its principle, this explanation is probably valid." ^ a b "Different views on human freedom – Mu'tazilites and Asharites – Authority in Islam – GCSE Religious Studies Revision – OCR" .

BBC Bitesize .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-21 . Retrieved 2021-06-19 .

^ Walzer 1967 .

^ a b Craig 2000 .

^ Campo, Juan Eduardo (2009).

Encyclopedia of Islam . Infobase Publishing. p. 512.

ISBN 978-1-4381-2696-8 .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-14 . Retrieved 2021-10-14 .

^ Brown, Rethinking tradition in modern Islamic thought , 1996 : p.15 ^ Brown, Rethinking tradition in modern Islamic thought , 1996 : p.13-15 ^ J. SCHACHT, An Introduction to Islamic Law (1964), supra note 5, at 47 ^ Forte, David F. (1978).

"Islamic Law; the impact of Joseph Schacht" (PDF) .

Loyola Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review .

1 : 13.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 April 2018 . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ a b Martin 1997 .

^ Nawas 1994 .

^ Nawas 1996 .

^ Cooperson 2005 .

^ Ess 2006 .

^ Schirrmacher, Christine (2020). "Leaving Islam". In Enstedt, Daniel; Larsson, Göran; Mantsinen, Teemu T. (eds.).

Handbook of Leaving Religion (PDF) . Brill. p. 82.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 January 2021 . Retrieved 6 January 2021 .

^ Adamson, Peter. "Al-Kindi and Mu'tazila: Divine Attributes, Creation and Freedom." Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 1 (2003): 45–77.

^ William Thomson, "The Moslem World", in William L. Langer (1948), ed., An Encyclopedia of World History , rev. edition, Boston:  Houghton Mifflin, p.189.

^ [2] Archived 2021-06-14 at the Wayback Machine (PDF) ^ Siddiqi, Muhammad (1993).

Hadith Literature . Oxford: The Islamic Texts Society. p. 47.

ISBN 0-946621-38-1 .

^ William Thomson, "The Moslem World", in William L. Langer (1948), ed., An Encyclopedia of World History , rev. edition, Boston:  Houghton Mifflin, p. 189.

^ Abun-Nasr, Jamil M. (1987-08-20).

A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-33767-0 .

^ "The People of Monotheism and Justice: Muʿtazilism in Islam and Judaism" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-08-30 . Retrieved 2020-10-29 .

^ Busse, Heribert (2004).

Chalif und Grosskönig: die Buyiden im Irak (945-1055) (Thesis). Würzburg: Ergon Verlag Würzburg in Kommission.

ISBN 9783899130058 .

^ Donzel, Emeri J. van, ed. (1997).

The encyclopaedia of Islam. 4: Iran - Kha / ed. by E. van Donzel (3. impr ed.). Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-05745-6 .

^ Arnaldez, Roger (2005), Le Mutazilisme, théologie de la liberté , p. 35 ^ Tritton, A. S. (1950).

"Introduction à la Théologie Musulmane; essai de théologie comparée. By Louis Gardet and M.-M. Anawati. (Etudes de Philosophie Médiévale, XXXVII.) pp. 543. Paris, 1948" .

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society .

82 ( 1– 2): 83– 85.

doi : 10.1017/s0035869x00103521 .

ISSN 1356-1863 .

^ Crone, Patricia (2022).

Medieval Islamic Political Thought . The New Edinburgh Islamic Surveys NEIS. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7486-4650-0 .

^ a b Fakhry, Majid (1983).

A History of Islamic Philosophy (second ed.). New York: Columbia University Press. p. 46.

Thus according to a leading Mu'talite authority of the end of the ninth century, five basic tenets make up the strict Mu'tazilite creed: monotheism, justice and unity, the inevitability of the threats and promises of God, the intermediary position, the injunction of right and the prohibition of wrong.

^ a b c d e Al-Khayyat, A.H., Kitab al-Intisar , Beirut, 1957, p.93 ^ Jackson 2005 .

^ "Willful Understanding: Avicenna's Philosophy of Action and Theory of the Will" .

Archived from the original on 2021-08-17 . Retrieved 2021-03-25 .

^ Martin 1997 , p. 92.

^ Madelung, Wilferd (1992).

"Studies in Medieval Muslim Thought and History" .

New Editions from 2016 on by Routledge, Oxon and New York . Ashgate Publishing.

doi : 10.4324/9781003221883 .

ISBN 978-1-003-22188-3 .

^ "Message Of Quran By Muhammad Asad 039 – WikiMir" . 2010-09-26. Archived from the original on 2010-09-26 . Retrieved 2021-02-04 .

^ Akyol, Mustafa (October 27, 2022).

"An Early Islamic Debate on Faith and Reason Is Worth Examining" .

www.cato.org . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

^ Aytekin, Arif (2022-06-30).

"The Question Regarding the Children of Nonbelievers in Islam" .

ATEBE (7): 129– 147.

ISSN 2757-5616 .

^ Martin 1997 , p. 58.

^ Martin 1997 , p. 93.

^ Martin 1997 , p. 65-6.

^ a b c al-Asadābādī, ʻAbd al-Jabbār ibn Aḥmad (1965).

Sharḥ al-Uṣūl al-Khamsah (in Arabic). Maktabat Wahbah.

^ a b c Abd al-Jabbār, Al-Qāḍī.

"Al-mughnī fī abwāb al-tawḥīd wa-l-ʿadl" .

doi : 10.2143/MID.27.0.2036195 . Retrieved 2024-12-15 .

^ Martin 1997 , p. 82, 106.

^ Mutahhari, Murtadha (2013-03-12).

"Mu'tazilah | An Introduction to Ilm al-Kalam" .

al-Islam.org . Retrieved 2024-12-15 .

^ "Ash'ariyya and Mu'tazila - Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.rep.routledge.com . Archived from the original on 2024-08-03 . Retrieved 2024-12-15 .

^ Martin 1997 , p. 90.

^ Kazanç, Fethi Kerim (2018-07-31).

"An Overview of Knowledge-Value Relationship in Mu'tazilite Ethical Theory" .

DergiPark .

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.1488648 .

^ Kadri, Sadakat (2012).

Heaven on Earth: A Journey Through Shari'a Law from the Deserts of Ancient Arabia ...

macmillan. pp.

118– 9.

ISBN 9780099523277 .

Archived from the original on 2020-12-27 . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ For al-Ghazali's argument see The Incoherence of the Philosophers . Translated by Michael E. Marmura. 2nd ed, Provo Utah, 2000, pp.116–7.

^ For Ibn Rushd's response, see Khalid, Muhammad A. ed.

Medieval Islamic Philosophical Writings , Cambridge UK, 2005, p.162) ^ Martin 1997 , p. 187.

^ Martin 1997 , p. 96.

^ Vasalou, Sophia (2008).

Moral Agents and Their Deserts: The Character of Mu'tazilite Ethics . Princeton University Press.

^ "Ash'ariyya and Mu'tazila - Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.rep.routledge.com . Archived from the original on 2024-08-03 . Retrieved 2024-12-15 .

^ Abdul-Raof, Hussein (2012).

Theological Approaches to Quranic Exegesis: A Practical Comparative-Contrastive Analysis . London: Routledge. pp.

33– 34.

ISBN 978-0-41544-958-8 .

^ Zaman, Muhammad Qasim (1997).

Religion and Politics Under the Early 'Abbasids: The Emergence of the Proto-Sunni Elite .

Leiden : E.J. Brill . p. 55.

ISBN 978-9-00410-678-9 .

^ see: Ḍirār b. ʿAmr (died 728/815) In his al-Taḥrīsh wa-l-irjāʾ ^ a b Ghani, Usman (2015).

"3. Concept of Sunna in Mu'tazilite Thought." . In Duderija, Adis (ed.).

The Sunna and its Status in Islamic Law: The Search for a Sound Hadith . Springer. p. 65.

ISBN 9781137369925 .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2021 . Retrieved 29 March 2018 .

^ Hallaq, Wael (1999).

"The Authenticity of Prophetic Ḥadîth: A Pseudo-Problem" (PDF) .

Studia Islamica .

89 (89): 75– 90.

doi : 10.2307/1596086 .

JSTOR 1596086 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2016 . Retrieved 30 March 2018 .

^ "Abu Hurayra' a Narrator of Hadith Revisited: An Examination into the Dichotomous Representations of an Important Figure in Hadith with special reference to Classical Islamic modes of criticism" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-11-09 . Retrieved 2020-12-12 .

^ Racha El-Omari, "Accommodation and Resistance: Classical Muʿtazilites on Ḥadīth" in Journal of Near Eastern Studies , Vol. 71, No. 2 (October 2012), pp. 234–235 ^ Seyithan, C. A. N. (2021).

"An Anatomic and Physiologic Analysis of the Discussions on the Locus of Human Power Among the Schools of Kalām" .

Kader .

19 (2): 631– 644.

doi : 10.18317/kaderdergi.971440 .

^ Martin, Richard C.; Woodward, Mark; Atmaja, Dwi S. (October 1997).

Defenders of Reason in Islam: Mu'tazililism from Medieval School to Modern Symbol . Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 978-1-85168-147-1 .

^ Dhanani, Alnoor (1993-01-01), "Background: Physical Theory in Kalām" , The Physical Theory of Kalām , Brill, pp.

1– 14, ISBN 978-90-04-44484-3 , retrieved 2025-06-02 ^ Sabra, Abdelhamid I. (2009-01-01).

"The Simple Ontology of Kalām Atomism: An Outline" .

Early Science and Medicine .

14 ( 1– 3): 68– 78.

doi : 10.1163/157338209X425506 .

ISSN 1573-3823 .

^ Dhanani, Alnoor (1994).

The Physical Theory of Kalām: Atoms, Space, and Void in Basrian Muʻtazilī Cosmology . E.J. Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-09831-2 .

^ Smith & Haddad, Islamic Understanding , 1981 : p.92 ^ Smith & Haddad, Islamic Understanding , 1981 : p.95 ^ Van Ess, Joseph (2005). Jones, Lindsay (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion . Vol. 9 (2nd ed.). Detroit: Macmillian Reference USA. p. 6322.

^ Kersten, Carool (17 June 2019).

Contemporary Thought in the Muslim World: Trends, Themes, and Issues - Carool Kersten - Google Books . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-00893-2 . Retrieved 2025-06-28 .

^ Bihishtī, Nargis (January 2021).

"The Similarities and Differences Between Mu'tazila and Neo-Mu'tazila Literary Approaches to the Qur'ān" .

Classical and Contemporary Islamic Studies .

3 (1): 85– 97.

^ "Contemporary Thought in the Muslim World: Trends, Themes, and Issues - Carool Kersten - Google Books" .

books.google.co.uk . Retrieved 2025-06-28 .

^ "Christian muslim dialogue Karl Rahner and Ismail Al-faruqi on universal salvation" .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-14 . Retrieved 2020-12-13 .

^ "Chapter 74: Jamal Al-Din Al-Afghani" .

www.al-islam.org . September 3, 2015.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved March 11, 2021 .

^ H. Al-Rahim, Ahmed (January 2006). "Islam and Liberty".

Journal of Democracy .

17 (1): 166– 169.

doi : 10.1353/jod.2006.0002 .

S2CID 154412966 .

^ Kerr, Malcolm H. (2010). Hoiberg, Dale H. (ed.).

'Abduh Muhammad (15 ed.). Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. p.

20–21 .

ISBN 978-1-59339-837-8 .

^ Benzine, Rachid (2008).

Les Nouveaux Penseurs de l'Islam . Albin Michel.

ISBN 978-2-226-29040-3 .

^ Esposito, John (1995).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195148039 .

^ Esack, Farid (1999).

On Being a Muslim: Finding a Religious Path in the World Today . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 1-85168-146-9 .

^ Martin, Richard C.; Woodward, Mark R.; Atmaja, Dwi S. (1997).

Defenders of Reason in Islam: Muʿtazilism from Medieval School to Modern Symbol . Oxford: Oneworld. p.

164 .

ISBN 9781851681471 .

^ Abu Zayd, Nasr (1998).

Rationalism in Exegesis: A Study of the Problem of Metaphor in the Writing of the Mutazilites (4 ed.). Beirut and Casablanca.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Mutazilisme" .

mutazilisme.fr (in French).

Archived from the original on 22 December 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2018 .

^ Lia, Brynjar (2011). "Jihadis divided between strategists and doctrinarians". In Moghadam, Assaf; Fishman, Brian (eds.).

Fault Lines in Global Jihad: Organizational, Strategic, and Ideological Fissures . Hoboken: Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-203-81492-5 .

OCLC 797919202 .

Bibliography [ edit ] 'Abd al-Jabbar (1965). 'Abd al-Karim 'Uthman (ed.).

Sharh al-Usul al-Khamsa (in Arabic). Cairo: Maktabat Wahba.

Brown, Daniel W. (1996).

Rethinking tradition in modern Islamic thought . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521570778 . Retrieved 10 May 2018 .

Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari (1969). M. M. 'Abd al-Hamid (ed.).

Maqalat al-Islamiyin wa Ikhtilaf al-Musallin (in Arabic). Cairo: Maktabat al-Nahdah al-Misriyah.

Cooperson, Michael (2005).

Al-Ma'mun (Makers of the Muslim World) . Oxford, England: Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 1-85168-386-0 .

Craig, W. L. (2000).

The Kalam Cosmological Argument . USA: Wipf & Stock Publishers.

ISBN 1-57910-438-X .

Ess, J. V. (2006).

The Flowering of Muslim Theology . USA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-02208-4 .

Gimaret, D. (1979). "Les Usul al-Hamsa du Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar et leurs commentaires".

Annales Islamologiques .

15 : 47– 96.

doi : 10.3406/anisl.1979.979 .

S2CID 259055137 .

Jackson, S. A. (2002).

On the Boundaries of Theological Tolerance in Islam: Abu Hamid al-Ghazali's Faysal al-Tafriqa . Studies in Islamic Philosophy, V.1. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-579791-4 .

Jackson, S. A. (2005).

Islam and the Blackamerican: Looking Toward the Third Resurrection . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-518081-X .

Martin, R. C.; M. R. Woodward; D. S. Atmaja (1997).

Defenders of Reason in Islam: Mu'tazilism from Medieval School to Modern Symbol . Oxford, England: Oneworld Publications. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1851681471 . Retrieved 28 September 2015 .

Nawas, J. A. (1994). "A Rexamination of Three Current Explanations for al-Ma'mun's Introduction of the Mihna".

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

26 (4): 615– 629.

doi : 10.1017/S0020743800061134 .

S2CID 159973328 .

Nawas, J. A. (1996). "The Mihna of 218 A.H./833 A. D. Revisited: An Empirical Study".

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

116 (4): 698– 708.

doi : 10.2307/605440 .

JSTOR 605440 .

Walzer, R. (1967). "Early Islamic Philosophy". In A. H. Armstrong (ed.).

The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy . UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-04054-X .

Aqeedah 11, An Exposition of Some Schools, Movements and Sects of Islam . West Coast Demarara, Guyana: Guyana Islamic Institute . Retrieved 16 September 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Mu'tazila: The use of reason in Islamic theology Association pour la renaissance de l'Islam mutazilite (ARIM) v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism ( al-Ash'ari ) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Said Nursî Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit ( Hanafiyah ) Malik ibn Anas ( Maliki ) Al-Shafi'i ( Shafi‘i ) Maturidism ( Al-Maturidi ) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Zakariyya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al- |Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al- Juzjanī al- Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram ( Karramiyya ) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad- Dimashqī an- Nabati al-Qībtī ( Murjī - Qadariyah ) Mu'tazila ( Wasil ibn 'Ata' ) Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Twelver Shi'ism Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali al-Sajjad Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Wilayat al-faqih Isma'ili Shi'ism Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Zaydi Shi'ism Abu'l-Jarud al-Hamdani Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd Al-Qasim al-Rassi Al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya Al-Mansur al-Qasim Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Sunni Islam Ahl al-Hadith ( Atharism ) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y ( Ilm al-Kalam ) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudiyya Batriyya Imamate Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima ( Arbitration ) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al- Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al- Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah ( Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah ) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al- Fārisī ad- Dimashqī Qalandariyya Barak Baba Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah ( Ma'bad al-Juhani ) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Galibi Order Muʿtazila ( Rationalism ) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad 's doctrine Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Tariqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Ahmad al-Rifa'i – Rifa`i Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence : Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mu%27tazilism&oldid=1303218864 " Categories : Mu'tazilism Islamic philosophical schools Abbasid Caliphate Rationalism Islamic branches Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2015 CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 18:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mu'tazilism 49 languages Add topic

