Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Term usage Toggle Term usage subsection 1.1 Early usage 1.2 Isaiah Berlin 1.3 Darrin McMahon 1.4 Graeme Garrard 1.5 James Schmidt 2 The French Revolution 3 Romanticism 4 Totalitarianism and Fascism Toggle Totalitarianism and Fascism subsection 4.1 Totalitarianism as a product of the Enlightenment 4.2 Nazism and Fascism as products of the Counter-Enlightenment 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Counter-Enlightenment 16 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Nederlands پښتو Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intellectual stance against mainstream attitudes of the 18th-century Enlightenment Not to be confused with Dark Enlightenment .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Counter-Enlightenment" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Divine Justice smites Jean-Baptiste Pigalle 's statue of Voltaire . Anonymous, 1773 The Counter-Enlightenment refers to a loose collection of intellectual stances that arose during the European Enlightenment in opposition to its mainstream attitudes and ideals. The Counter-Enlightenment is generally seen to have continued from the 18th century into the early 19th century, especially with the rise of Romanticism . Its thinkers did not necessarily agree to a set of counter-doctrines but instead each challenged specific elements of Enlightenment thinking, such as the belief in progress , the rationality of all humans, liberal democracy , and the increasing secularisation of European society.

Scholars differ on who is to be included among the major figures of the Counter-Enlightenment. In Italy, Giambattista Vico criticised the spread of reductionism and the Cartesian method , which he saw as unimaginative and stifling creative thinking .

[ 1 ] Decades later, Joseph de Maistre in Sardinia and Edmund Burke in Britain both criticised the anti-religious ideas of the Enlightenment for leading to the Reign of Terror and a totalitarian police state following the French Revolution . The ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Johann Georg Hamann were also significant to the rise of the Counter-Enlightenment with French and German Romanticism respectively.

In the late 20th century, the concept of the Counter-Enlightenment was popularised by pro-Enlightenment historian Isaiah Berlin [ 2 ] as a tradition of relativist , anti-rationalist , vitalist , and organic thinkers stemming largely from Hamann and subsequent German Romantics.

[ 3 ] While Berlin is largely credited with having refined and promoted the concept, the first known use of the term in English occurred in 1949 and there were several earlier uses of it across other European languages, [ 4 ] including by German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche .

Term usage [ edit ] Joseph-Marie, Comte de Maistre was one of the more prominent altar-and-throne counter-revolutionaries who vehemently opposed Enlightenment ideas.

Early usage [ edit ] Despite criticism of the Enlightenment being a widely discussed topic in twentieth- and twenty-first century thought, the term "Counter-Enlightenment" was slow to enter general usage. It was first mentioned briefly in English in William Barrett 's 1949 article "Art, Aristocracy and Reason" in Partisan Review .

He used the term again in his 1958 book on existentialism, Irrational Man; however, his comment on Enlightenment criticism was very limited.

[ 2 ] In Germany, the expression "Gegen-Aufklärung" has a longer history. It was probably coined by Friedrich Nietzsche in "Nachgelassene Fragmente" in 1877.

[ 5 ] Lewis White Beck used this term in his Early German Philosophy (1969), a book about Counter-Enlightenment in Germany. Beck claims that there is a counter-movement arising in Germany in reaction to Frederick II 's secular authoritarian state. On the other hand, Johann Georg Hamann and his fellow philosophers [ who?

] believe that a more organic conception of social and political life, a more vitalistic view of nature, and an appreciation for beauty and the spiritual life of man have been neglected by the eighteenth century.

[ 2 ] Isaiah Berlin [ edit ] Isaiah Berlin established this term's place in the history of ideas . He used it to refer to a movement that arose primarily in late 18th- and early 19th-century Germany against the rationalism , universalism and empiricism that are commonly associated with the Enlightenment. Berlin's essay "The Counter-Enlightenment" was first published in 1973, and later reprinted in a collection of his works, Against the Current , in 1981.

[ 6 ] The term has been more widely used since.

Isaiah Berlin traces the Counter-Enlightenment back to J. G. Hamann (shown).

Berlin argues that, while there were opponents of the Enlightenment outside of Germany (e.g.

Joseph de Maistre ) and before the 1770s (e.g.

Giambattista Vico ), Counter-Enlightenment thought did not take hold until the Germans "rebelled against the dead hand of France in the realms of culture, art and philosophy, and avenged themselves by launching the great counter-attack against the Enlightenment." This German reaction to the imperialistic universalism of the French Enlightenment and Revolution, which had been forced on them first by the francophile Frederick II of Prussia , then by the armies of Revolutionary France and finally by Napoleon , was crucial to the shift of consciousness that occurred in Europe at this time, leading eventually to Romanticism . The consequence of this revolt against the Enlightenment was pluralism . The opponents to the Enlightenment played a more crucial role than its proponents, some of whom were monists , whose political, intellectual and ideological offspring have been terreur and totalitarianism .

Darrin McMahon [ edit ] In his book Enemies of the Enlightenment (2001), historian Darrin McMahon extends the Counter-Enlightenment back to pre-Revolutionary France and down to the level of " Grub Street ". McMahon focuses on the early opponents to the Enlightenment in France, unearthing a long-forgotten " Grub Street " literature in the late 18th and early 19th centuries aimed at the philosophes . He delves into the obscure world of the "low Counter-Enlightenment" that attacked the encyclopédistes and fought to prevent the dissemination of Enlightenment ideas in the second half of the century. Many people from earlier times attacked the Enlightenment for undermining religion and the social and political order. It later became a major theme of conservative criticism of the Enlightenment. After the French Revolution, it appeared to vindicate the warnings of the anti-philosophes in the decades prior to 1789.

Graeme Garrard [ edit ] Rousseau is identified by Graeme Garrard as the originator of the Counter-Enlightenment.

Cardiff University professor Graeme Garrard claims that historian William R. Everdell was the first to situate Rousseau as the "founder of the Counter-Enlightenment" in his 1971 dissertation and in his 1987 book, Christian Apologetics in France, 1730–1790: The Roots of Romantic Religion .

[ 7 ] In his 1996 article, "the Origin of the Counter-Enlightenment: Rousseau and the New Religion of Sincerity", in the American Political Science Review (Vol. 90, No. 2), Arthur M. Melzer corroborates Everdell's view in placing the origin of the Counter-Enlightenment in the religious writings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau , further showing Rousseau as the man who fired the first shot in the war between the Enlightenment and its opponents.

[ 8 ] Graeme Garrard follows Melzer in his "Rousseau's Counter-Enlightenment" (2003). This contradicts Berlin's depiction of Rousseau as a philosophe (albeit an erratic one) who shared the basic beliefs of his Enlightenment contemporaries. But similar to McMahon, Garrard traces the beginning of Counter-Enlightenment thought back to France and prior to the German Sturm und Drang movement of the 1770s. Garrard's book Counter-Enlightenments (2006) broadens the term even further, arguing against Berlin that there was no single "movement" called "The Counter-Enlightenment". Rather, there have been many Counter-Enlightenments, from the middle of the 18th century to the 20th century among critical theorists, postmodernists and feminists. The Enlightenment has opponents on all points of its ideological compass, from the far left to the far right, and all points in between. Each of the Enlightenment's challengers depicted it as they saw it or wanted others to see it, resulting in a vast range of portraits, many of which are not only different but incompatible.

James Schmidt [ edit ] The idea of Counter-Enlightenment has evolved in the following years. The historian James Schmidt questioned the idea of "Enlightenment" and therefore of the existence of a movement opposing it. As the conception of "Enlightenment" has become more complex and difficult to maintain, so has the idea of the "Counter-Enlightenment". Advances in Enlightenment scholarship in the last quarter-century have challenged the stereotypical view of the 18th century as an " Age of Reason ", leading Schmidt to speculate on whether the Enlightenment might not actually be a creation of its opponents, but the other way round. The fact that the term "Enlightenment" was first used in 1894 in English [ citation needed ] to refer to a historical period supports the argument that it was a late construction projected back onto the 18th century.

The French Revolution [ edit ] Political thinker Edmund Burke opposed the French Revolution in his Reflections on the Revolution in France .

By the mid-1790s, the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution fueled a major reaction against the Enlightenment. Many leaders of the French Revolution and their supporters made Voltaire and Rousseau , as well as Marquis de Condorcet 's ideas of reason, progress , anti-clericalism, and emancipation, central themes to their movement. It led to an unavoidable backlash to the Enlightenment as there were people opposed to the revolution. Many counter-revolutionary writers, such as Edmund Burke , Joseph de Maistre and Augustin Barruel , asserted an intrinsic link between the Enlightenment and the Revolution.

[ 2 ] They blamed the Enlightenment for undermining traditional beliefs that sustained the ancien regime . As the Revolution became increasingly bloody, the idea of "Enlightenment" was discredited, too. Hence, the French Revolution and its aftermath have contributed to the development of Counter-Enlightenment thought.

[ citation needed ] Edmund Burke was among the first of the Revolution's opponents to relate the philosophes to the instability in France in the 1790s. His Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) identifies the Enlightenment as the principal cause of the French revolution. In Burke's opinion, the philosophes provided the revolutionary leaders with the theories on which their political schemes were based.

[ 9 ] Augustin Barruel 's Counter-Enlightenment ideas were well developed before the revolution. He worked as an editor for the anti- philosophes literary journal, L'Année Littéraire . Barruel argues in his Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) that the Revolution was the consequence of a conspiracy of philosophes and freemasons.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In Considerations on France (1797), Joseph de Maistre interprets the Revolution as divine punishment for the sins of the Enlightenment. According to him, "the revolutionary storm is an overwhelming force of nature unleashed on Europe by God that mocked human pretensions." [ 2 ] Romanticism [ edit ] Main article: Romanticism In the 1770s, the " Sturm und Drang " movement started in Germany. It questioned some key assumptions and implications of the Aufklärung and the term " Romanticism " was first coined. Many early Romantic writers such as Chateaubriand , Friedrich von Hardenberg (Novalis) and Samuel Taylor Coleridge inherited the Counter-Revolutionary antipathy towards the philosophes . All three directly blamed the philosophes in France and the Aufklärer in Germany for devaluing beauty, spirit and history in favour of a view of man as a soulless machine and a view of the universe as a meaningless, disenchanted void lacking richness and beauty. One particular concern to early Romantic writers was the allegedly anti-religious nature of the Enlightenment since the philosophes and Aufklärer were generally deists , opposed to revealed religion . Some historians, such as Hamann , nevertheless contend that this view of the Enlightenment as an age hostile to religion is common ground between these Romantic writers and many of their conservative Counter-Revolutionary predecessors. However, not many have commented on the Enlightenment, except for Chateaubriand, Novalis, and Coleridge, since the term itself did not exist at the time and most of their contemporaries ignored it.

[ 2 ] The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters , c.

1797 , 21.5 cm × 15 cm. One of the most famous prints of Spaniard Francisco Goya The historian Jacques Barzun argues that Romanticism has its roots in the Enlightenment. It was not anti-rational, but rather balanced rationality against the competing claims of intuition and the sense of justice. This view is expressed in Goya's Sleep of Reason , in which the nightmarish owl offers the dozing social critic of Los Caprichos a piece of drawing chalk. Even the rational critic is inspired by irrational dream-content under the gaze of the sharp-eyed lynx.

[ 12 ] Marshall Brown makes much the same argument as Barzun in Romanticism and Enlightenment , questioning the stark opposition between these two periods.

By the middle of the 19th century, the memory of the French Revolution was fading and so was the influence of Romanticism. In this optimistic age of science and industry, there were few critics of the Enlightenment, and few explicit defenders.

Friedrich Nietzsche is a notable and highly influential exception. After an initial defence of the Enlightenment in his so-called "middle period" (late 1870s to early 1880s), Nietzsche turned vehemently against it.

Totalitarianism and Fascism [ edit ] Totalitarianism as a product of the Enlightenment [ edit ] After World War II , the Enlightenment re-emerged as a key organizing concept in social and political thought and the history of ideas . The Counter-Enlightenment literature blaming the 18th-century Age of Reason for both 18th and 20th-century totalitarianism also resurged. The locus classicus of this view is Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno 's Dialectic of Enlightenment (1947), which traces the degeneration of the general concept of enlightenment from ancient Greece (epitomized by the cunning "bourgeois" hero Odysseus ) to 20th-century fascism .

The authors take "enlightenment" as their target including its 18th-century form – which we now call "The Enlightenment". They claim it is epitomized by the Marquis de Sade . However, there were philosophers rejecting Adorno and Horkheimer's claim that Sade's moral skepticism is actually coherent, or that it reflects Enlightenment thought.

[ 13 ] Nazism and Fascism as products of the Counter-Enlightenment [ edit ] Part of a series on Fascism Principles Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Corporatism Proprietary Corporation Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Economic Social Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social order Spazio vitale State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Ideology Martyrs Movements Mysticism Symbolism Politicians al-Gaylani Arcand Araki Balbo Bandera Bose Böszörmény Bottai Blythe Bucard Ciano Codreanu Darnand Déat Degrelle Déroulède Doriot Engdahl Federzoni Flores Franco Frashëri Goga Hitler Hlinka Hoornaert Ljotić de Man von Marées Monshizadeh Mosley Mussolini Nakano O'Duffy Quisling Pavelić Pavolini Pelley Preto Primo de Rivera Rodzaevsky Saadeh Salgado Sima Starace Starhemberg Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Szálasi Tiso Türkeş Vallat Valois Van Severen Wilson Intellectuals Ahimeir Arthuys Bardèche Béraud Brăileanu Brasillach Céline Chamberlain Chesterton Civinini Cogni Collins Corradini Crainic Croce Cupcea D'Annunzio Dilling Drieu La Rochelle Evola Gentile Giani Gini de Gobineau Herseni Ionescu Kita Krannhals de Lapouge Lewis Malaparte Manuilă Marinetti Maxence Michels Mosley Ojetti Ōkawa Olivetti Orano Panero Panunzio Pirandello Pitt-Rivers Pound Ramos Rebatet Reghini Rosenberg Sadoveanu-Evan Saint-Loup Savarkar Scaligero Schmitt Schwarz Soffici Sorel Spirito Streel Thomson Ungaretti Valois Literature Triumph of Death (1894) The Flame (1900) The Will to Power (1901) Reflections on Violence (1908) Fascio Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista (1914) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " Futurist Manifesto " (1919) Fascist Manifesto (1919) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals (1925) Frederick the Second (1927) My Autobiography (1928) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) The Outlaws (1930) " The Doctrine of Fascism " (1932) Twenty-Six Point Program of the Falange (1934) Man, the Unknown (1935) For My Legionaries (1936) Guide to Kulchur (1938) A Warning to the Hindus (1939) Gilles (1939) Organizations Arrow Cross Party Blackshirts Blueshirts Brazilian Integralist Action British Democratic Party (2013) British National Party British Union of Fascists Stewards Canadian Union of Fascists Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fatherland Front FE de las JONS FET y de las JONS French Popular Party Futurist Political Party IKL Iron Guard Kataeb Party Kokumin Dōmei Lapua Movement Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Christian Party National Fascist Party Nazi Party Gestapo Hitler Youth RAD SA SS National Radical Camp National Social Movement New Party Opera Nazionale Balilla Patriotic People's Movement Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Ratniks Republican Fascist Party Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Revolutionary Union Rexist Party Russian Fascist Party Silver Legion of America Squadrismo School of Fascist Mysticism Slovak People's Party Taisei Yokusankai Tōhōkai UR Group Ustaše Ustaše Youth Verdinaso VFO Vlajka VNV Media Action Ajan Suunta The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt Buna Vestire Critica fascista Fashist Gândirea Gringoire Il Popolo d'Italia Je suis partout La Conquista del Estado Le Pays Réel L'Idea Nazionale Lidel Nash Put' Nástup Neues Volk Nippon Fujin NS-Frauen-Warte Das Schwarze Korps Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter History March on Rome Beer Hall Putsch Gentile Reform Aventine Secession Second Italo-Senussi War Mukden Incident German election of 1932 Enabling Act Austrian Civil War Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Second Italo-Ethiopian War 1935 Revolution Day Zócalo Battle Spanish Civil War Unification Decree Battle of Cable Street Second Sino-Japanese War Marco Polo Bridge Incident Japanese war crimes Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Italian invasion of Albania Pact of Steel Peasant March World War II The Holocaust Downfall in Italy Downfall in Germany Surrender of Japan Nuremberg trials International Military Tribunal for the Far East Variants Albanian Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Clerical Crypto- Croatian socialism Eco- Falangism Francoism French Doriotism Pétainism Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Ibañism Ilminism Irish Islamic Qutbism Khomeinism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Reform bureaucratism Statism Restoration Ultra- Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Strasserism Swedish Neo- Finnish Legionarism Pan-Turkic Rexism Romanian Legionarism National Legionary State Neo- Romanianism/Stelism Russian Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno- Third Position National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Ukrainian Banderism National Shevchenkoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism By continent Asia Europe Bulgaria Netherlands Russia North America Canada United States South America Peru Uruguay Related topics Anti-fascism Axis powers Criticism of fascism Donald Trump and fascism Extremism of the centre F-scale Fascist as an insult Feudal fascism Futurism Glossary of Fascist Italy Lebensphilosophie Mediterraneanism Para-fascism Paramilitary Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Social fascism Politics portal v t e Later, various historians and authors argued that Fascism was a product of the Counter-Enlightenment itself. For example, Ze'ev Sternhell called Fascism "an exacerbated form of the tradition of counter-Enlightenment": with Fascism, "Europe created for the first time a set of political movements and regimes whose project was nothing but the destruction of Enlightenment culture." [ 14 ] Similar opinions were expressed by such historians as Georges Bensoussan and Enzo Traverso , who noted "Counter-Enlightenment tendencies, combined with industrial and technical progress, a state monopoly over violence, and the rationalisation of methods of domination" and "Counter-Enlightenment (Gegenaufklärung) and the cult of modern technology, a synthesis of Teutonic mythologies and biological nationalism" in Nazism, thus recognizing it as grounded on intellectual traditions of counter-Enlightenment, but mixing them with "instrumental reason" which allowed adopting "the methods of industrial production and scientific management were employed" for such irrational goals as racial extermination.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Prior to these historians, various philosophers described Fascism as a "revolt against reason" and a force hostile to scientific objectivity and rational inqury, namely Umberto Eco , Bertrand Russell , Richard Wolin and Jason Stanley .

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Alasdair MacIntyre Aleksandr Dugin Anti-intellectualism Antiscience Augustin Barruel Charles Taylor Chateaubriand Dark Enlightenment (Neo-reactionary movement) Darrin McMahon Dialectic of Enlightenment Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi Panagiotis Kondylis Vincenzo Cuoco Monaldo Leopardi Giacomo Leopardi Graeme Garrard Friedrich Nietzsche Jean-Jacques Lefranc de Pompignan Johann Georg Hamann John N. Gray Joseph de Maistre Martin Heidegger Walter Benjamin Lewis White Beck Leo Strauss Louis de Bonald Carl Schmitt Ernst Jünger Natural philosophy Norbert Elias Novalis Juan Donoso Cortés Søren Kierkegaard Voltaire Thomas Carlyle [ 18 ] [ a ] Julius Evola Jacques Derrida Gilles Deleuze Giorgio Agamben Georges Bataille Pierre Klossowski Charles Maurras Reactionary politics Curtis Yarvin Lebensphilosophie Notes [ edit ] ^ It is difficult to label Carlyle's thought, but his famous concept of Hero-Worship as well as his somewhat critical analysis of the French Revolution links him with the Counter-Enlightenment.

References [ edit ] ^ Bertland, Alexander.

"Giambattista Vico (1668—1744)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ a b c d e f Garrard, Graeme (2006).

Counter-enlightenments : from the eighteenth century to the present . Abingdon [England]: Routledge.

ISBN 0203645669 .

OCLC 62895765 .

^ Aspects noted by Darrin M. McMahon, "The Counter-Enlightenment and the Low-Life of Literature in Pre-Revolutionary France" Past and Present No. 159 (May 1998:77–112) p. 79 note 7.

^ listed by Henry Hardy in the second edition of Isaiah Berlin, Against the Current: Essays in the History of Ideas (Princeton University Press, 2013), p. xxv, note 1.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1877).

Werke: Kristische Gesamtausgabe . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. p. 478.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-09-03 . Retrieved 2013-08-03 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Garrard, Graeme (2003), Rousseau's Counter-Enlightenment: A Republican Critique of the Philosophes , State University of New York Press, To my knowledge, the first explicit identification of Rousseau as "founder of the "Counter-Enlightenment" appears in William Everdell's study of Christian apologetics in eighteenth-century France.

^ Melzer, Arthur M. (1996). "The Origin of the Counter-Enlightenment: Rousseau and the New Religion of Sincerity".

The American Political Science Review .

90 (2): 344– 360.

doi : 10.2307/2082889 .

JSTOR 2082889 .

S2CID 146774142 .

^ Church, Jeffrey (2010). "The Anti-Anti-Enlightenment Thinker".

The Review of Politics .

72 (4). Cambridge University Press: 731– 733.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670510000689 .

^ Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017).

The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6 .

^ Gay, Peter (1995).

The Enlightenment: The Rise of Modern Paganism . Enlightenment an Interpretation. Vol. 1 (revised ed.). New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 0393313026 .

^ Linda Simon, The Sleep of Reason ^ Geoffrey Roche, "Much Sense the Starkest Madness: de Sade’s Moral Scepticism".

Angelaki Volume 15, Issue 1 April 2010, pages 45 – 59.

^ The New Faces of Fascism: Populism and the Far Right . Verso Books. 29 January 2019.

ISBN 978-1-78873-049-5 .

^ European Pack for Visiting Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum: Guidelines for Teachers and Educators . Council of Europe. January 2010.

ISBN 978-92-871-6794-1 .

^ The New Faces of Fascism: Populism and the Far Right . Verso Books. 29 January 2019.

ISBN 978-1-78873-046-4 .

^ Frege and Fascism . Taylor & Francis. 12 December 2024.

ISBN 978-1-040-27116-2 .

^ Young, B. W. (2018). "The Counter-Enlightenments of Thomas Carlyle". In Kerry, Paul E.; Pionke, Albert D.; Dent, Megan (eds.) Thomas Carlyle and the Idea of Influence . Madison and Teaneck, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. ISBN 9781683930662.

Further reading [ edit ] Barzun, Jacques . 1961.

Classic, Romantic, and Modern . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226038520 .

Berlin, Isaiah , "The Counter-Enlightenment" in The Proper Study of Mankind: An Anthology of Essays , ISBN 0-374-52717-2 .

Berlin, Isaiah, Three Critics of the Enlightenment: Vico, Hamann, Herder . ( Henry Hardy , editor). Princeton University Press, 2003 Everdell, William R.

Christian Apologetics in France, 1730–1790: The Roots of Romantic Religion.

Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press, 1987.

Everdell, William R. “Complots, Côteries, Conspirations: L’origine de la ‘thèse Barruel’ dans le roman apologétique” (7/6/89) in L’Image de la Révolution française: Communications présentées lors du Congrès Mondial..., vol III, Paris, 1989. Actes du Congrès mondial, “L’Image de la Révolution francaise!, 6-12 juillet, 1989, Pergamon press, p. 1881-1885 Everdell, William R.

The Evangelical Counter-Enlightenment: From Ecstasy to Fundamentalism in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam in the 18th Century . New York: Springer, 2021.

ISBN 978-3-030-69761-7 Garrard, Graeme, Rousseau's Counter-Enlightenment: A Republican Critique of the Philosophes (2003) ISBN 0-7914-5604-8 Garrard, Graeme, Counter-Enlightenments: From the Eighteenth Century to the Present (2006) ISBN 0-415-18725-7 Garrard, Graeme, "Isaiah Berlin's Counter-Enlightenment" in Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , ed. Joseph Mali and Robert Wokler (2003), ISBN 0-87169-935-4 Garrard, Graeme, "The War Against the Enlightenment", European Journal of Political Theory , 10 (2011): 277–86.

Garrard, Graeme, "Tilting at Counter-Enlightenment Windmills", Eighteenth-Century Studies , 49/ (2015): 77–82.

Humbertclaude, Éric , Récréations de Hultazob . Paris: L'Harmattan 2010, ISBN 978-2-296-12546-9 (sur Melech August Hultazob, médecin-charlatan des Lumières Allemandes assassiné en 1743) Israel, Jonathan , Enlightenment Contested: Philosophy, Modernity, and the Emancipation of Man, 1670-1752 , Oxford University Press, 2006.

ISBN 978-0-19-954152-2 .

Jung, Theo, "Multiple Counter-Enlightenments: The Genealogy of a Polemics from the Eighteenth Century to the Present", in: Martin L. Davies (ed.), Thinking about the Enlightenment: Modernity and Its Ramifications, Milton Park / New York 2016, 209-226 ( PDF ).

Lehner, Ulrich L.

The Catholic Enlightenment (2016) Lehner, Ulrich L.

Women, Enlightenment and Catholicism (2017) Masseau, Didier, Les ennemis des philosophes:. l’antiphilosophie au temps des Lumières , Paris: Albin Michel, 2000.

McMahon, Darrin M.

, Enemies of the Enlightenment: The French Counter-Enlightenment and the Making of Modernity details the reaction to Voltaire and the Enlightenment in European intellectual history from 1750 to 1830.

Norton, Robert E.

"The Myth of the Counter-Enlightenment," Journal of the History of Ideas , 68 (2007): 635–58.

Schmidt, James, What Enlightenment Project?

, Political Theory, 28/6 (2000), pp. 734–57.

Schmidt, James, Inventing the Enlightenment: Anti-Jacobins, British Hegelians and the Oxford English Dictionary , Journal of the History of Ideas, 64/3 (2003), pp. 421–43.

Wolin, Richard , The Seduction of Unreason: The Intellectual Romance with Fascism from Nietzsche to Postmodernism (Princeton University Press) 2004, sets out to trace "the uncanny affinities between the Counter-Enlightenment and postmodernism." External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Counter-Enlightenment .

Isaiah Berlin,"The Counter-Enlightenment" , in Dictionary of the History of Ideas (1973) Darrin M. McMahon, "The counter-Enlightenment and the low-life of literature in pre-Revolutionary France," from Past & Present, May 1998 v t e Joseph de Maistre Works Considerations on France (1796) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) An Examination of the Philosophy of Bacon (1836) Schools Clerical philosophy Conservatism Counter-Enlightenment French royalism Neo-medievalism Neo-ultramontanism Family Baronne Almaury de Maistre (niece) Rodolphe de Maistre (son) Xavier de Maistre (brother) Analysis Scholars Carolina Armenteros Richard Lebrun Larry Siedentop Works The Hedgehog and the Fox (1953) Enemies of the Enlightenment (2001) Joseph de Maistre's Life, Thought, and Influence (2001) The Headless Republic (2005) Les antimodernes (2005) The Reactionary Mind (2011) v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐vcqz6
Cached time: 20250814231715
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.904 seconds
Real time usage: 1.134 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4076/1000000
Revision size: 27737/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 281317/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9905/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 111677/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.526/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16788474/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  819.551      1 -total
 20.33%  166.602      2 Template:Reflist
 18.60%  152.458      5 Template:Navbox
 18.10%  148.341      1 Template:Fascism_sidebar
 17.81%  145.957      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.37%  142.327      1 Template:Age_of_Enlightenment
 17.10%  140.113      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 14.46%  118.527      4 Template:Lang
  9.81%   80.375      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.49%   61.361      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:505760:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814231715 and revision id 1299459797. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Counter-Enlightenment&oldid=1299459797 " Categories : Counter-Enlightenment 19th century in philosophy Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Anti-intellectualism Conservatism Right-wing politics Counter-revolutionaries Criticism of rationalism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 14:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Counter-Enlightenment 16 languages Add topic

