Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Functionality 3 See also 4 References 5 Literature 6 External links Toggle the table of contents BASE (search engine) 6 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic search engine BASE (Bielefeld Academic Search Engine) Logo Aerial view of Bielefeld University with recognizable construction progress at the new main entrance from June 15th, 2022 Type of site Academic Internet search engine Available in Chinese (simplified), German, English, French, Spanish (Castilian), Polish, Greek, Ukrainian Area served Worldwide Owner Bielefeld University Library URL www .base-search .net Commercial No Registration Optional Launched June 24, 2004 ; 21 years ago ( 2004-06-24 ) Current status Active BASE ( Bielefeld Academic Search Engine ) is a multi-disciplinary search engine to scholarly internet resources, created by Bielefeld University Library in Bielefeld , Germany . It is based on free and open-source software such as Apache Solr and VuFind .

[ 1 ] It harvests OAI metadata from institutional repositories and other academic digital libraries that implement the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH), and then normalizes and indexes the data for searching. In addition to OAI metadata , the library indexes selected web sites and local data collections, all of which can be searched via a single search interface.

History [ edit ] BASE was developed at the German university of Bielefeld beginning in 2002. The project's initial goal was to develop a search engine that would provide users access to the university's research resources. Yet as the initiative advanced, the creators came to see the need for a more thorough search engine that might provide users access to academic resources outside of the university.

The initial iteration of BASE was released as a prototype in 2004 and made accessible to the general public for testing. The search engine was created to index and offer access to scholarly materials such journals, institutional repositories, and digital collections as well as scientific publications. The search engine's creators emphasized on ensuring open access to scientific knowledge and made sure that its search results only included materials that were publicly available through the web.

[ 2 ] Over the next few years, BASE continued to grow and develop. The search engine was refined and improved, and it began to attract users from all over the world. In 2007, the project received funding from the German Research Foundation (DFG) to further develop and improve the search engine.

Since then, BASE has become one of the largest and most comprehensive search engines for academic resources. It provides access to scholarly resources in a variety of languages and disciplines, and it has become an important tool for researchers, scholars, and students around the world.

In addition to providing access to scholarly resources, BASE has also been involved in several projects and initiatives aimed at promoting open access and improving scholarly communication. For example, the search engine has been involved in the development of the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH), which is used to facilitate the exchange of metadata between digital repositories.

Overall, BASE has played an important role in the development of open access and the democratization of knowledge. Its commitment to providing free and open access to scholarly resources has made it an important resource for researchers and scholars around the world.

Functionality [ edit ] Users can search bibliographic metadata including abstracts, if available. However, BASE does not currently offer full text search . It contrasts with commercial search engines in multiple ways, including in the types and kinds of resources it searches and the information it offers about the results it finds. Results can be narrowed down using drill down menus ( faceted search ).

Bibliographic data is provided in several formats, and the results may be sorted by multiple fields, such as by author or year of publication.

Paying customers include EBSCO Information Services who integrated BASE into their EBSCO Discovery Service (EDS).

[ 3 ] Non-commercial services can integrate BASE search for free using an API . BASE has become an increasingly important component of open access initiatives concerned with enhancing the visibility of their digital archive collections.

[ 4 ] On 6 October 2016, BASE surpassed the 100 million documents threshold having indexed 100,183,705 documents from 4,695 content sources. As of 2022, it had indexed over 315 million documents from over 10,000 sources.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] List of academic databases and search engines CORE (research service) Open access in Germany References [ edit ] ^ Pieper, Dirk (May 18, 2011).

"BASE Migration" . InetBib. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012 . Retrieved August 27, 2013 .

^ Pieper and Summann, Dirk and Friedrich (October 2006).

"Bielefeld Academic Search Engine (BASE) An end-user oriented institutional repository search service" .

ResearchGate .

^ Price, Gary (December 7, 2015).

"Content from Bielefeld University's BASE Database Now Searchable in EBSCO Discovery Service" . Library Journal INFOdocket . Retrieved July 10, 2017 .

^ Lochman, Martin (March 23, 2017).

"Open Archives Initiative service providers: Enhancing the visibility of research in Malta" .

OpenScience.com . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "BASE - Bielefeld Academic Search Engine | Statistics" .

Literature [ edit ] Lossau, Norbert. 2004. "Search Engine Technology and Digital Libraries: Libraries Need to Discover the Academic Internet," D-Lib Magazine, Volume 10, Number 6, June 2004.

doi:10.1045/june2004-lossau Summann, Friedrich and Norbert Lossau. 2004. "Search Engine Technology and Digital Libraries: Moving from Theory to Practice," D-Lib Magazine, Volume 10, Number 9, September 2004.

doi:10.1045/september2004-lossau External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Open access History Timeline Concepts Gratis versus libre Subscription business model Subscribe to Open Paywall Copyright transfer agreement Academic journal Scientific journal Manuscript Preprint Postprint Article processing charge Predatory publishing Statements Budapest Open Access Initiative Berlin Declaration Bethesda Statement DORA Durham Statement Geneva Declaration NIH Public Access Policy Research Works Act Strategies Self-archiving Open-access mandate Open-access repository Hybrid open-access journal Delayed open-access journal Projects and organizations The Cost of Knowledge Creative Commons Directory of Open Access Books [ ca ; es ] Directory of Open Access Journals Initiative for Open Citations Open Access Scholarly Publishing Association OpenAIRE Open Archives Initiative Open Knowledge Foundation Open Society Foundations Plan S Public Library of Science Public Knowledge Project Registry of Open Access Repositories Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition SciELO Sci-Hub By country Australia Austria Belgium Canada Denmark France Germany Greece Hungary India Republic of Ireland Italy Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Spain Sweden Ukraine Other Access to Knowledge movement Access2Research List of open-access journals Open content Open data Open education Open government Open hardware Open knowledge Open science Open source Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=BASE_(search_engine)&oldid=1306388486 " Categories : Internet search engines Open access (publishing) Bibliographic databases and indexes Scholarly search services Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 13:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents BASE (search engine) 6 languages Add topic

