Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1826 to 1926 1.1.1 From Democratic Group to New Progressive Party 1.1.2 Portuguese Republican Party 1.2 1985 onwards 1.2.1 Social Democratic Party 1.2.2 Social Liberal Movement 1.2.3 Liberal Initiative 1.2.4 Democracia 21 2 Political parties 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Portugal 2 languages العربية Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of liberalism in Portugal Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Since the beginning of liberalism in Portugal in the 19th century, several parties have, by gaining representation in parliament, continued the liberal ideology in contemporary Portuguese politics. But after the initial fervor of the Liberal Revolution of 1820 and the outcome of the Liberal Wars (1828–1834) during the 19th century, liberalism was relegated to a secondary role in Portuguese politics and government and even outlawed for periods of time. The first fully-fledged liberal party (a political party professing classical liberalism including pro-market, business-friendly economic liberalism , small government and individual freedom as core tenets of its ideology) founded as such to have a seat in the Portuguese Parliament since the end of the First Portuguese Republic (1910–1926), was the Liberal Initiative , in 2019.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] 1826 to 1926 [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) From Democratic Group to New Progressive Party [ edit ] 1826: Supporters of the liberal revolution of 1820 establish the Democratic Group ( Grupo Democrata ) 1840: The party is reorganized into the Progress Party ( Partido do Progresso ), founded by João de Saldanha 1849: The New Progressive Party merges with the conservative Regenerator Party ( Partido Regenerador ) 1851: A faction leaves the party and founds the Progressive Historical Party/Party of Historical Progressives (Partido Progressista Histórico/Partido dos Progressistas Históricos) 1862: The Progressive Historical Party is split into the Reformist Party and the Historical Party ( Partido Histórico ) 1876: Both parties reunite and merge into the New Progressive Party ( Novo Partido Progressista ), which eventually develops into a Conservative party 1910: The New Progressive Party dissolves.

Portuguese Republican Party [ edit ] 1872: Revolutionary and radical liberals establish the Portuguese Republican Party ( Partido Republicano Português ) 1891: The Portuguese Republican Party is banned.

1906: It is reestablished.

1910: The newly radicalized party stages a revolution and its leader Joaquim Teófilo Braga becomes Prime Minister of Portugal.

1911: Liberal and moderate factions of the Portuguese Republican Party ( Partido Republicano Português ) form the Republican National Union ( União Nacional Republicano ) which secedes.

1912: The Republican National Union is split and liberals establish the Evolutionist Republican Party ( Partido Republicano Evolucionista ), led by António José de Almeida . The conservative wing in the split continues as the Republican Union. The radical remains of the Portuguese Republican Party rebranded themselves as Democratic Party ( Partido Democrático ).

1919: The Republican Union and the Evolutionist Republican Party merged into the conservative Republican Liberal Party ( Partido Republicano Liberal ) and the liberals form the Popular Portuguese Party ( Partido Português Popular ) 1920: The National Reconstituted Republican Party secedes, leaving the Portuguese Republican Party as an intransigent radical, such as the Jacobine party which is banned in 1926. Liberal elements from the Portuguese Republican Party form the National Reconstituted Republican Party ( Partido Republicano Reconstituente Nacional ) 1922: The Portuguese Republic Party is renamed Radical Party ( Partido Radical ) 1923: The Republican Action Party was merged into the conservative Nationalist Republican Party ( Partido Republicano Nacionalista ), but later that year it is refounded as the Republican Action ( Acção Republicana ) 1925: Left-wing dissidents of the Republican Party/Democratic Party formed the Democratic Leftwing Republican Party ( Partido Republicano Esquerdista Democrático ) and the Reformist Party .

1926: The Republic Action Party is banned.

1985 onwards [ edit ] Social Democratic Party [ edit ] Pedro Passos Coelho , Prime Minister of Portugal from 2011 to 2015.

Francisco Sá Carneiro became a member of the Portuguese National Assembly in 1969 under the Estado Novo dictatorial regime (1933-1974) and, in turn, one of the leaders of the "Liberal Wing" ( Ala Liberal ) of the National Assembly (the Portuguese legislature during the Estado Novo regime) which attempted to work for the gradual transformation of António de Oliveira Salazar's dictatorship into a Western European liberal democracy .

[ 3 ] In May 1974, a month after the Carnation Revolution , Sá Carneiro and others founded the Popular Democratic Party (PPD) the original name of the Social Democratic Party (PSD). The Social Democratic Party was a full right member of the Liberal International , from 1985 until 1996. The party leaned towards economic liberalism since Aníbal Cavaco Silva served as Prime Minister of Portugal from 1985 to 1995 (a period marked by high economic growth in the country) and later as President of Portugal from 2006 to 2016. From June 2011 to November 2015, after a IMF-European Union orchestrated bailout to the insolvent Portuguese Republic has been requested by the incumbent Prime Minister José Sócrates of the Socialist Party on 6 April 2011, Pedro Passos Coelho of the Social Democratic Party served as Prime Minister and his policies and proposals, in accordance with the recommendations made by the European troika to the Portuguese Republic, were regarded by the left as aligned with economic liberalism after decades of left-leaning, labor movement-inspired policies enacted by Portuguese socialist politicians and their political allies [ 4 ] before the ultimate signals of financial collapse of the Republic arose in 2010.

[ 5 ] However, many of Pedro Passos Coelho cabinet's proposals from 2011 to 2015 didn't pass due to the anti-liberal, labor movement -inspired Portuguese law .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Social Liberal Movement [ edit ] 2005: The Social Liberal Movement (Movimento Liberal Social, MLS) is founded as a movement (not a political party). The current president is Miguel Duarte.

Liberal Initiative [ edit ] João Cotrim de Figueiredo , the first ever elected Member of the Portuguese Parliament for the Liberal Initiative .

2017: The Liberal Initiative , a liberal party in the right-liberal European tradition , is founded and becomes a full member of the ALDE European Party. In 2019, its debut year at the Portuguese legislative elections, the party won one seat in the Portuguese Parliament . The party supported its first government coalition, at regional level, after the 2020 Azorean regional election .

[ 8 ] It won 30 seats in municipal councils in its first ever local elections .

[ 9 ] In the 2022 legislative election , the party added seven new seats in the Portuguese Parliament for a total of eight MPs .

Democracia 21 [ edit ] 2018: Democracia 21 (D21) was founded. Sofia Afonso Ferreira became its leader.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] Political parties [ edit ] School Party Leaders Liberalism Liberal Initiative Carlos Guimarães Pinto João Cotrim de Figueiredo Rui Rocha Conservative liberalism Social Democratic Party Pedro Passos Coelho See also [ edit ] Liberal Revolution of 1820 Liberal Wars History of Portugal Politics of Portugal List of political parties in Portugal References [ edit ] ^ a b SAPO.

"Eram desajustados, agora são liberais" .

SAPO 24 (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Porto Editora – Liberalismo em Portugal na Infopédia [em linha]. Porto: Porto Editora. [consult. 2024-02-19 23:20:49]. Disponível em https://www.infopedia.pt/$liberalismo-em-portugal ^ a b "A Ala Liberal e a Revisão Constitucional de 1971" .

www.parlamento.pt (in European Portuguese) . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Ficando para trás, o quarto de século socialista (ECO) https://eco.sapo.pt/opiniao/ficando-para-tras-o-quarto-de-seculo-socialista/ ^ Quem tem medo de Passos Coelho? ( Observador ) https://observador.pt/opiniao/quem-tem-medo-de-passos-coelho/ ^ E vão nove chumbos e meio a Passos Coelho ( Expresso ) https://expresso.pt/politica/e-vao-nove-chumbos-e-meio-a-passos-coelho=f885944 ^ Governo mantém norma que proíbe despedimentos de funcionários públicos admitidos até 2009 ( Público ) https://www.publico.pt/2013/09/04/economia/noticia/governo-mantem-norma-que-proibe-despedimentos-de-funcionarios-publicos-admitidos-ate-2009-1604902 ^ "Iniciativa Liberal anuncia acordo com PSD para viabilização de governo nos Açores" .

TSF Rádio Notícias . November 7, 2020.

^ "Resultados Autárquicas 2021. Veja quem ganhou no seu município e na sua freguesia – Observador" .

^ Rodrigues, Sofia (2018-08-16).

"Movimento Democracia 21 arranca com apresentações em Setembro" .

PÚBLICO (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Portugal&oldid=1292668350 " Categories : Liberalism in Portugal Liberalism by country Political history of Portugal Politics of Portugal Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 European Portuguese-language sources (pt-pt) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 05:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Portugal 2 languages Add topic

