Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The effect Toggle The effect subsection 1.1 Explanation 1.2 Construction 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rubin vase 11 languages Català Español Euskara فارسی 한국어 עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Optical illusion developed by Edgar Rubin This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rubin vase" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A version of Rubin's vase.

The Rubin vase (sometimes known as Rubin's vase , the Rubin face or the figure–ground vase ) is a famous example of ambiguous or bi-stable (i.e., reversing) two-dimensional forms developed around 1915 by the Danish psychologist Edgar Rubin .

[ 1 ] The depicted version of Rubin's vase can be seen as the black profiles of two people looking towards each other or as a white vase, but not both.

Another example of a bistable figure Rubin included in his Danish-language, two-volume book was the Maltese cross .

A 3D model of a Rubin vase Rubin presented in his doctoral thesis (1915) a detailed description of the visual figure-ground relationship, an outgrowth of the visual perception and memory work in the laboratory of his mentor, Georg Elias Müller .

[ 2 ] One element of Rubin's research may be summarized in the fundamental principle, "When two fields have a common border, and one is seen as figure and the other as ground, the immediate perceptual experience is characterized by a shaping effect which emerges from the common border of the fields and which operates only on one field or operates more strongly on one than on the other".

The effect [ edit ] The visual effect generally presents the viewer with two shape interpretations, each of which is consistent with the retinal image, but only one of which can be maintained at a given moment. This is because the bounding contour will be seen as belonging to the figure shape, which appears interposed against a formless background. If the latter region is interpreted instead as the figure, then the same bounding contour will be seen as belonging to it.

Explanation [ edit ] These types of stimuli are both interesting and useful because they provide an excellent and intuitive demonstration of the figure–ground distinction the brain makes during visual perception . Rubin's figure–ground distinction, since it involved higher-level cognitive pattern matching , in which the overall picture determines its mental interpretation, rather than the net effect of the individual pieces, influenced the Gestalt psychologists , who discovered many similar percepts themselves.

Normally the brain classifies images by which object surrounds which – establishing depth and relationships. If one object surrounds another object, the surrounded object is seen as figure, and the presumably further away (and hence background) object is the ground, and reversed. This makes sense, since if a piece of fruit is lying on the ground, one would want to pay attention to the "figure" and not the "ground".

[ 3 ] However, when the contours are not so unequal, ambiguity starts to creep into the previously simple inequality, and the brain must begin "shaping" what it sees; it can be shown that this shaping overrides and is at a higher level than feature recognition processes that pull together the face and the vase images – one can think of the lower levels putting together distinct regions of the picture (each region of which makes sense in isolation), but when the brain tries to make sense of it as a whole, contradictions ensue, and patterns must be discarded.

Construction [ edit ] Water sculpture featuring a reverse profile of 19th c. abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison in the black granite area The distinction is exploited by devising an ambiguous picture , whose contours match seamlessly the contours of another picture (sometimes the same picture; a practice M. C. Escher used on occasion). The picture should be "flat" and have little (if any) texture to it. The stereotypical example has a vase in the center, and a face matching its contour (since it is symmetrical, there is a matching face on the other side).

See also [ edit ] Pareidolia References [ edit ] ^ Rubin, E. (1915). Synsoplevede figurer: Studier i psykologisk analyse [Perceived figures: Studies in psychological analysis]. Gyldendal, Nordisk forlag.

^ "Looking back: Figure and ground at 100 | The Psychologist" .

^ "Figure/Ground" . Archived from the original on 2002-12-24.

Further reading [ edit ] A Psychology of Picture Perception , John M. Kennedy. 1974, Jossey-Bass Publishers, ISBN 0-87589-204-3 The art and science of visual illusions , Nicholas Wade. 1982 Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.

ISBN 0-7100-0868-6 Visual Space Perception , William H. Ittelson. 1969, Springer Publishing Company, LOCCCN 60-15818 "Vase or face? A neural correlates of shape-selective grouping processes in the human brain." Uri Hasson, Talma Hendler, Dafna Ben Bashat, Rafael Malach.

Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , Vol 13(6), Aug 2001. pp. 744–753. ISSN 0898-929X (Print) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rubin's vase .

Rubin's People Inside the Wall People trapped inside a Wall Illusionworks.com article Archived 2013-01-20 at the Wayback Machine Rubin has invented nothing The Rubin's vase  before Rubin (fr) v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rubin_vase&oldid=1264346806 " Category : Optical illusions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 21 December 2024, at 17:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rubin vase 11 languages Add topic

