Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes 2 Ecological role 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Witch's broom 28 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Íslenska עברית Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Žemaitėška Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of deformity in a woody plant For a broom associated with witches, see Besom . For the Witch's Broom nebula, see Veil Nebula .

Witch's brooms on downy birch , caused by the fungus Taphrina betulina Witch's broom on a white pine.

Witch's broom in Yamaska National Park, QC Witch's broom or witches' broom is a deformity in a woody plant , typically a tree , where the natural structure of the plant is changed. A dense mass of shoots grows from a single point, with the resulting structure resembling a broom or a bird's nest . It is sometimes caused by pathogens.

Diseases with symptoms of witches' broom, caused by phytoplasmas or basidiomycetes, are economically important in a number of crop plants, including the cocoa tree Theobroma cacao , [ 1 ] jujube ( Ziziphus jujuba ) [ 2 ] and the timber tree Melia azedarach .

[ 3 ] Causes [ edit ] A tree's characteristic shape, or habit, is in part the product of auxins , hormones which control the growth of secondary apices . The growth of an offshoot is limited by the auxin, while that of the parent branch is not. In cases of witch's broom, the normal hierarchy of buds is interrupted, and apices grow indiscriminately. This can be caused by cytokinin , a phytohormone which interferes with growth regulation. The phenomenon can also be caused by other organisms, including fungi , oomycetes , insects, mites , nematodes , phytoplasmas , and viruses .

[ 4 ] The broom growths may last for many years, typically for the life of the host plant. If twigs of witch's brooms are grafted onto normal rootstocks, freak trees result [ clarification needed ] , showing that the attacking organism has changed the inherited growth pattern of the twigs.

[ 4 ] Ecological role [ edit ] Witches' brooms provide nesting habitat for birds and mammals, such as the northern flying squirrel , which nests in them.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Mistletoes , which are not the host plant's own tissue, but parasitic plants growing on the host Plant development#Buds and shoots , atypical shoot development Epicormic shoot , a shoot that develops from buds under the bark Forest pathology Longan witches broom-associated virus Melampsora , can cause different kinds of witch's brooms Moniliophthora perniciosa , cause of witch's broom disease in cacao Phyllody , a related plant growth abnormality affecting flowers References [ edit ] ^ Purdy, L.H.; Schmidt, R.A. (1996). "Status Of Cacao Witches' Broom: Biology, Epidemiology, and Management".

Annual Review of Phytopathology .

34 (1): 573– 594.

Bibcode : 1996AnRvP..34..573P .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.phyto.34.1.573 .

PMID 15012557 .

^ Li Yun; Wang Yu; Tian Yanting & Sun Haoyuan (2001).

"Advances in Tissue Culture and Eliminating of the Pathogeny of Witch Broom Disease(MLO) of Chinese Jujube" .

Journal of Fruit Science .

18 (2): 115– 119.

^ Gomez, G.G.; Conci, L.R.; Ducasse, D.A.; Nome, S.F. (1996). "Purification of the Phytoplasma Associated with China-tree ( Melia azedarach L.) Decline and the Production of a Polyclonal Antiserum for its Detection".

Journal of Phytopathology .

144 ( 9– 10): 473– 477.

Bibcode : 1996JPhyt.144..473G .

doi : 10.1111/j.1439-0434.1996.tb00327.x .

^ a b Book of the British Countryside . Pub. London : Drive Publications, (1973). p. 519.

^ Mowry, Robert A. (2008).

"Northern Flying Squirrel" (PDF) .

Alaska Department of Fish and Game . Retrieved 2 June 2020 .

^ Paragi, Thomas; Rodman, Sue (2020).

"Maintaining wildlife habitat in the boreal forest of Alaska" (PDF) .

Alaska Department of Fish and Game . pp.

18– 19 . Retrieved 2 June 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Witch's broom at Wikimedia Commons Witches' Broom at BBC h2g2 .

Fir and spruce broom Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Witch%27s_broom&oldid=1293509132 " Category : Plant pathogens and diseases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 03:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Witch's broom 28 languages Add topic

