Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Measurement 2 Antiferromagnetic materials 3 Geometric frustration 4 Other properties 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Antiferromagnetism 36 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regular pattern of magnetic moment ordering This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Antiferromagnetism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Antiferromagnetic ordering Magnetic orders : comparison between ferro, antiferro and ferrimagnetism Condensed matter physics Phases Phase transition QCP States of matter Solid Liquid Gas Plasma Bose–Einstein condensate Bose gas Fermionic condensate Fermi gas Fermi liquid Supersolid Superfluidity Luttinger liquid Time crystal Phase phenomena Order parameter Phase transition QCP Electronic phases Electronic band structure Plasma Insulator Mott insulator Semiconductor Semimetal Conductor Superconductor Thermoelectric Piezoelectric Ferroelectric Topological insulator Spin gapless semiconductor Electronic phenomena Quantum Hall effect Spin Hall effect Kondo effect Magnetic phases Diamagnet Superdiamagnet Paramagnet Superparamagnet Ferromagnet Antiferromagnet Metamagnet Spin glass Quasiparticles Phonon Exciton Plasmon Polariton Polaron Magnon Roton Soft matter Amorphous solid Colloid Granular material Liquid crystal Polymer Scientists Van der Waals Onnes von Laue Bragg Debye Bloch Onsager Mott Peierls Landau Luttinger Anderson Van Vleck Hubbard Shockley Bardeen Cooper Schrieffer Josephson Louis Néel Esaki Giaever Kohn Kadanoff Fisher Wilson von Klitzing Binnig Rohrer Bednorz Müller Laughlin Störmer Yang Tsui Abrikosov Ginzburg Leggett Parisi Wetterich Perdew Physics portal Category v t e In materials that exhibit antiferromagnetism , the magnetic moments of atoms or molecules , usually related to the spins of electrons , align in a regular pattern with neighboring spins (on different sublattices) pointing in opposite directions. This is, like ferromagnetism and ferrimagnetism , a manifestation of ordered magnetism . The phenomenon of antiferromagnetism was first introduced by Lev Landau in 1933.

[ 1 ] Generally, antiferromagnetic order may exist at sufficiently low temperatures, but vanishes at and above the Néel temperature – named after Louis Néel , who had first identified this type of magnetic ordering.

[ 2 ] Above the Néel temperature, the material is typically paramagnetic .

Measurement [ edit ] When no external field is applied, the antiferromagnetic structure corresponds to a vanishing total magnetization. In an external magnetic field, a kind of ferrimagnetic behavior may be displayed in the antiferromagnetic phase, with the absolute value of one of the sublattice magnetizations differing from that of the other sublattice, resulting in a nonzero net magnetization. Although the net magnetization should be zero at a temperature of absolute zero , the effect of spin canting often causes a small net magnetization to develop, as seen for example in hematite .

[ 3 ] The magnetic susceptibility of an antiferromagnetic material typically shows a maximum at the Néel temperature. In contrast, at the transition between the ferromagnetic to the paramagnetic phases the susceptibility will diverge. In the antiferromagnetic case, a divergence is observed in the staggered susceptibility .

Various microscopic (exchange) interactions between the magnetic moments or spins may lead to antiferromagnetic structures. In the simplest case, one may consider an Ising model on a bipartite lattice, e.g. the simple cubic lattice , with couplings between spins at nearest neighbor sites. Depending on the sign of that interaction, ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic order will result.

Geometrical frustration or competing ferro- and antiferromagnetic interactions may lead to different and, perhaps, more complicated magnetic structures.

The relationship between magnetization and the magnetizing field is non-linear like in ferromagnetic materials . This fact is due to the contribution of the hysteresis loop , [ 4 ] which for ferromagnetic materials involves a residual magnetization .

Antiferromagnetic materials [ edit ] Antiferromagnetic structures were first shown through neutron diffraction of transition metal oxides such as nickel, iron, and manganese oxides. The experiments, performed by Clifford Shull , gave the first results showing that magnetic dipoles could be oriented in an antiferromagnetic structure.

[ 5 ] Antiferromagnetic materials occur commonly among transition metal compounds, especially oxides. Examples include hematite , metals such as chromium , alloys such as iron manganese (FeMn), and oxides such as nickel oxide (NiO). There are also numerous examples among high nuclearity metal clusters. Organic molecules can also exhibit antiferromagnetic coupling under rare circumstances, as seen in radicals such as 5-dehydro-m-xylylene .

Antiferromagnets can couple to ferromagnets, for instance, through a mechanism known as exchange bias , in which the ferromagnetic film is either grown upon the antiferromagnet or annealed in an aligning magnetic field, causing the surface atoms of the ferromagnet to align with the surface atoms of the antiferromagnet. This provides the ability to "pin" the orientation of a ferromagnetic film, which provides one of the main uses in so-called spin valves , which are the basis of magnetic sensors including modern hard disk drive read heads. The temperature at or above which an antiferromagnetic layer loses its ability to "pin" the magnetization direction of an adjacent ferromagnetic layer is called the blocking temperature of that layer and is usually lower than the Néel temperature.

Geometric frustration [ edit ] Main article: Geometrical frustration Unlike ferromagnetism, anti-ferromagnetic interactions can lead to multiple optimal states (ground states—states of minimal energy). In one dimension, the anti-ferromagnetic ground state is an alternating series of spins: up, down, up, down, etc. Yet in two dimensions, multiple ground states can occur.

Consider an equilateral triangle with three spins, one on each vertex. If each spin can take on only two values (up or down), there are 2 3 = 8 possible states of the system, six of which are ground states. The two situations which are not ground states are when all three spins are up or are all down. In any of the other six states, there will be two favorable interactions and one unfavorable one. This illustrates frustration : the inability of the system to find a single ground state. This type of magnetic behavior has been found in minerals that have a crystal stacking structure such as a Kagome lattice or hexagonal lattice .

Other properties [ edit ] Synthetic antiferromagnets (often abbreviated by SAF) are artificial antiferromagnets consisting of two or more thin ferromagnetic layers separated by a nonmagnetic layer.

[ 6 ] Dipole coupling of the ferromagnetic layers results in antiparallel alignment of the magnetization of the ferromagnets.

Antiferromagnetism plays a crucial role in devices employing giant magnetoresistance (GMR), an effect discovered [ 7 ] [ 8 ] in 1988 by the Nobel Prize winners Albert Fert and Peter Grünberg (awarded in 2007). First, for antiferromagnets being employed as pinning layers and also since the original device design (iron-chromium-iron multilayer with the Cr layer thickness carefully tuned [ 9 ] ) amounts to a synthetic antiferromagnet.

[ 10 ] There are also examples of disordered materials (such as iron phosphate glasses) that become antiferromagnetic below their Néel temperature. These disordered networks 'frustrate' the antiparallelism of adjacent spins; i.e. it is not possible to construct a network where each spin is surrounded by opposite neighbour spins. It can only be determined that the average correlation of neighbour spins is antiferromagnetic. This type of magnetism is sometimes called speromagnetism .

See also [ edit ] Exchange bias Giant magnetoresistance – Phenomenom involving the change of conductivity in metallic layers Geometrically frustrated magnet – Complex structures in matter physics Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Ising model – Mathematical model of ferromagnetism in statistical mechanics ANNNI model – Variant of the Ising model Mottness – Materials classically predicted to be conductors, that are actually insulators Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Quantum spin liquid – Phase of matter Ferromagnetism – Mechanism by which materials form into and are attracted to magnets Diamagnetism – Magnetic property of ordinary materials References [ edit ] ^ Landau, L. D. (1933). A possible explanation of the field dependence of the susceptibility at low temperatures. Phys. Z. Sowjet, 4, 675.

^ M. Louis Néel (1948).

"Propriétées magnétiques des ferrites; Férrimagnétisme et antiferromagnétisme" (PDF) .

Annales de Physique .

12 (3): 137– 198.

Bibcode : 1948AnPh...12..137N .

doi : 10.1051/anphys/194812030137 .

S2CID 126111103 .

^ Coey, J. M. D (2009).

Magnetism and Magnetic Materials . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 196.

ISBN 978-0-521-81614-4 .

^ František, Hrouda (September 1, 2002).

"Low-field variation of magnetic susceptibility and its effect on the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility of rocks" .

Geophysical Journal International .

150 (3). Oxford University Press: 715– 723.

Bibcode : 2002GeoJI.150..715H .

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-246X.2002.01731.x .

ISSN 1365-246X .

OCLC 198890763 .

^ Shull, C. G.; Strauser, W. A.; Wollan, E. O. (1951-07-15). "Neutron Diffraction by Paramagnetic and Antiferromagnetic Substances".

Physical Review .

83 (2). American Physical Society (APS): 333– 345.

Bibcode : 1951PhRv...83..333S .

doi : 10.1103/physrev.83.333 .

ISSN 0031-899X .

^ M. Forrester and F. Kusmartsev (2014).

"The nano-mechanics and magnetic properties of high moment synthetic antiferromagnetic particles" .

Physica Status Solidi A .

211 (4): 884– 889.

Bibcode : 2014PSSAR.211..884F .

doi : 10.1002/pssa.201330122 .

S2CID 53495716 .

^ Baibich, M. N. (1988).

"Giant Magnetoresistance of (001)Fe/(001)Cr Magnetic Superlattices" .

Physical Review Letters .

61 (21): 2472– 2475.

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.61.2472 .

hdl : 10183/99075 .

^ Binasch, G. (1989).

"Enhanced magnetoresistance in layered magnetic structures with antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange" .

Physical Review B .

39 (7): 4828– 4830.

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevB.39.4828 .

^ Grünberg, P. (1986).

"Layered Magnetic Structures: Evidence for Antiferromagnetic Coupling of Fe Layers across Cr Interlayers" .

Physical Review Letters .

57 (19): 2442– 2445.

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.2442 .

^ Duine, R. A.; Lee, Kyung-Jin; Parkin, Stuart S. P.; Stiles, M. D. (March 2018).

"Synthetic antiferromagnetic spintronics" .

Nature Physics .

14 (3): 217– 219.

doi : 10.1038/s41567-018-0050-y .

PMC 5997292 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Antiferromagnetism at Wikimedia Commons Magnetism: Models and Mechanisms in E. Pavarini, E. Koch, and U. Schollwöck: Emergent Phenomena in Correlated Matter, Jülich 2013, ISBN 978-3-89336-884-6 v t e Magnetism Magnetic response diamagnetism superdiamagnetism paramagnetism superparamagnetism Van Vleck paramagnetism Magnetic states altermagnetism antiferromagnetism ferrimagnetism ferromagnetism superferromagnetism ferromagnetic superconductor helimagnetism metamagnetism mictomagnetism spin glass amorphous magnetism spin ice Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antiferromagnetism&oldid=1297127741 " Categories : Quantum phases Magnetic ordering Quantum lattice models Physical phenomena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 08:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antiferromagnetism 36 languages Add topic

