Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Issues 2 By country Toggle By country subsection 2.1 Australia 2.2 Canada 2.3 United Kingdom 2.4 United States 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Religious exemption Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal privilege Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e A religious exemption is a legal privilege that exempts members of a certain religion from a law, regulation, or requirement. Religious exemptions are often justified as a protection of religious freedom , and proponents of religious exemptions argue that complying with a law against one's faith is a greater harm than complying against a law that one otherwise disagrees with due to a fear of divine judgment .

[ 1 ] Opponents of religious exemptions argue that they mandate unequal treatment and undermine the rule of law .

[ 2 ] Issues [ edit ] Many religions incorporate drug use into their practices or consider certain illegal drugs to be sacred. In areas where these drugs are illegal, religious groups may petition for a religious exemption. The use of cannabis is traditional in Rastafari , and the use of peyote is traditional for some Native American tribes .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Laws governing alcohol may sometimes grant exceptions for practices such as Eucharist .

[ citation needed ] Religious opposition to medical procedures has prompted debate on religious exemptions in medicine. Many places allow for religious exemptions from vaccination .

[ 5 ] Jehovah's Witnesses have challenged child neglect laws that obligate the parent to provide medical assistance to their children.

[ 6 ] Some religions have requirements on how adherents may dress or groom . Many governments require companies and organizations to provide exceptions for religious apparel that would typically violate a dress code . In many other places, certain religious articles of clothing are rendered illegal by laws governing public attire.

[ citation needed ] Sikhism requires that adherents carry a kirpan , which often requires a religious exemption to laws regarding the carrying of weapons.

[ 7 ] Churches, marriage officiants , and government employees that oppose same-sex marriage may seek religious exemptions from involvement in such marriages.

[ 8 ] Islam and Judaism both have specific traditions regarding the slaughter of animals. Some governments have made exemptions to their animal cruelty laws to permit these traditions.

[ 9 ] By country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Section 116 of the Constitution of Australia guarantees that the federal government shall not prohibit the free exercise of religion. Religious organizations are exempt from the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 and are legally permitted to discriminate based on sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, intersex status, relationship status, and pregnancy.

[ 10 ] A religious exemption in 1998 allowed members of the Church of Christ, Scientist to refuse child vaccination without losing welfare benefits, but the exemption was ended in 2015.

[ 11 ] Canada [ edit ] The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms establishes a right to "freedom of conscience and religion". In 1985, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that a business could not be compelled to close on Sunday for religious reasons in R v Big M Drug Mart Ltd . In 2004, the Supreme Court ruled that Hasidic Jews had the right to observe Sukkot on a condominium balcony against the wishes of the property owner.

[ 12 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Under Article 9 of the Human Rights Act 1998 , citizens of the United Kingdom are guaranteed the right to hold religious beliefs. The government reserves the power to legally restrict the expression of religious beliefs in the name of public safety, public order, health and morals, and the rights of others.

[ 13 ] The House of Lords has ruled that dress codes banning religious accessories are undue but that a dress code banning a full body jilbāb is within reason. The English Court of Appeal has ruled in several cases that laws promoting equal rights outweigh the right to discriminate due to religious belief.

[ 14 ] United States [ edit ] In the United States, the First Amendment guarantees that Congress will make no law " prohibiting the free exercise " of religion, and this clause is used as justification for the legality of religious exemptions in the United States.

[ 1 ] The earliest court case litigating religious exemptions was the New York case People v. Phillips in 1813, ruling that a Catholic priest could not be compelled to testify on a confession in violation of his duty as a priest. In 1878, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the government could ban polygamy without a religious exemption in Reynolds v. United States . In 1943, the Supreme Court did grant a religious exemption to an ordinance against door-to-door solicitation in Murdock v. Pennsylvania . In 1972, the Supreme Court established the " Sherbert test " in Sherbert v. Verner , establishing a standard of strict scrutiny on religious exemptions. The Supreme Court moved away from religious exemptions in Employment Division v. Smith in 1990.

[ 15 ] In the 1990s, Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act and the American Indian Religious Freedom Act to write religious exemptions into law. The Religious Freedom Restoration Act authorized the government to enforce a law against religious practice only if it "furthers a compelling governmental interest" and it is the "least restrictive means" to pursue this interest.

[ 16 ] The American Indian Religious Freedom Act granted a religious exemption for the use of peyote for religious purposes by Native American tribes.

[ 4 ] Many states have since passed their own versions of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act to extend its coverage to state law.

In 2014, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of religious exemptions for private businesses in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.

Legal scholars have considered a wide variety of implications that may result from this decision, many of which have yet to be tested in court.

[ 17 ] A substantial area of religious exemptions in the United States are those that allow individuals to avoid vaccination mandates . For childhood vaccination mandates, most U.S. states provide some kind of religious exemption, with standards for receiving such an exemption varying from a minimal statement in some states to a more searching examination of the sincerity of the beliefs claimed in others.

[ 18 ] As of 2025, 45 states and the District of Columbia grant exemptions for people who have religious objections to immunizations.

[ 19 ] The five states that do not recognize a religious objection are California ( California Senate Bill 277 ), Connecticut , Maine ( 2020 Maine Question 1 ), New York, and West Virginia.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Until 2015, only Mississippi and West Virginia did not permit religious exemptions.

[ 22 ] However, the 2014 Disneyland measles outbreak and 2019 measles outbreak prompted lawmakers to remove religious and philosophical exemptions in some states.

[ 19 ] In 2023, Mississippi re-instated religious exemptions for childhood vaccine mandates.

[ 23 ] In January 2025, West Virginia governor Patrick Morrisey issued an executive order allowing religious exemptions in the state, though the order has been ignored by the state's Board of Education and has not been enforced or codified into law.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Law portal Religion portal Accommodationism Law and religion Religion in politics References [ edit ] ^ a b Gedicks, Frederick Mark (1998). "An Unfirm Foundation: The Regrettable Indefensibility of Religious Exemptions".

University of Arkansas at Little Rock Law Review .

20 (3): 555– 574.

^ Vallier, Kevin (October 7, 2015). "The Moral Basis of Religious Exemptions".

Law and Philosophy .

35 .

^ Gibson, Matt (2010). "Rastafari and Cannabis: Framing a Criminal Law Exemption".

Ecclesiastical Law Journal .

12 (3): 324– 344.

doi : 10.1017/S0956618X10000384 .

S2CID 143392090 .

^ a b "Summary of H.R. 4230 (103rd): American Indian Religious Freedom Act Amendments of 1994" .

GovTrack.us . Retrieved 2022-03-21 .

^ Pelčić, Gordana; Karačić, Silvana; Mikirtichan, Galina L.; Kubar, Olga I.; Leavitt, Frank J.; Cheng-tek Tai, Michael; Morishita, Naoki; Vuletić, Suzana; Tomašević, Luka (October 2016).

"Religious exception for vaccination or religious excuses for avoiding vaccination" .

Croatian Medical Journal .

57 (5): 516– 521.

doi : 10.3325/cmj.2016.57.516 .

ISSN 0353-9504 .

PMC 5141457 .

PMID 27815943 .

^ Woolley, S. (2005).

"Children of Jehovah's Witnesses and adolescent Jehovah's Witnesses: what are their rights?" .

Archives of Disease in Childhood .

90 (7): 715– 719.

doi : 10.1136/adc.2004.067843 .

PMC 1720472 .

PMID 15970615 .

^ Juss, Satvinder Singh (2013). "Kirpans, Law, and Religious Symbols in Schools".

Journal of Church and State .

55 (4).

Oxford University Press : 758– 795.

doi : 10.1093/jcs/css058 .

^ "Marriage Solemnization: Religious Exemption Statutes" .

National Conference of State Legislatures . Retrieved 2022-03-21 .

^ Rawlinson, Mary; Ward, Caleb (2016).

The Routledge Handbook of Food Ethics . New York: Routledge. pp.

305– 306.

ISBN 9781317595502 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "Religious exemptions under the SDA" (PDF) .

Australian Human Rights Commission . Retrieved 2022-03-30 .

^ Izadi, Elahe (2015-04-20).

"Religious vaccination exemptions will completely end in Australia" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2022-03-30 .

^ "An Institutional History of Religious Freedom in Canada" .

Cardus . 2020-04-03 . Retrieved 2022-03-21 .

^ "Article 9: Freedom of thought, belief and religion" .

Equality and Human Rights Commission . 2021-06-03 . Retrieved 2022-03-30 .

^ Lim, Ernest (2014-10-01).

"Religious Exemptions in England" .

Oxford Journal of Law and Religion .

3 (3): 440– 461.

doi : 10.1093/ojlr/rwu024 .

ISSN 2047-0770 .

^ Barclay, Stephanie H. (November 13, 2020).

"The Historical Origins of Judicial Religious Exemptions" .

Notre Dame Law Review .

96 : 55– 124.

^ "Summary of H.R. 1308 (103rd): Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993" .

GovTrack.us . Retrieved 2022-03-21 .

^ Liptak, Adam (March 24, 2014).

"Ruling Could Have Reach Beyond Issue of Contraception" .

The New York Times .

^ Abramson, Brian Dean (2025). "Ch. 9-Vaccination Exemptions".

Vaccine, Vaccination, and Immunization Law, Third Edition . Bloomberg Law. p. 2.

ISBN 979-8-34170-407-7 .

^ a b c "States with Religious and Philosophical Exemptions from School Immunization Requirements" . National Conference of State Legislatures. April 30, 2021.

^ "Measles Outbreak: N.Y. Eliminates Religious Exemptions for Vaccinations" .

New York Times . June 13, 2019.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2019.

^ "Governor Lamont Signs CT Religious Vaccine Exemption Bill Into Law" .

NBC Connecticut . 28 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 April 2021 .

^ Horowitz, Julia (30 June 2015).

"California governor signs strict school vaccine legislation" . Associated Press.

^ https://apnews.com/article/mississippi-vaccines-religion-747269fe3edcc20530a9aa17e6ad1a3b ^ "West Virginia governor axes DEI and enacts vaccine exemptions on first full day in office" .

AP News . 2025-01-14 . Retrieved 2025-01-17 .

^ "A West Virginia parent sues seeking a religious exemption from required school vaccinations" .

AP News . 2025-06-24 . Retrieved 2025-08-13 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_exemption&oldid=1305601497 " Categories : Religion and society Religion and government Religion and law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious exemption Add languages Add topic

