Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions Toggle Definitions subsection 1.1 Theravada 1.2 Mahayana 2 Within the five aggregates 3 In the early Buddhist literature 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Saṃjñā 9 languages বাংলা Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Português Русский ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Samjñā ) Buddhist term Translations of Saṃjñā English perception, cognition, conceptualization, distinguishing Sanskrit saṃjñā, संज्ञा Pali sañña, सञ्ञा Burmese သညက္ခန္ဓာ, ဆန္ဒ Chinese 想 (xiǎng) Indonesian persepsi Japanese 想 ( Rōmaji : sō ) Khmer សញ្ញា ( UNGEGN : sânhnhéa ) Korean 상 ( RR : sang ) Tibetan འདུ་ཤེས། ( Wylie : 'du shes; THL : du shé ) Thai สัญญา ( RTGS : sanya ) Vietnamese Tưởng Glossary of Buddhism Part of Theravāda Abhidhamma 52 Cetasikas Theravāda Buddhism 7 universal ( sabbacittasādhāraṇa ) Phassa Vedanā Saññā Cetanā Ekaggatā Samādhi Jīvitindriya Manasikāra 6 occasional ( pakiṇṇaka ) Vitakka Vicāra Adhimokkha Viriya Pīti Chanda 14 unwholesome ( akusala ) 4 universal unwholesome ( akusalasādhāraṇa ): Moha Ahirika Anottappa Uddhacca 3 greed-group ( lobha ): Lobha Diṭṭhi Māna 4 hatred-group ( dosa ): Dosa Issā Macchariya Kukkucca other unwholesome: Thīna Middha Vicikicchā 25 beautiful ( sobhana ) 19 universal beautiful ( sobhanasādhāraṇa ): Saddhā Sati Hiri Ottappa Alobha Adosa Mettā Tatramajjhattatā Upekkhā Kāyapassaddhi Cittapassaddhi Kāyalahutā Cittalahutā Kāyamudutā Cittamudutā Kāyakammaññatā Cittakammaññatā Kāyapāguññatā Cittapāguññatā Kāyujukatā Cittujukatā 3 abstinences ( virati ): Sammāvācā Sammākammanta Sammā-ājīva 2 immeasurables ( appamañña ): Karuṇā Muditā 1 faculty of wisdom ( paññindriya ): Paññā Amoha Buddhism portal v t e Uses of samādhi (based on AN IV.41) object of concentration development four jhānas pleasant abiding ( sukha -vihārāya ) in this life ( diţţhadhamma ) perception ( sañña ) of light ( āloka ) knowing ( ñāṇa ) and seeing ( dassana ) arising, passing, fading of feelings ( vedanā ), perceptions ( saññā ) and thoughts ( vitakkā ) mindfulness ( sati ) and clear comprehension ( sampajaññā ) arising and fading of the five aggregates of clinging ( pañc' upādāna - khandha ) extinction ( khaya ) of the taints ( āsava ) [Arahantship] This box: view talk edit Saṃjñā (Sanskrit; Pali: sañña ) is a Buddhist term that is typically translated as "perception" or "cognition." It can be defined as grasping at distinguishing features or characteristics.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Samjñā has multiple meanings depending on religions. Although Samjñā means the five aggregates in Buddhism , in Hinduism , it refers to art traditions and in Jainism , it points to recognition distinct from cognition .

[ 3 ] Saṃjñā is identified within the Buddhist teachings as follows: One of the five aggregates One of the seven universal mental factors in the Theravada Abhidharma.

One of the five universal mental factors in the Mahayana Abhidharma Definitions [ edit ] Theravada [ edit ] Bhikkhu Bodhi states: [ 4 ] The characteristic of perception is the perceiving of the qualities of the object. Its function is to make a sign as a condition for perceiving again that "this is the same," or its function is recognizing what has been previously perceived. It becomes manifest as the interpreting of the object...by way of the features that had been apprehended. Its proximate cause is the object as it appears. Its procedure is compared to a carpenter's recognition of certain kinds of wood by the mark he has made on each.

According to the Theravada tradition, saññā experiences the same object as the citta it accompanies but it performs its own task: it 'perceives' or 'recognizes' the object and it 'marks' it so that it can be recognized again.

[ 5 ] The Atthasālinī (I, Part IV, Chapter 1, 110) provides the following two definitions for saññā: ...It has the characteristic of noting and the function of recognizing what has been previously noted. There is no such thing as perception in the four planes of existence without the characteristic of noting. All perceptions have the characteristic of noting. Of them, that perceiving which knows by specialized knowledge has the function of recognizing what has been noted previously. We may see this procedure when the carpenter recognizes a piece of wood which he has marked by specialized knowledge...

Perception has the characteristic of perceiving by an act of general inclusion, and the function of making marks as a condition for repeated perception (for recognizing or remembering), as when woodcutters 'perceive' logs and so forth. Its manifestation is the action of interpreting by means of the sign as apprehended, as in the case of blind persons who 'see' an elephant. Or, it has briefness as manifestation, like lightning, owing to its inability to penetrate the object. Its proximate cause is whatever object has appeared, like the perception which arises in young deer mistaking scarecrows for men.

[ 5 ] Mahayana [ edit ] The Abhidharma-samuccaya states: [ 2 ] What is the absolutely specific characteristic of conceptualization ( saṃjñā )? It is to know by association. It is to see, hear, specify, and to know by way of taking up the defining characteristics and distinguishing them.

Mipham Rinpoche states: [ 1 ] Perception consists of the grasping of distinguishing features.

In terms of support, they can be divided into six types: perceptions resulting from contact, the meeting of the eye and so forth, up until the mind.

Furthermore, they are distinguishing characteristics in regard to sense objects... and... in regard to names...

Alexander Berzin gives the following informal explanation: [ 6 ] Then there is distinguishing (’du-shes, Skt. samjna). And so it takes a special feature of the object, of the appearing object—so, the hologram—and it gives some significance to it, some conventional significance to it. In other words, within a sense field it distinguishes between, for instance, light and dark. I mean, we’re seeing a huge amount of information, and in order to deal with it we need to distinguish one little piece from everything else. That’s distinguishing.

Within the five aggregates [ edit ] Saṃjñā is identified as one of the five aggregates , as shown in the following diagram: The Five Aggregates ( pañca khandha ) according to the Pali Canon .

form ( rūpa ) 4 elements ( mahābhūta ) ↓ contact ( phassa ) ↓ ↑ consciousness ( viññāna ) → ← ← mental factors ( cetasika ) feeling ( vedanā ) perception ( sañña ) formation ( saṅkhāra ) Form is derived from the Four Great Elements .

Consciousness arises from other aggregates .

Mental Factors arise from the Contact of Consciousness and other aggregates .

The five aggregates are no-self .

Source: MN 109 (Thanissaro, 2001) | diagram details In the early Buddhist literature [ edit ] In the early Buddhism Theravadin texts of the Nikāyas and Āgamas , saṃjñā / sañña is the third of the five aggregates (Skt.: skandha ; Pali: khandha ) which can be used to skillfully delineate phenomenological experiences during meditation .

[ 7 ] Whether as one of the Five Aggregates, meditative concentration ( samādhi ) on the passing and rising (P.

vipassana , S.

vipaśyanā ) of sañña can lead to mindfulness (P.

sati , S.

smṛti ), clear comprehension (P.

sampajanna , S.

samprajaña ) enlightenment and Arhantship (see Table).

In the Pali Canon , sañña is frequently defined as: [ 8 ] It perceives blue, it perceives yellow, it perceives red, it perceives white.

In post-canonical Pali commentaries , the Visuddhimagga likens sañña to "a child without discretion." [ 9 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Kunsang (2004) , p. 22.

^ a b Guenther (1975) , Kindle Locations 364-365.

^ "Samjna, Saṃjñā, Saṃjña: 17 definitions" .

www.wisdomlib.org . 2016-02-08 . Retrieved 2020-06-07 .

^ Bodhi (2003) , p.

80 .

^ a b Van Gorkom (2010) , Definition of sanna .

^ Berzin (2010) .

^ See, for instance, the Satipatthana Sutta .

^ Thanissaro Bhikkhu (tr.) (2001) .

^ Buddhaghosa (1999) , p. 436.

Works cited [ edit ] Berzin, Alexander (June 2010).

"Developing the Mind Based on Buddha-Nature, Session Two: Primary Consciousness and Mental Factors" (transcript). Moscow, Russia. Archived from the original on 2016-09-02.

Bodhi, Bhikkhu (2003).

A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma . Pariyatti Publishing.

Buddhaghosa (1999).

The Path of Purification: Visuddhimagga . Translated by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli . Seattle: BPS Pariyatti Editions.

ISBN 1-928706-00-2 .

Guenther, Herbert V. (1975).

Mind in Buddhist Psychology: A Translation of Ye-shes rgyal-mtshan's "The Necklace of Clear Understanding" . Dharma Publishing.

Kunsang, Erik Pema (2004).

Gateway to Knowledge . Vol. 1. North Atlantic Books.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu (tr.) (2001).

"Khajjaniya Sutta: Chewed Up" .

Access to Insight . Retrieved 2006-06-22 .

( Samyutta Nikaya 22.79).

Van Gorkom, Nina (2010).

Cetasikas . Archived from the original on 5 May 2013.

v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dr5cr
Cached time: 20250817060652
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.542 seconds
Real time usage: 0.652 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3138/1000000
Revision size: 8966/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 129008/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6610/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50961/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.328/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17778769/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  506.197      1 -total
 25.23%  127.700      1 Template:Buddhist_term
 24.69%  124.976      1 Template:Infobox
 20.52%  103.894      1 Template:Cetasika
 20.25%  102.515      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.69%   94.586     13 Template:Lang
 15.17%   76.811      1 Template:Reflist
 14.70%   74.435      3 Template:Cite_web
 10.22%   51.727      1 Template:Short_description
  8.71%   44.111      1 Template:Buddhism_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1985253:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817060652 and revision id 1302379340. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saṃjñā&oldid=1302379340 " Categories : Mental factors in Buddhism Sanskrit words and phrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Pali-language text Articles containing Burmese-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Khmer-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Standard Tibetan-language text Articles containing Thai-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 02:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saṃjñā 9 languages Add topic

