Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Figurative system of human knowledge 4 languages العربية Français Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Tree of Diderot and d'Alembert ) Taxonomy of human knowledge Classification chart with the original "figurative system of human knowledge" tree, in French The " figurative system of human knowledge " ( French : Système figuré des connaissances humaines ), sometimes known as the tree of Diderot and d'Alembert , was a tree developed to represent the structure of knowledge itself, produced for the Encyclopédie by Jean le Rond d'Alembert and Denis Diderot .

The tree was a taxonomy of human knowledge, inspired by Francis Bacon 's The Advancement of Learning . The three main branches of knowledge in the tree are: "Memory"/ History , "Reason"/ Philosophy , and "Imagination"/ Poetry .

Notable is the fact that theology is ordered under philosophy. The historian Robert Darnton has argued that this categorization of religion as being subject to human reason, and not a source of knowledge in and of itself ( revelation ), was a significant factor in the controversy surrounding the work.

[ 1 ] "Knowledge of God" is only a few nodes away from divination and black magic.

Content [ edit ] Below is a version of the Tree rendered in English as a bulleted outline.

"Detailed System of Human Knowledge" from the Encyclopédie .

Understanding Memory .

History .

Sacred (History of Prophets ).

Ecclesiastical .

Civil , Ancient and Modern .

Civil History , properly said.

(See also: History of civil society ) Literary History .

Memoirs .

Antiquities .

(See also: Classical antiquity ) Complete Histories.

Natural .

Uniformity of Nature.

(See: Uniformitarianism ) Celestial History .

History...

of Meteors .

of the Earth and the Sea (See also: Origin of water on Earth ) of Minerals .

(See also: Geological history of Earth ) of Vegetables .

(See also: History of agriculture ) of Animals .

(See also: Evolutionary history of life ) of the Elements .

(See also: Classical element , History of alchemy , and History of chemistry ) Deviations of Nature.

Celestial Wonders .

Large Meteors .

(See also: Asteroids ) Wonders of Land and Sea.

(See: Wonders of the World ) Monstrous Minerals .

Monstrous Vegetables.

(See: Largest plants , Poisonous plants , and Carnivorous plants ) Monstrous Animals. (See: Largest animals and Predators ) Wonders of the Elements.

(See: Natural disasters ) Uses of Nature (See Technology and Applied sciences ) Arts, Crafts , Manufactures.

Work and Uses of Gold and Silver .

Minter .

Gold Beaters.

Gold Spinners.

Gold Drawers.

Silversmith & Goldsmith .

Planisher Mounter（METTEUR EN ŒUVRE）,etc.

Work and Uses of Precious Stones.

Lapidary .

Diamond cutting .

Jeweler , etc.

Work and Uses of Iron .

Large Forges .

Locksmith .

Tool Making.

Armorer.

Gun Making, etc.

Work and Uses of Glass .

Glassmaking .

Plate-Glassmaking .

Mirror Making .

Optician .

Glazier , etc.

Work and Uses of Skin.

Tanner .

Chamois Maker .

Leather Merchant.

Glove Making, etc.

Work and Uses of Stone , Plaster , Slate , etc.

Practical Architecture .

Practical Sculpture .

Mason .

Tiler , etc.

Work and Uses of Silk .

Spinning.

Milling.

Needlecraft.

Velvet .

Brocaded Fabrics, etc.

Work and Uses of Wool .

Cloth-Making.

Bonnet-Making, etc.

Working and Uses, etc.

Reason Philosophy General Metaphysics , or Ontology , or Science of Being in General, of Possibility, of Existence , of Duration, etc.

Science of God .

Natural Theology .

Revealed Theology .

Science of Good and Evil Spirits.

Divination .

Black magic .

Science of Man.

Pneumatology or Science of the Soul .

Reasonable.

Sensible.

Logic .

Art of Thinking .

Apprehension .

Science of Ideas Judgement .

Science of Propositions .

Reasoning .

Induction .

Method .

Demonstration.

Analysis .

Synthesis .

Art of Remembering.

Memory .

Natural.

Artificial .

Prenotion.

Emblem.

Supplement to Memory.

Writing .

Printing .

Alphabet .

Cipher.

Arts of Writing , Printing, Reading , Deciphering.

Orthography .

Art of Communication Science of the Instrument of Discourse .

Grammar .

Signs .

Gesture .

Pantomime .

Declamation.

Characters.

Ideograms .

Hieroglyphics .

Heraldry or Blazonry.

Prosody .

Construction.

Syntax .

Philology .

Critique.

Pedagogy .

Choice of Studies .

Manner of Teaching .

Science of Qualities of Discourse .

Rhetoric .

Mechanics of Poetry .

Ethics .

General .

General Science of Good and Evil , of duties in general, of Virtue , of the necessity of being Virtuous, etc.

Particular .

Science of Laws or Jurisprudence .

Natural .

Economic .

(See also commercial law ) Political .

(See also political law ) Internal and External .

(See also foreign policy ) Commerce on Land and Sea .

Science of Nature Metaphysics of Bodies or, General Physics, of Extent, of Impenetrability, of Movement, of Word, etc.

Mathematics .

Pure .

Arithmetic .

Numeric .

Algebra .

Elementary .

Infinitesimal .

Differential .

Integral .

Geometry .

Elementary (Military Architecture, Tactics).

Transcendental (Theory of Courses).

Mixed.

Mechanics .

Statics .

Statics, properly said.

Hydrostatics .

Dynamics .

Dynamics, properly said.

Ballistics .

Hydrodynamics .

Hydraulics .

Navigation , Naval Architecture.

Geometric Astronomy .

Cosmography .

Uranography .

Geography .

Hydrography .

Chronology .

Gnomonics .

Optics .

Optics, properly said.

Dioptrics , Perspective.

Catoptrics .

Acoustics .

Pneumatics .

Art of Conjecture.

Analysis of Chance .

Physicomathematics.

Particular Physics.

Zoology .

Anatomy .

Simple.

Comparative .

Physiology .

Medicine .

Hygiene.

Hygiene , properly said.

Cosmetics (Orthopedics).

Athletics (Gymnastics).

Pathology.

Semiotics.

Treatment.

Diete.

Surgery .

Pharmacy.

Veterinary Medicine .

Horse Management .

Hunting .

Fishing .

Falconry .

Physical Astronomy .

Astrology .

Judiciary Astrology.

Physical Astrology.

Meteorology .

Cosmology .

Uranology.

Aerology .

Geology .

Hydrology .

Botany .

Agriculture .

Gardening .

Mineralogy .

Chemistry .

Chemistry, properly said, ( Pyrotechnics , Dyeing, etc.).

Metallurgy .

Alchemy .

Natural Magic.

Imagination.

Poetry .

Sacred, Profane.

Narrative.

Epic Poem Madrigal Epigram Novel , etc.

Dramatic Tragedy Comedy Opera Pastoral , etc.

Parable Allegory (Note: This next branch seems to belong to both the narrative and dramatic tree, as indicated by the line drawn connecting the two.) Music Theoretical Practical (see also musical technique ) Instrumental Vocal Painting Sculpture Civil architecture Engraving See also [ edit ] Classification chart Instauratio magna Propædia Pierre Mouchon Tree of knowledge (philosophy) References [ edit ] ^ Robert Darnton, "Philosophers Trim the Tree of Knowledge: The Epistemological Strategy of the Encyclopedie ," The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural History (New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1984), 191-213.

Further reading [ edit ] Robert Darnton, "Epistemological angst: From encyclopedism to advertising," in Tore Frängsmyr, ed., The structure of knowledge: classifications of science and learning since the Renaissance (Berkeley, CA: Office for the History of Science and Technology, University of California, Berkeley, 2001).

Adams, David (2006) 'The Système figuré des Connaissances humaines and the structure of Knowledge in the Encyclopédie',  in Ordering the World, ed. Diana Donald and Frank O'Gorman, London: Macmillan, p. 190-215.

Preliminary discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot , Jean Le Rond d'Alembert, translated by Richard N. Schwab, 1995.

ISBN 0-226-13476-8 External links [ edit ] image of the Tree with English translations superimposed over the French text ESSAI D'UNE DISTRIBUTION GÉNÉALOGIQUE DES SCIENCES ET DES ARTS PRINCIPAUX, published as a fold-out frontispiece in volume 1 of Pierre Mouchon, Table analytique et raisonnée des matieres contenues dans les XXXIII volumes in-folio du Dictionnaire des sciences, des arts et des métiers, et dans son supplément , Paris, Panckoucke 1780.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Figurative_system_of_human_knowledge&oldid=1275615649 " Categories : Taxonomy Age of Enlightenment Trees (data structures) Knowledge representation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 14 February 2025, at 01:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Figurative system of human knowledge 4 languages Add topic

