Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Departments 3 Publications 4 Displays Toggle Displays subsection 4.1 Gallery 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Museum of Comparative Zoology 11 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′42.50″N 71°06′56.00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3784722°N 71.1155556°W ﻿ / 42.3784722; -71.1155556 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Natural history museum at Harvard University A collection of bird specimens at the Museum of Comparative Zoology The Museum of Comparative Zoology (formally the Agassiz Museum of Comparative Zoology and often abbreviated to MCZ ) is a zoology museum located on the grounds of Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts . It is one of three natural-history research museums at Harvard, whose public face is the Harvard Museum of Natural History .

Harvard MCZ's collections consist of some 21 million specimens, of which several thousand are on rotating public display. While the research collections of the MCZ are not open to the public, the museum maintains MCZbase, a public database of its zoological collections.

[ 1 ] Many of the exhibits in the public museum have not only zoological interest, but also historical significance. Past exhibits have featured a fossil sand dollar collected by Charles Darwin in 1834, a mamo collected by Captain James Cook , and two golden pheasants that once belonged to George Washington .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Gonzalo Giribet , Alexander Agassiz Professor of Zoology at Harvard and Curator of Invertebrate Zoology, has served as the museum's director since 2021.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The Museum of Comparative Zoology was founded in 1859 through the efforts of zoologist Louis Agassiz ; the museum used to be referred to as "The Agassiz" after its founder.

[ 5 ] Agassiz designed the collection to illustrate the variety and comparative relationships of animal life. According to Goodale, "What he had in mind, as indicated by hints in his reports and other communications, was a museum for research and illustration in all departments of what was then called natural history. It was intended to comprise everything from minerals, through the kingdom of plants, to the highest animals. It was to include also man regarded from an archaeological and ethnological point of view." Alexander Agassiz was his father's assistant until 1875 when Alexander became curator . Alexander Agassiz served for 23 years as curator, 10 as director of the Museum of Comparative Zoology, and from 1902, until his death, as director of the University Museum, comprising all the sections. His gifts to the museum and to other departments of Harvard University considerably exceeded a million dollars.

[ 6 ] Many female paleontologists, such as Elvira Wood , were involved in the early development of the museum.

The Radcliffe Zoological Laboratory was created in 1894 when Radcliffe College rented a space on the fifth floor of the MCZ to convert into a women's laboratory. Prior to this acquisition, Radcliffe science laboratories were taught using inadequate facilities, converting spaces such as bathrooms in old houses into physics laboratories, in which Harvard professors often refused to teach.

[ 7 ] The laboratory space was converted from an office or storage closet, and was sandwiched between other invertebrate storage rooms on the fifth floor.

Departments [ edit ] The museum has nine departments with research collections: Entomology , Herpetology , Ichthyology , Invertebrate Paleontology , Invertebrate Zoology , Mammalogy , Malacology , Ornithology , and Vertebrate Paleontology . The Ernst Mayr Library and its archives form the tenth department of the museum.

[ 8 ] The library is a founding member of the Biodiversity Heritage Library.

[ 9 ] Publications [ edit ] The museum publishes two journals: the Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard College , first published in 1869, [ 10 ] and Breviora , first published in 1956.

[ 11 ] Displays [ edit ] In contrast to numerous more modern museums, the Harvard Museum of Natural History has many hundreds of taxidermy animals on display, from the MCZ collections. Notable exhibits include whale skeletons , the largest turtle shell ever found (8 ft long), "the Harvard mastodon ", a 42-foot (13 m) long Kronosaurus skeleton, the skeleton of a dodo , and a coelacanth preserved in fluid. The two-story Great Mammal Hall was renovated in 2009 in celebration of the 150th anniversary of founding of the museum.

Changing exhibitions at the museum have included "Evolution" (2008); "The Language of Color" (2008 to 2013); "Arthropods: Creatures that Rule" (2006); "New England Forests" (2011); and "Mollusks: Shelled Masters of the Marine Realm" (2012).

Gallery [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ "Database" .

Museum of Comparative Zoology . Retrieved June 18, 2025 .

^ "A Bouquet for Nature-Lovers" .

Harvard Magazine . November 1, 2004 . Retrieved June 18, 2025 .

^ Powell, Alvin (July 19, 2001).

"Warm, fuzzy, weird, funny: The Museum(s) of Natural History spin some tall tales" .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved June 18, 2025 .

^ "Gonzalo Giribet named director of the MCZ" .

Museum of Comparative Zoology . July 1, 2021 . Retrieved June 26, 2022 .

^ Winsor, Mary P. (November 15, 1991).

Reading the Shape of Nature: Comparative Zoology at the Agassiz Museum . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-90215-9 .

^ Goodale, George (1912).

"Biographical Memoir of Alexander Agassiz 1835-1910" (PDF) . National Academy of Sciences . Retrieved August 3, 2025 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Tonn, Jenna (2017). "HUL Access/2.0".

Gender & History .

29 (2): 329– 358.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0424.12292 .

S2CID 149438967 .

^ "About" .

Museum of Comparative Zoology . Retrieved June 26, 2022 .

^ Biodiversity Heritage Library ^ "Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard College" .

Biodiversity Heritage Library . The Museum. 1863–2023 . Retrieved May 31, 2025 .

^ "Breviora" .

Biodiversity Heritage Library . Retrieved August 25, 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Museum of Comparative Zoology .

Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX 42°22′42.50″N 71°06′56.00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3784722°N 71.1155556°W ﻿ / 42.3784722; -71.1155556 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Museum_of_Comparative_Zoology&oldid=1304174363 " Categories : Harvard University museums Natural history museums in Massachusetts Dinosaur museums in the United States Paleontology in Massachusetts Shell museums Museums in Cambridge, Massachusetts University museums in Massachusetts Museums established in 1859 1859 establishments in Massachusetts Scientific organizations established in 1859 Hidden categories: Source attribution Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 12:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Museum of Comparative Zoology 11 languages Add topic

