Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods 2 History 3 Products 4 References Toggle the table of contents Alligator hunting 3 languages العربية Français Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Capture and killing of gators Alligator hunting in Florida Alligator hunting is the capture and killing of gators . With the appropriate licenses and tags, the American alligator can legally be hunted in the Southeastern United States .
The states of Florida , Georgia , Alabama , Arkansas , Mississippi , Louisiana , North Carolina , South Carolina , and Texas all distribute alligator hunting licenses.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Methods [ edit ] There is no single method of alligator hunting. Depending on the circumstances, hunters commonly use a combination of the following: [ 6 ] hook and line bow and arrow gig and snare firearm The use of a hook and line is the most common method. It involves securing a sturdy hook and line to a tree or pole in the ground. The hook is commonly baited with fish or chicken quarter. After the bait is taken, the hunter returns to draw in and dispatch the gator.

[ 7 ] Allowed methods of hunting vary by state, in South Carolina an alligator must be captured before being killed with either a handgun or bangstick.

[ 8 ] A bangstick is a specialized underwater firearm fired only when in direct contact with the target.

History [ edit ] Historically, unregulated hunting has led to dramatic decreases in alligator populations. In 1973 the American alligator was listed as endangered under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.

[ 6 ] [ 9 ] The American alligator was listed as an endangered species in 1967 under a law that was a precursor to the Endangered Species Act of 1973. Since the species' recovery, alligator hunting programs have been established in the majority of U.S. States in the alligator's habitat range.

[ 10 ] Products [ edit ] The main products of alligator hunting are alligator meat and skin. Alligator skins have been harvested since the 1800s. Alligator skin was used in the manufacture of boots, belts, and saddles. In the early 1900s some states began the commercial tanning of alligator skin.

[ 11 ] The increased popularity of alligator leather led to the rise of alligator farming , now a $60 million industry. Following the global economic recession of 2008 , demand for wild alligator skins declined dramatically. In the state of Louisiana the number of reported skins dropped from 35,625 to 9,139 in one year.

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ "MDWFP Alligator Program" .

^ "Georgia Alligator Hunting Program" . Archived from the original on 2015-04-02 . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

^ "Florida Alligator Hunting Program" . Archived from the original on 2018-12-13 . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

^ "Alabama Alligator Hunting Program" . Archived from the original on 2015-03-17 . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

^ "Changes in Regulations for 2018-2019" .

^ a b "Alligators in Texas" (PDF) .

tpwd.texas.gov . Texas Parks and Wildlife . Retrieved 13 February 2015 .

^ "Alligator Hunting" .

lagatorprogram.com . Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries . Retrieved 13 February 2015 .

^ "South Carolina Alligator Hunting Guide (2009)" (PDF) . SC Department of Natural Resources. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-09-28 . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .

^ "American Alligator Alligator mississippiensis" (PDF) . U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service . Retrieved 13 February 2015 .

^ "Alligator Hunting Guides and Outfitters Trips and Guided Hunts" . Hunting Trips R Us.

^ "General Alligator Information" .

Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, Louisiana . Retrieved 27 February 2015 .

^ "Numbers of Alligator Skins Taken and Their Uses During 1 800 - 20 1 0 in Louisiana" (PDF) .

Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, Louisiana . Retrieved 27 February 2015 .

v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Authority control databases International FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alligator_hunting&oldid=1297813899 " Categories : Hunting by game Alligators and humans Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 17:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alligator hunting 3 languages Add topic

