Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Occurrence 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Uraninite 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Uranium-rich oxide mineral "Pitchblende" redirects here. For other uses, see Pitchblende (disambiguation) .

Uraninite Pitchblende from Niederschlema-Alberoda deposit, Germany General Category Oxide minerals Formula Uranium dioxide or uranium(IV) oxide (UO 2 ) IMA symbol Urn [ 1 ] Strunz classification 4.DL.05 Crystal system Isometric Crystal class Hexoctahedral (m 3 m) H-M symbol : (4/m 3 2/m) Space group Fm 3 m Unit cell a = 5.4682 Å; Z = 4 Identification Color Steel-black to velvet-black, brownish black, pale gray to pale green; in transmitted light, pale green, pale yellow to deep brown and green-gray (thin fragments) Crystal habit Massive, botryoidal , granular. Octahedral crystals uncommon.

Cleavage Indistinct Fracture Conchoidal to uneven Mohs scale hardness 5–6 Luster Submetallic, greasy, dull Streak Brownish black, gray, olive-green Diaphaneity Opaque; transparent in thin fragments Specific gravity 10.63–10.95; decreases on oxidation Optical properties Isotropic Other characteristics Radioactive 70 Bq/g to 150 kBq/g References [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Major varieties Pitchblende Massive Uraninite , also known as pitchblende , is a radioactive , uranium -rich mineral and ore with a chemical composition that is largely UO 2 but because of oxidation typically contains variable proportions of U 3 O 8 .

Radioactive decay of the uranium causes the mineral to contain oxides of lead and trace amounts of helium . It may also contain thorium and rare-earth elements .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Overview [ edit ] Uraninite used to be known as pitchblende (from pitch , because of its black color, and blende , from blenden meaning "to deceive", a term used by German miners to denote minerals whose density suggested metal content, but whose exploitation, at the time they were named, was either unknown or not economically feasible). The mineral has been known since at least the 15th century, from silver mines in the Ore Mountains , on the German/Czech border. The type locality is the historic mining and spa town known as Joachimsthal, the modern-day Jáchymov , on the Czech side of the mountains, where F. E. Brückmann described the mineral in 1772.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Pitchblende from the Johanngeorgenstadt deposit in Germany was used by M. Klaproth in 1789 to discover the element uranium .

[ 7 ] All uraninite minerals contain a small amount of radium as a radioactive decay product of uranium.

Marie Curie used pitchblende, processing tons of it herself, as the source material for her isolation of pure metallic radium in 1910.

[ 8 ] Uraninite also always contains small amounts of the lead isotopes 206 Pb and 207 Pb, the end products of the decay series of the uranium isotopes 238 U and 235 U respectively. Small amounts of helium are also present in uraninite as a result of alpha decay . Helium was first found on Earth in cleveite , an impure radioactive variety of uraninite, after having been discovered spectroscopically in the Sun's atmosphere . The extremely rare elements technetium and promethium can be found in uraninite in very small quantities (about 200 pg /kg and 4 fg /kg respectively), produced by the spontaneous fission of uranium-238 . Francium can also be found in uraninite at 1 francium atom for every 1 × 10 18 uranium atoms in the ore as a result from the decay of actinium .

Occurrence [ edit ] Uraninite crystals from Topsham, Maine (size: 2.7 × 2.4 × 1.4 cm) Uraninite is a major ore of uranium. Some of the highest-grade uranium ores in the world were found in the Shinkolobwe mine in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (the initial source for the Manhattan Project ) and in the Athabasca Basin in northern Saskatchewan , Canada. Another important source of pitchblende is at Great Bear Lake in the Northwest Territories of Canada, where it is found in large quantities associated with silver . It also occurs in Australia , the Czech Republic , Germany , England , Rwanda , Namibia and South Africa . In the United States, it can be found in the states of Arizona , Colorado , Connecticut , Maine , New Hampshire , New Mexico , North Carolina and Wyoming . The geologist Charles Steen made a fortune on the production of uraninite in his Mi Vida mine in Moab, Utah . Uranium ores from the Ore Mountains (today the border between the Czech Republic and Germany) were an important supply of both the wartime German nuclear program (which failed to produce a bomb) and the Soviet nuclear program . Mining for uranium in the Ore Mountains (under the auspices of SDAG Wismut after the war) ceased after the collapse of the German Democratic Republic .

Uranium ore is generally processed close to the mine into yellowcake , which is an intermediate step in the processing of uranium.

See also [ edit ] List of minerals List of uranium mines Thorianite Uranium ore deposits References [ edit ] ^ Warr, L.N. (2021).

"IMA–CNMNC approved mineral symbols" .

Mineralogical Magazine .

85 (3): 291– 320.

Bibcode : 2021MinM...85..291W .

doi : 10.1180/mgm.2021.43 .

S2CID 235729616 .

^ a b Klein, Cornelis and Cornelius S. Hurlbut, Jr., Manual of Mineralogy , Wiley, 1985, 20th ed. pp. 307–308 ISBN 0-471-80580-7 ^ Anthony, John W.; Bideaux, Richard A.; Bladh, Kenneth W.; Nichols, Monte C. (eds.). "Uraninite".

Handbook of Mineralogy (PDF) . Vol. III (Halides, Hydroxides, Oxides). Chantilly, VA: Mineralogical Society of America.

ISBN 0-9622097-2-4 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 14, 2012 . Retrieved December 5, 2011 .

^ a b c Uraninite Archived November 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine . Mindat.org ^ Uraninite Archived October 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . Webmineral.com ^ Veselovsky, F., Ondrus, P., Gabsová, A., Hlousek, J., Vlasimsky, P., Chernyshew, I. V. (January 2003).

"Who was who in Jáchymov mineralogy II" (PDF) .

Journal of the Czech Geological Society .

48 ( 3– 4): 193– 205.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 23, 2014.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Schüttmann, W. (1998). "Das Erzgebirge und sein Uran".

RADIZ-Information .

16 : 13– 34.

^ "Marie Curie and the Science of Radioactivity" . history.aip.org.

Archived from the original on June 28, 2017 . Retrieved June 29, 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Uraninite at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ore minerals , mineral mixtures and ore deposits Ores Oxides Cassiterite ( tin ) Chromite ( chromium ) Coltan ( niobium and tantalum ) Columbite ( niobium ) Hematite ( iron ) Ilmenite ( titanium ) Magnetite ( iron ) Pyrolusite ( manganese ) Tantalite ( tantalum ) Uraninite ( uranium ) Sulfides Acanthite ( silver ) Argentite ( silver ) Bornite ( copper ) Chalcopyrite ( copper ) Chalcocite ( copper ) Cinnabar ( mercury ) Cobaltite ( cobalt ) Galena ( lead ) Molybdenite ( molybdenum ) Pyrite ( iron ) Pentlandite ( nickel ) Sphalerite ( zinc ) Carbonates Dolomite ( magnesium ) Magnesite ( magnesium ) Malachite ( copper ) Other Baryte ( barium ) Bauxite ( aluminium ) Beryl ( beryllium ) Sperrylite ( platinum ) Scheelite ( tungsten ) Wolframite ( tungsten ) Deposit types Banded iron formation Carbonate-hosted lead-zinc Heavy mineral sands Iron oxide copper gold (IOCG) Kambalda-type komatiitic nickel Lateritic nickel Magmatic nickel-copper-iron-PGE Porphyry copper Sedimentary exhalative (SedEx) Uranium Volcanogenic massive sulfide (VMS) Orogenic gold deposit Minerals portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uraninite&oldid=1286016485 " Categories : Cubic minerals Minerals in space group 225 Oxide minerals Radioactive minerals Uranium(IV) minerals Blendes Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 05:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Uraninite 49 languages Add topic

