Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Boston Marathon Bombing 2.2 Merger with Lahey Hospital & Medical Center 2.3 Partnership With Dana-Farber 3 Structure 4 Major affiliates 5 In popular culture 6 Notable faculty and alumni 7 References Toggle the table of contents Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 11 languages العربية Català Français Fulfulde مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Српски / srpski Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′12″N 71°06′34″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3366°N 71.1094°W ﻿ / 42.3366; -71.1094 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, US For hospitals with a similar name, see Beth Israel Hospital (disambiguation) and Deaconess Hospital (disambiguation) .

Hospital in Massachusetts, U.S.

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Beth Israel Lahey Health Geography Location Boston , Massachusetts, U.S.

Coordinates 42°20′12″N 71°06′34″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3366°N 71.1094°W ﻿ / 42.3366; -71.1094 Organisation Care system Private Funding Non-profit hospital Type Teaching Affiliated university Harvard Medical School Services Emergency department Level I Trauma Center [ 1 ] Beds 743 [ 2 ] Helipads Helipad ( FAA LID : 36MA ) Number Length Surface ft m H1 49 15 Rooftop Public transit access MBTA Bus 8, 19, 47, 60, 65, CT2, CT3 Green Line D, E History Opened Deaconess: 1896 Beth Israel: 1916 Merged: 1996 Founding member of Beth Israel Lahey Health, a new health care system formed in March 2019 Links Website www .bidmc .org Lists Hospitals in U.S.

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center ( BIDMC ) in Boston, Massachusetts is a teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School and one of the founding members of Beth Israel Lahey Health . It was formed out of the 1996 merger of Beth Israel Hospital (founded in 1916 by the Jewish community) and New England Deaconess Hospital (founded in 1896 by Methodist deaconesses ). Among independent teaching hospitals, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center has ranked in the top three recipients of biomedical research funding from the National Institutes of Health .

[ 3 ] Research funding totals nearly $200 million annually.

[ 4 ] BIDMC researchers run more than 850 active sponsored projects and 200 clinical trials.

[ 4 ] The Harvard-Thorndike General Clinical Research Center, the oldest clinical research laboratory in the United States, has been located on this site since 1973.

[ 5 ] Overview [ edit ] BIDMC is one of the largest hospitals in New England , is affiliated with Joslin Diabetes Center and is a research partner of Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center , the largest cancer institution in the country.

[ citation needed ] The hospital is part of the Boston MedFlight consortium and supports a Level I trauma center through the use of its rooftop helipad .

[ 3 ] Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center has affiliates in the Boston-area towns of Needham, Milton, Plymouth, Chestnut Hill, Chelsea and Lexington, as well as through numerous primary care practices and community health centers.

BIDMC is the official hospital of the Boston Red Sox .

[ 6 ] Under the 32-year leadership of Mitchell T. Rabkin , it was the first hospital in the nation to create and adopt a Patient Bill of Rights.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Peter J. Healy joined Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center as president in 2017.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] New England Deaconess Hospital was founded In 1896 by Methodist deaconesses to care for Boston's residents.

[ 11 ] The revival of the office of the Christian deaconess , which started in Germany in 1836, was spurred by a group of Christian women dedicating themselves to the care of the sick and the poor. The first 14-bed infirmary was opened in a converted five-story brownstone at 691 Massachusetts Avenue. Although the hospital was originally staffed by the Deaconesses, in 1922 it added a permanent medical and surgical staff. In 1927, the New England Deaconess Association opened the Palmer Memorial Hospital, a cancer treatment facility. During the 1960s, Deaconess' residency programs gained accreditation and it affiliated with Harvard Medical School . Deaconess had a leading role in the early studies of the cause, course and treatment of AIDS. Deaconess was also a pioneer in organ transplantation and immunological research.

During an era of religious separatism and anti-Semitism, Boston's Jewish community founded Beth Israel Hospital in 1916 to meet the needs of the growing Jewish immigrant population.

[ 11 ] Its first hospital on Townsend Street in Roxbury held 45 beds. The new hospital addressed the needs of immigrants who spoke Yiddish without speaking English and for patients who kept a kosher diet. In 1928, Beth Israel established relationships with Tufts University and the Harvard Medical School and relocated to a new facility in the Longwood area of Boston. During the Depression, Beth Israel was one of only two hospitals in Boston that treated welfare recipients. Researchers at Beth Israel discovered vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in 1983.

The two neighboring hospitals merged in 1996, continuing the patient care, educational and research components of both predecessors.

[ 4 ] In 2003, BIDMC researchers identified the source of preeclampsia , a life-threatening complication of pregnancy.

In January 2014, Jordan Hospital joined the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center family of hospitals and became Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Plymouth. It was founded in 1899 when a group of leading citizens from Plymouth saw a need to build a hospital to serve residents and pursued the idea of "a hospital on the hill". They approached retail tycoon, philanthropist, and summer resident Eben Jordan of the Jordan Marsh & Company who donated $20,000 to build was to become Jordan Hospital. In December 1903, Jordan Hospital opened its doors to the first patients and has remained a community hospital ever since. It remains a private, not-for-profit hospital serving the communities of Bourne, Carver, Duxbury, Halifax, Kingston, Lakeville, Pembroke, Plympton, Plymouth, Marshfield, Middleboro, Sandwich and Wareham.

[ 12 ] Boston Marathon Bombing [ edit ] BIDMC received and cared for 21 victims of the April 2013 Boston Marathon bombing , as well as receiving Dzhokhar Tsarnaev after he was arrested by police.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Of the 21 victims received, 17 had serious injuries and seven required emergency surgery.

[ 13 ] Tamerlan Tsarnaev was also brought to BIDMC where attempts were made to resuscitate him, and where he was ultimately pronounced dead.

[ 15 ] Merger with Lahey Hospital & Medical Center [ edit ] In January 2017, The Boston Globe reported of a letter of intent for a merger between Beth Israel Deaconess and Lahey Hospital & Medical Center with this partnership creating the largest hospital merger in more than 20 years.

[ 16 ] The combined system would be counteraction to Partners HealthCare , Massachusetts' largest network of hospitals and doctors with a market share of 22% in the eastern part of the state.

[ 17 ] In December 2017, a group called the Make Healthcare Affordable Coalition came out in opposition to the proposed merger of Lahey Health and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center stating that the "mega merger" would lead to higher costs and the closing of health clinics serving minority communities.

[ 18 ] In March 2019, Beth Israel Lahey Health was formed by the merger of Lahey Health and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Beth Israel Lahey Health is composed of Addison Gilbert Hospital, Anna Jaques Hospital, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital—Milton, Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital—Needham, Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital—Plymouth, Beverly Hospital, Lahey Hospital & Medical Center , Lahey Medical Center-Peabody, Mount Auburn Hospital , New England Baptist Hospital , and Winchester Hospital .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Partnership With Dana-Farber [ edit ] In September 2023, the Dana–Farber Cancer Institute announced a new partnership with BIDMC and plans to build a new standalone hospital focused on treating adult cancer patients. This includes a departure from their current home and longtime affiliation with Brigham and Women's Hospital , which had been recognized among U.S. News & World Report's top cancer care facilities for 23 consecutive years.

[ 24 ] Structure [ edit ] Since the Beth Israel–Deaconess merger, the hospital has consisted of two campuses, the East (former Beth Israel) and the West (former Deaconess). The East Campus retained most primary care, outpatient, clinical and administrative functions, while the emergency department, inpatient care, the department of human resources, and many specialists are located on the West Campus. The medical center has more than 6,000 full-time employees.

[ 25 ] The merger coincided with the completion of the ten-story Clinical Center, located at the corner of Brookline and Longwood Avenues, in space formerly occupied by the Massachusetts College of Art .

[ citation needed ] The Clinical Center houses most of the hospital's outpatient services. The East Campus is located at 330 Brookline Avenue in the Longwood Medical Area .

[ citation needed ] The nation's oldest clinical research laboratory, the Harvard–Thorndike Laboratory, has been at this site since 1973.

[ 26 ] The West Campus is nearly diagonally across the street, at 1 Deaconess Road.

[ citation needed ] A number of other non-clinical, administrative offices (e.g. payroll, accounts payable, telecommunications) are located offsite in offices scattered throughout the area.

[ citation needed ] Major affiliates [ edit ] One of the teaching hospitals of Harvard Medical School [ 27 ] Affiliated with Joslin Diabetes Center Research partner of the Dana-Farber Harvard Cancer Center Level I trauma center verified by the American College of Surgeons [ 28 ] Part of the consortium of hospitals which operates Boston MedFlight [ 29 ] In 2003 the institution formed a partnership with the Boston Red Sox , becoming the official hospital of the team [ 30 ] In popular culture [ edit ] A stylized version of Beth Israel Hospital serves as the setting for the novel The House of God , a satirical account of one physician's training in the Harvard medical system in the 1970s.

[ 31 ] The hospital's intensive care unit served as the basis and subject of Frederick Wiseman's 1989 documentary Near Death . The film explores the "complex interrelationships among patients, families, doctors, nurses, hospital staff, and religious advisors" as they are confronted with the implications of continuing life-sustaining treatment on individual patients approaching the end of their lives. It is Wiseman's longest documentary at a length of six hours, and is regarded as one of the longest cinematic films of all time .

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Notable faculty and alumni [ edit ] James B. Aguayo-Martel , MD, MPH, developer of MR microscopy and deuterium spectroscopy Stephen Bergman , author of The House of God William Dameshek , MD, a pioneering hematologist, founder of the journal Blood, and founder of the American Society of Hematology Sanjiv Chopra , MD, MACP, Professor of Medicine and Faculty Dean for Continuing Medical Education at Harvard Medical School , Senior Consultant in Hepatology at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Ezekiel Emanuel , MD, PhD, bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania who was instrumental in developing the Affordable Care Act Jerome Groopman , chief of experimental medicine, author of Anatomy of Hope , How Doctors Think [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Mark Josephson , chairman of cardiology, one of the most influential figures in the history of electrophysiology Roderick MacKinnon , 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry "for structural and mechanistic studies of ion channels" [ 36 ] Godwin Maduka , MD and founder of Las Vegas Pain Institute and Medical Center Joel Mark Noe , MD, pioneering reconstructive plastic surgeon who, in 1977, created the burn unit and argon laser program Alvaro Pascual-Leone , MD, PhD, noted neuroscientist, one of the pioneers in the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation and the director of Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation John Rowe , former chief of geriatrics, CEO of Aetna Chip Skowron , hedge fund portfolio manager convicted of insider trading Jill Stein , MD, two-time presidential candidate Paul Zoll , first to describe technique of electrical cardioversion in humans and eponym for the Zoll defibrillator [ 37 ] Ralph de la Torre , MD, founder of BIDMC's CardioVasular Institute, later founder and current CEO of Steward Health Care .

[ 38 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Trauma Centers" . American College of Surgeons . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ "About BIDMC" .

BIDMC . Retrieved June 26, 2023 .

^ a b "Stats and Facts – Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center" . Archived from the original on December 13, 2010 . Retrieved December 17, 2010 .

^ a b c "Merger" . Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Archived from the original on October 6, 2011 . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ "Stats and Facts" . Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Archived from the original on December 13, 2010 . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ "Red Sox & BIDMC" . Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Archived from the original on August 29, 2011 . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ "Mitchell Rabkin, MD" .

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

^ "Patients' Rights: Hospitals Finding It's More Than Bedside Manner" .

Chicago Tribune . March 10, 1985 . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

^ "Patients' Rights and Responsibilities | Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center" . Archived from the original on June 29, 2015 . Retrieved May 7, 2015 .

^ "Peter Healy" .

Beth Israel Lahey Health . Retrieved July 9, 2020 .

^ a b "How it All Began" . Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011 . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ Beth Israel Hospital Plymouth web site, 2014, "About Us Plymouth, Massachusetts (MA) – Beth Israel Deaconess" . Archived from the original on September 28, 2014 . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ a b Gawande, Atul.

"Why Boston's Hospitals Were Ready" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved December 15, 2016 .

^ Schwartzapfel, Beth.

"Tending to Tsarnaev" . Retrieved December 15, 2016 .

^ "Beth Israel Deaconess medical staff tried to revive suspect killed in shoot-out" .

The Boston Globe . April 19, 2013 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ McCluskey, Priyanka Dayal (January 30, 2017).

"Beth Israel, Lahey health systems agree to pursue merger" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved January 30, 2017 .

^ "Newsflash: The Market Is Working" . June 2, 2016 . Retrieved January 30, 2017 .

^ Leighton, Paul (December 17, 2017).

"Group opposes hospital merger" .

The Eagle-Tribune . Retrieved December 19, 2017 .

^ "Things to watch now that Beth Israel-Lahey merger is official" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved June 25, 2019 .

^ Bartlett, Jessica (January 18, 2019).

"Beth Israel Lahey Health announces new organization for five-hospital merger" .

Boston Business Journal . Retrieved June 25, 2019 .

^ Kacik, Alex (March 1, 2019).

"Beth Israel Deaconess and Lahey Health complete merger" . Retrieved June 25, 2019 .

^ "Health Care System" . Beth Israel Lahey Health . Retrieved June 25, 2019 .

^ Bebinger, Martha; Mullins, Lisa (February 28, 2019).

"Beth Israel Lahey Health is Set to Become Official" . WBUR . Retrieved June 25, 2019 .

^ Sacchetti, Sharman (September 15, 2023).

"New hospital proposed as Boston-based medical giants change partnerships" .

WCVB . Retrieved January 6, 2024 .

^ "Stats and Facts | Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center" . January 30, 2017. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ "Harvard Transfers Medical Research From Thorndike" .

The Harvard Crimson . October 5, 1973.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2017 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ "Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center | HMS" . October 18, 2016. Archived from the original on October 18, 2016 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ "American College of Surgeons: Trauma Programs: Consultations/Verification Programs: Verified Trauma Centers" . Facs.org. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014 . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ "Critical Care Transport Service" . Boston MedFlight . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ "About Our Affiliation" . Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ Markel, Howard (August 18, 2009).

"A Book Doctors Can't Close" .

The New York Times .

^ "Near Death (1989) – Frederick Wiseman – IDFA" .

International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam .

^ "Zipporah Films Near Death" .

Zipporah Films .

^ "Dr. Jerome Groopman, 'Anatomy of Hope' " .

Fresh Air . NPR. February 3, 2004 . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ "About Dr. Jerome Groopman" . Jerome Groopman. Archived from the original on May 29, 2012 . Retrieved July 6, 2012 .

^ "Roderick MacKinnon, M.D." The Rockefeller University . Retrieved April 2, 2013 .

^ "Paul Maurice Zoll: Faculty of Medicine – Memorial Minute" . Harvard Gazette. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013 . Retrieved April 2, 2013 .

^ Arsenault, Mark; Kowalczyk, Liz; Weisman, Robert; Piore, Adam (March 29, 2024).

"Inside the rise and fall of Steward Health Care's Ralph de la Torre" .

The Boston Globe . Archived from the original on August 16, 2024 . Retrieved August 19, 2024 .

v t e Massachusetts trauma centers List of hospitals in Massachusetts Level I Baystate Medical Center Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Medical Center Brigham and Women's Hospital Lahey Hospital and Medical Center Massachusetts General Hospital Tufts Medical Center UMass Memorial Health Care Level II South Shore Hospital St. Luke's Hospital Level III Anna Jaques Hospital Berkshire Medical Center Beverly Hospital Cape Cod Hospital Good Samaritan Medical Center Lawrence General Hospital Lowell General Hospital MelroseWakefield Hospital Salem Hospital Pediatric Level I Boston Children's Hospital Boston Medical Center Massachusetts General Hospital for Children UMass Memorial Health Care Pediatric Level II Baystate Medical Center v t e Massachusetts hospitals Active Barnstable County Cape Cod Hospital Falmouth Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Cape Cod Berkshire County Austen Riggs Center Berkshire Medical Center Fairview Hospital VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Bristol County Arbour-Fuller Hospital Morton Hospital and Medical Center St. Luke's Hospital Taunton State Hospital Dukes County Martha's Vineyard Hospital Essex County Lawrence General Hospital Salem Hospital Franklin County VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampden County Baystate Health Holyoke Medical Center Mercy Medical Center Providence Behavioral Health Hospital Soldiers' Home in Holyoke VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampshire County Cooley Dickinson Hospital Northampton Veterans Affairs Medical Center Middlesex County Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center Cambridge Hospital CHA Everett Hospital Emerson Hospital Lahey Hospital & Medical Center Lowell General Hospital McLean Hospital MelroseWakefield Hospital MetroWest Medical Center Mount Auburn Hospital Newton-Wellesley Hospital Saints Medical Center Somerville Hospital Tewksbury Hospital Winchester Hospital Nantucket County Nantucket Cottage Hospital Norfolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital - Milton Norwood Hospital South Shore Hospital Wrentham State School Plymouth County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Plymouth Boston Medical Center – South Bridgewater State Hospital Brockton Hospital VA Boston Healthcare System Suffolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Children's Hospital Boston Medical Center Boston Medical Center – Brighton Brigham and Women's Faulkner Hospital Brigham and Women's Hospital Dana–Farber Cancer Institute Floating Hospital for Children Franciscan Children's Joslin Diabetes Center Lemuel Shattuck Hospital Massachusetts Eye and Ear Massachusetts General Hospital New England Baptist Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Tufts Medical Center VA Boston Healthcare System Worcester County Adcare Hospital Athol Memorial Hospital Federal Medical Center, Devens Hahnemann Hospital Jewish Healthcare Center Milford Regional Medical Center Memorial Hospital Saint Vincent Hospital 2021 strike UMass Memorial Health Care VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Worcester Recovery Center and Hospital Defunct Barnstable County 551st United States Air Force Hospital Barnstable County Hospital Berkshire County North Adams Regional Hospital Bristol County Lovering Colony State Hospital Paul A. Dever State School Truesdale Hospital Dukes County Penikese Island Leper Hospital Essex County Benjamin Stickney Cable Memorial Hospital Children's Island Sanitarium Danvers State Hospital Essex Hospital Saugus General Hospital Hampden County Monson Developmental Center Hampshire County Belchertown State School Northampton State Hospital Westover Air Force Base Hospital Middlesex County Boston Regional Medical Center Community Memorial Hospital Gaebler Children's Center Lovell General Hospital Metropolitan State Hospital Middlesex County Hospital Murphy Army Hospital Nashoba Valley Medical Center Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center Norfolk County Foxborough State Hospital Medfield State Hospital New England Sinai Hospital Pondville State Hospital Quincy Medical Center Plymouth County Cranberry Specialty Hospital Lakeville Hospital Suffolk County Adams-Nervine Asylum Boston City Hospital Boston Consumptives Hospital Boston Emergency and General Hospital Boston Psychopathic Hospital Boston State Hospital Carney Hospital Dimock Community Health Center Complex Massachusetts Homeopathic Hospital Naval Hospital Boston New England Hospital for Women and Children Worcester County Dale General Hospital Gardner State Hospital Grafton State Hospital Lyman School for Boys Rutland Heights State Hospital State Reform School for Boys Templeton Developmental Center Westborough State Hospital Worcester City Hospital Worcester County Hospital Worcester State Hospital Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beth_Israel_Deaconess_Medical_Center&oldid=1303811698 " Categories : 1996 establishments in Massachusetts Harvard Medical School Hospitals established in 1996 Hospitals in Boston Jewish medical organizations Jews and Judaism in Boston Teaching hospitals in Massachusetts Trauma centers Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from August 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from June 2019 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 05:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 11 languages Add topic

