Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and development 2 Description Toggle Description subsection 2.1 Individual components 3 Usages Toggle Usages subsection 3.1 Australia 3.2 France 3.3 Canada 3.4 New Caledonia 3.5 Croatia 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Forest fire weather index 3 languages Català Français Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Estimation of the risk of wildfire Daily Fire Weather Index forecast The Forest fire weather index ( FWI ) (French: indice forêt météo , IFM ) is an estimation of the risk of wildfire developed by the Canadian Forest Service in the late 1960s. It is in use in Canada, France, Australia, and several other countries. It uses a variety of fuel moisture measurements and weather indices to calculate potential fire behaviour in wildland environments.

History and development [ edit ] Efforts to understand the risk and potential severity of forest fires began in Canada in 1925 under J.W. Wright.

[ 1 ] Four different systems were developed over the next decades. By the late 1960's, researchers with the Canadian Forest Service began a project to harmonize and simplify the different systems.

[ 1 ] The current system was released in 1970, and underwent only small changes in calculation and a switch to metric measurements over the next decades. in 2025, the FWI is being updated to reflect non-forest fire environments, such as grassland and peat. The new updates will allow more fine-grained data, such as hourly weather readings, to be integrated into the system.

[ 2 ] The FWI is part of a larger set of measurements - the Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System (CFFDRS).

Description [ edit ] How the elements of the FWI work together The index is a whole number that ranges between 0 and 20 in France and up to above 30 in Canada. It is computed from five components. The first three components are numeric ratings of the moisture content of litter and other fine fuels, the average moisture content of loosely compacted organic layers of moderate depth, and the average moisture content of deep, compact organic layers. The last two components are the rate of fire spread if fuel is available for combustion, and the frontal fire intensity.

[ 3 ] Individual components [ edit ] Fine Fuel Moisture Code (FFMC) : This measures the moisture level in the smaller, surface materials that are often the first fuels to burn in a fire.

[ 4 ] Depth is 0-2 cm.

[ 5 ] This can include needles, dry grasses, small twigs and branches, dead leaves, and other small pieces of organic matter on the forest floor.

[ 6 ] The FFMC is a good indicator of how easily a new fire could start from an ignition source such as lightning.

Duff Moisture Code (DMC) : The DMC measures moisture levels in the organic soil just below the surface, as well as moisture in medium-sized woody material, such as small logs. Depth is 2-7 cm.

[ 5 ] The DMC gives an indication of how deeply a surface fire will penetrate.

[ 4 ] Drought Code (DC) : Long-term moisture deficits in deep soil layers is indicated by the Drought Code. It is measured from 8-18 cm in depth below ground level.

[ 5 ] It also indicates the flammability of large logs and trees.

[ 4 ] The DC is most effected by extended temperature trends and long-term rainfall levels.

Build-Up Index (BUI) : This number represents a combination of the DMC and the DC, and indicates how much fuel is available for combustion.

[ 4 ] Initial Spread Index (ISI) : The ISI factors in wind speed and the FFMC numbers to give an indication of how fast a fire might spread once ignited.

[ 4 ] The essential information needed to calculate this index is: the humidity of the air at the beginning of the afternoon (when it has its lowest value); the temperature in the middle of the afternoon (when it has its highest value); the 24-hour total precipitation (from noon to noon); the maximum speed of the average wind .

Usages [ edit ] The FWI is one of the most used fire indexes worldwide. It is used in Europe, North and South America, and in parts of Asia.

[ 7 ] Australia [ edit ] The FWI was adapted for use in Australia, with large FWI values most commonly associated with high wind speeds, followed secondly by low relative humidities and then thirdly by high temperatures.

[ 8 ] France [ edit ] This index is computed for 40 zones of France, three are in the Landes ( département with the biggest forest of France ). Météo France sends the IFM to civil defense authorities, which allows the prepositioning of men and vehicles, especially air units . The computed index is revised every year to take new data into account.

[ 9 ] Canada [ edit ] Each provincial forest fire prevention authority is calculating the FWI for the different regions under their jurisdiction. The Daily Severity Rating (DSR) is a numeric rating of the difficulty of controlling fires, based on the Fire Weather Index, that is calculated afterward. It reflects more accurately the expected efforts required for fire suppression.

[ citation needed ] New Caledonia [ edit ] A daily fire weather outlook is issued twice a day to alert the fire authority and help local firefighters to get organized. Provided information is based on FWI values computed at 20 weather stations representative of the climatic diversity of the country.

[ 10 ] Croatia [ edit ] FWI has been adopted in 1980s at Meteorological and Hydrological Service of Croatia where it is computed daily and used as a predictor in forest fire risk assessment. Final product is calibrated and ranked in 5 risk classes, from very low to very high. Product is daily forwarded to civil defense authorities.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] National Fire Danger Rating System Haines Index References [ edit ] ^ a b Wagner, C. E. Van (1987).

Development and structure of the Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index System . Forestry technical report. Ottawa: Canadian Forestry Service.

ISBN 978-0-662-15198-2 .

^ "Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System - Next generation" .

natural-resources.canada.ca . Natural Resources Canada. 2025-02-21 . Retrieved 2025-08-02 .

^ "Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index (FWI) System" .

Background Information .

Natural Resources Canada . 2009. Archived from the original on 2011-07-06 . Retrieved 2009-09-13 .

^ a b c d e "Canadian Wildland Fire Information System | Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index (FWI) System" .

cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca . Natural Resources Canada . Retrieved 2025-07-28 .

^ a b c Kudláčková, Lucie; Bartošová, Lenka; Linda, Rostislav; Bláhová, Monika; Poděbradská, Markéta; Fischer, Milan; Balek, Jan; Žalud, Zdeněk; Trnka, Miroslav (2024-06-03), Assessing fire danger classes of the Canadian Fire Weather Index across global environmental zones: A Review , Zenodo, doi : 10.5281/ZENODO.10589619 , retrieved 2025-08-12 ^ "Wildfire Glossary - Province of British Columbia" .

www2.gov.bc.ca . BC Wildfire Service - Province of British Columbia . Retrieved 2025-07-28 .

^ Baijnath-Rodino, Janine A.; Foufoula-Georgiou, Efi; Banerjee, Tirtha (August 2020), Reviewing the "Hottest" Fire Indices Worldwide , ESS Open Archive, p. 21, doi : 10.1002/essoar.10503854.1 , retrieved 2025-08-11 ^ Dowdy, Andrew J.; Mills, Graham A.; Finkele, Klara; de Groot, William (2009). "Index sensitivity analysis applied to the Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index and the McArthur Forest Fire Danger Index".

Meteorological Applications .

17 (3): 298– 312.

doi : 10.1002/met.170 .

S2CID 57319286 .

^ Plein feu sur la forêt Archived 2005-10-18 at the Wayback Machine , Météo France (26 March 2002, in French ) ^ Le caillou vert menacé par les feux [ permanent dead link ] , Météo France (Juin 2011, in French ) ^ Forest Fire Risk Index Croatia Archived 2017-02-27 at the Wayback Machine , DHMZ (in Croatian ) Bibliography [ edit ] Stocks, B.J., B.D. Lawson, M.E. Alexander, M.E., C.E. Van Wagner, R.S. McAlpine, T.J. Lynham, D.E. Dube. 1989.

The Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System: An Overview .

Forestry Chronicle Vol. 65 issue 6 : 450-457.

v t e Meteorological data and variables General Adiabatic processes Advection Buoyancy Lapse rate Lightning Surface solar radiation Surface weather analysis Visibility Vorticity Wind Wind shear Condensation Cloud Cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) Fog Convective condensation level (CCL) Lifting condensation level (LCL) Precipitable water Precipitation Water vapor Convection Convective available potential energy (CAPE) Convective inhibition (CIN) Convective instability Convective momentum transport Conditional symmetric instability Convective temperature ( T c ) Equilibrium level (EL) Free convective layer (FCL) Helicity K Index Level of free convection (LFC) Lifted index (LI) Maximum parcel level (MPL) Bulk Richardson number (BRN) Temperature Dew point ( T d ) Dew point depression Dry-bulb temperature Equivalent temperature ( T e ) Forest fire weather index Haines Index Heat index Humidex Humidity Relative humidity (RH) Mixing ratio Potential temperature ( θ ) Equivalent potential temperature ( θ e ) Sea surface temperature (SST) Temperature anomaly Thermodynamic temperature Vapor pressure Virtual temperature Wet-bulb temperature Wet-bulb globe temperature Wet-bulb potential temperature Wind chill Pressure Atmospheric pressure Baroclinity Barotropicity Pressure gradient Pressure-gradient force (PGF) Velocity Maximum potential intensity Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_fire_weather_index&oldid=1305576086 " Categories : Wildfire suppression Firefighting Forestry and the environment Atmospheric dynamics Hazard scales Meteorological indices Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 22:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest fire weather index 3 languages Add topic

