Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Year-numbering systems Toggle Year-numbering systems subsection 2.1 Eras 2.2 Epochs 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Solar calendars 3.2 Lunisolar calendars by dynasty 3.2.1 Zhou dynasty 3.2.2 Competing Warring states calendars 3.2.3 Qin and early Han dynasties 3.2.4 Han dynasty Tàichū calendar 3.2.5 Northern and Southern Dynasties Dàmíng calendar 3.2.6 Tang dynasty Wùyín Yuán calendar 3.2.7 Yuan dynasty Shòushí calendar 3.2.8 Ming and Qing Shíxiàn calendar 3.2.9 Modern Chinese calendar 3.3 Contributions from Chinese astronomy 4 Phenology Toggle Phenology subsection 4.1 Names of months 5 Horology Toggle Horology subsection 5.1 Day 5.2 Week 5.2.1 Seven-day week and 28-day cycle 5.3 Month 5.4 Year 5.4.1 Solar year and solar terms 5.5 Planets 5.6 Stars 5.6.1 Big Dipper 5.6.2 3 Enclosures and 28 Mansions 5.6.2.1 List of lunar mansions 6 Sexagenary system 7 Age reckoning 8 Holidays Toggle Holidays subsection 8.1 Chinese New Year 8.2 Holidays with the same day and same month 8.3 Full moon holidays (holidays on the fifteenth day) 8.4 Celebrations of the twelfth month 8.5 Celebrations of solar-term holidays 8.6 Religious holidays based on the Chinese calendar 8.7 Celebrations in Japan 8.8 Double celebrations due to intercalary months 9 Similar calendars Toggle Similar calendars subsection 9.1 Outlying areas of China 9.2 Non-Chinese areas 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Sources 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Chinese calendar 99 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Galego 贛語 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lunisolar calendar from China This article is about the traditional Chinese calendar. For the official calendar of modern China, see Gregorian calendar and Adoption of the Gregorian calendar § China and Taiwan .

See also: Sexagenary cycle Not to be confused with Republic of China calendar .

This article may lack focus or may be about more than one topic .

Please help improve this article , possibly by splitting the article or organising a disambiguation page . There might be further discussion about this on the talk page .

( November 2023 ) Tung Shing , an almanac closely tied to the traditional Chinese calendar, is vital in many aspects of life, including marking suitable dates related to indigenous beliefs and guiding the selection of the most auspicious days for events like weddings.

Chinese calendar Traditional Chinese 農曆 Simplified Chinese 农历 Literal meaning "agricultural calendar" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin nónglì Bopomofo ㄋㄨㄥˊ ㄌㄧˋ Wade–Giles nung 2 li 4 Tongyong Pinyin nóng-lì IPA [nʊ̌ŋ.lî] Yue: Cantonese Jyutping nung4 lik6 IPA [nʊŋ˩ lɪk̚˨] Part of a series on the History of science and technology in China List of discoveries List of inventions Four Great Inventions By subject Agriculture sericulture Alchemy Architecture classic gardens bridges Astronomy Calendar Cartography Ceramics Coinage Mathematics Units of measurement Traditional medicine herbology Metallurgy Military navy Printing Silk industry Transport navigation By era Neolithic and early Bronze Age Han Tang Song Yuan People's Republic agriculture space v t e In ancient China, a vertical pole and a horizontal ruler, aligned north and south on the ground, were used to determine the winter solstice and the length of the tropical year by measuring the length of the shadow cast.

The Chinese calendar , as the name suggests, is a lunisolar calendar created by or commonly used by the Chinese people . While this description is generally accurate, it does not provide a definitive or complete answer. A total of 102 calendars have been officially recorded in classical historical texts.

[ 1 ] In addition, many more calendars were created privately, with others being built by people who adapted Chinese cultural practices, such as the Koreans , Japanese , Vietnamese , and many others, over the course of a long history.

A Chinese calendar consists of twelve months , each aligned with the phases of the moon , along with an intercalary month inserted as needed to keep the calendar in sync with the seasons . It also features twenty-four solar terms , which track the position of the sun and are closely related to climate patterns. Among these, the winter solstice is the most significant reference point and must occur in the eleventh month of the year. Each month contains either twenty-nine or thirty days. The sexagenary cycle for each day runs continuously over thousands of years and serves as a determining factor to pinpoint a specific day amidst the many variations in the calendar. In addition, there are many other cycles attached to the calendar that determine the appropriateness of particular days, guiding decisions on what is considered auspicious or inauspicious for different types of activities.

The variety of calendars arises from deviations in algorithms and assumptions about inputs. The Chinese calendar is location-sensitive, meaning that calculations based on different locations, such as Beijing and Nanjing , can yield different results. This has even led to occasions where the Mid-Autumn Festival was celebrated on different days between mainland China and Hong Kong in 1978, [ 2 ] as some almanacs based on old imperial rule. The sun and moon do not move at a constant speed across the sky. While ancient Chinese astronomers were aware of this fact, it was simpler to create a calendar using average values. There was a series of struggles over this issue, and as measurement techniques improved over time, so did the precision of the algorithms. The driving force behind all these variations has been the pursuit of a more accurate description and prediction of natural phenomena.

The calendar during imperial times was regarded as sacred and mysterious. Rulers, with their mandate from Heaven, worked tirelessly to create an accurate calendar capable of predicting climate patterns and astronomical phenomena, which were crucial to all aspects of life, especially agriculture , fishing, and hunting. This, in turn, helped maintain their authority and secure an advantage over rivals. In imperial times, only the rulers had the authority to announce a calendar. An illegal calendar could be considered a serious offence, often punishable by capital punishment .

Early calendars were also lunisolar, but they were less stable due to their reliance on direct observation. Over time, increasingly refined methods for predicting lunar and solar cycles were developed, eventually reaching maturity around 104 BC, when the Taichu Calendar (太初曆), namely the genesis calendar, was introduced during the Han dynasty . This calendar laid the foundation for subsequent calendars, with its principles being followed by calendar experts for over two thousand years. Over centuries, the calendar was refined through advancements in astronomy and horology , with dynasties introducing variations to improve accuracy and meet cultural or political needs.

Improving accuracy has its downsides. The solar terms, namely solar positions, calculated based on the predicted location of the sun, make them far more irregular than a simple average model. In practice, solar terms don't need to be that precise because climate don't change overnight. The introduction of the leap second to the Chinese calendar is somewhat excessive, as it makes future predictions more challenging. This is particularly true since the leap second is typically announced six months in advance, which can complicate the determination of which day the new moon or solar terms fall on, especially when they occur close to midnight.

While modern China primarily adopts the Gregorian calendar for official purposes, the traditional calendar remains culturally significant, influencing festivals and cultural practices, determining the timing of Chinese New Year with traditions like the twelve animals of the Chinese zodiac still widely observed. The winter solstice serves as another New Year, a tradition inherited from ancient China. Beyond China, it has shaped other East Asian calendars, including the Korean , Vietnamese , and Japanese lunisolar systems, each adapting the same lunisolar principles while integrating local customs and terminology.

The sexagenary cycle, a repeating system of Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches , is used to mark years, months, and days. Before adopting their current names, the Heavenly Stems were known as the "Ten Suns" (十日), [ 3 ] [ 4 ] having research that it is a remnant of an ancient solar calendar .

[ 5 ] Epochs , or fixed starting points for year counting, have played an essential role in the Chinese calendar's structure. Some epochs are based on historical figures, such as the inauguration of the Yellow Emperor ( Huangdi ), while others marked the rise of dynasties or significant political shifts. This system allowed for the numbering of years based on regnal eras, with the start of a ruler's reign often resetting the count.

The Chinese calendar also tracks time in smaller units, including months, days, double-hour, hour and quarter periods. These timekeeping methods have influenced broader fields of horology, with some principles, such as precise time subdivisions, still evident in modern scientific timekeeping. The continued use of the calendar today highlights its enduring cultural, historical, and scientific significance.

Etymology [ edit ] Ancient form 秝 in oracle bone script The name of calendar is in Chinese : 曆 ; pinyin : lì , and was represented in earlier character forms variants ( 歷, 厤 ), and ultimately derived from an ancient form ( 秝 ). The ancient form of the character consists of two stalks of rice plant ( 禾 ), arranged in parallel. This character represents the order in space and also the order in time.

[ 6 ] As its meaning became complex, the modern dedicated character ( 曆 ) was created to represent the meaning of calendar.

Maintaining the correctness of calendars was an important task to maintain the authority of rulers, being perceived as a way to measure the ability of a ruler. For example, someone seen as a competent ruler would foresee the coming of seasons and prepare accordingly. This understanding was also relevant in predicting abnormalities of the Earth and celestial bodies , such as lunar and solar eclipses . The significant relationship between authority and timekeeping helps to explain why there are 102 calendars in Chinese history, trying to predict the correct courses of sun, moon and stars, and marking good time and bad time. Each calendar is named as ＿＿曆 and recorded in a dedicated calendar section in history books of different eras. The last one in imperial era was 時憲曆 . A ruler would issue an almanac before the commencement of each year.  There were private almanac issuers, usually illegal, when a ruler lost his control of some territories.

There are various Chinese terms for the calendar including: Nongli Calendar ( traditional Chinese : 農曆 ; simplified Chinese : 农历 ; pinyin : nónglì ; lit.

'agricultural calendar') Jiuli Calendar ( traditional Chinese : 舊曆 ; simplified Chinese : 旧历 ; pinyin : jiùlì ; Jyutping : Gau6 Lik6 ; lit.

'former calendar') Laoli Calendar ( traditional Chinese : 老曆 ; simplified Chinese : 老历 ; pinyin : lǎolì ; lit.

'old calendar') Zhongli Calendar ( traditional Chinese : 中曆 ; simplified Chinese : 中历 ; pinyin : zhōnglì ; Jyutping : zung1 lik6 ; lit.

'Chinese calendar') Huali Calendar ( traditional Chinese : 華曆 ; simplified Chinese : 华历 ; pinyin : huálì ; Jyutping : waa4 lik6 ; lit.

'Chinese calendar') 2017 Chinese calendar Page of a Chinese calendar containing monthly information in the years Daoguang 14–16, corresponding to 1834–1836 Various modern Chinese calendar names resulted from the struggle between the introduction of Gregorian calendar by government and the preservation of customs by the public in the era of Republic of China .

[ 7 ] The government wanted to abolish the Chinese calendar to force everyone to use the Gregorian calendar, and even abolished the Chinese New Year, but faced great opposition.  The public needed the astronomical Chinese calendar to do things at a proper time, for example farming and fishing; also, a wide spectrum of festivals and customs observations have been based on the calendar.  The government finally compromised and rebranded it as the agricultural calendar in 1947, [ 8 ] depreciating the calendar to merely agricultural use.

Some modern names of Chinese calendar and Gregorian calendar Chinese calendar Gregorian calendar 唐曆, 華曆, Chinese calendar 西洋曆, 洋曆, 西曆 , Western calendar 舊曆, 老曆, 古曆 , old calendar 新曆 , new calendar 陰曆 , yin calendar 陽曆 , yang calendar 傳統曆 , traditional calendar 農曆, 農民曆 , agricultural calendar 夏曆 , The first dynasty calendar 黄曆, 黄帝曆 , Yellow Emperor calendar 公曆 , public calendar, namely universal calendar or common calendar 國曆 , national calendar 皇曆 , Imperial calendar (obsoleted) After the end of the imperial era, there are some almanacs based upon the algorithm of the last Imperial calendar with longitude of Peking .  Such almanacs were under the name of "universal book" 通書 , or under Cantonese name 通勝 , transcribed as Tung Shing .  Later these almanacs moved to new calculation based on the location of Purple Mountain Observatory , with longitude of 120°E.

Year-numbering systems [ edit ] Eras [ edit ] Main article: Chinese era name Ancient China numbered years from an emperor's ascension to the throne or his declaration of a new era name. The first recorded reign title was Jiànyuán ( 建元 ), from 140 BCE; the last reign title was Xuāntǒng ( 宣統 ; 宣统 ), from 1908 CE. The era system was abolished in 1912, after which the current or Republican era was used.

Epochs [ edit ] See also: Epoch Further information: Chinese era name and Regnal year An epoch is a point in time chosen as the origin of a particular calendar era , thus serving as a reference point from which subsequent time or dates are measured. The use of epochs in Chinese calendar system allow for a chronological starting point from whence to begin point continuously numbering subsequent dates. Various epochs have been used. Similarly, nomenclature similar to that of the Christian era has occasionally been used: [ 9 ] Era Chinese name Start Year 1 2025 CE is year...

Yellow Emperor (Huángdì) year 黄帝紀年 Yellow Emperor (YE) began reigning 2697 BCE or 2698 BCE 4722 or 4723 Yáo year 唐堯紀年 Emperor Yao began reigning 2156 BCE 4181 Gònghé year 共和紀年 Gonghe Regency began 841 BCE 2866 Confucius year 孔子紀年 Confucius 's birth year 551 BCE 2576 Unity year 統一紀年 Qin Shi Huang began reigning 221 BCE 2246 No reference date is universally accepted. The most popular is the Gregorian calendar ( 公曆 ; 公历 ; gōnglì ; 'common calendar').

During the 17th century, the Jesuit missionaries tried to determine the epochal year of the Chinese calendar. In his Sinicae historiae decas prima (published in Munich in 1658), Martino Martini (1614–1661) dated the Yellow Emperor 's ascension at 2697 BCE and began the Chinese calendar with the reign of Fuxi (which, according to Martini, began in 2952 BCE).

Philippe Couplet 's 1686 Chronological table of Chinese monarchs ( Tabula chronologica monarchiae sinicae ) gave the same date for the Yellow Emperor. The Jesuits' dates provoked interest in Europe, where they were used for comparison with Biblical chronology.

[ citation needed ] Modern Chinese chronology has generally accepted Martini's dates, except that it usually places the reign of the Yellow Emperor at 2698 BCE and omits his predecessors Fuxi and Shennong as "too legendary to include".

[ This quote needs a citation ] Publications began using the estimated birth date of the Yellow Emperor as the first year of the Han calendar in 1903, with newspapers and magazines proposing different dates.

Jiangsu province counted 1905 as the year 4396 (using a year 1 of 2491 BCE, and implying that 2025 CE is 4516), and the newspaper Ming Pao ( 明報 ) reckoned 1905 as 4603 (using a year 1 of 2698 BCE, and implying that 2025 CE is 4723).

[ citation needed ] Liu Shipei ( 劉師培 , 1884–1919) created the Yellow Emperor Calendar ( 黃帝紀元, 黃帝曆 or 軒轅紀年 ), with year 1 as the birth of the emperor (which he determined as 2711 BCE, implying that 2025 CE is 4736).

[ 10 ] There is no evidence that this calendar was used before the 20th century.

[ 11 ] Liu calculated that the 1900 international expedition sent by the Eight-Nation Alliance to suppress the Boxer Rebellion entered Beijing in the 4611th year of the Yellow Emperor.

Taoists later adopted Yellow Emperor Calendar and named it Tao Calendar ( 道曆 ).

On 2 January 1912, Sun Yat-sen announced changes to the official calendar and era. 1 January was 14 Shíyīyuè 4609 Huángdì year, assuming a year 1 of 2698 BCE, making 2025 CE year 4723. Many overseas Chinese communities like San Francisco's Chinatown adopted the change.

[ 12 ] The modern Chinese standard calendar uses the epoch of the Gregorian calendar, which is on 1 January of the year 1 CE.

History [ edit ] The Chinese calendar system has a long history, which has traditionally been associated with specific dynastic periods . Various individual calendar types have been developed with different names. In terms of historical development, some of the calendar variations are associated with dynastic changes along a spectrum beginning with a prehistorical/mythological time to and through well attested historical dynastic periods. Many individuals have been associated with the development of the Chinese calendar, including researchers into underlying astronomy; and, furthermore, the development of instruments of observation are historically important. Influences from India, Islam, and Jesuits also became significant.

Solar calendars [ edit ] Five-phase and four-quarter calendars The traditional Chinese lunisolar calendar was developed between 771 BCE and 476 BCE, during the Spring and Autumn period of the Eastern Zhou dynasty. Solar calendars were used before the Zhou dynasty period, along with the basic sexagenary system.

One version of the solar calendar is the five-elements (or phases) calendar ( 五行曆 ; 五行历 ; wǔxíng lì ), which derives from the Wu Xing . A 365-day year was divided into five phases of 72 days, with each phase preceded by an intercalary day associated with the claimed beginning of the following 72 day period of domination by the next Wu Xing element; thus, the five phases each begin with a governing-element day ( 行御 ), followed by a 72-day period characterized by the ruling element. Years began on a jiǎzǐ ( 甲子 ) day and a 72-day wood phase, followed by a bǐngzǐ ( 丙子 ) day and a 72-day fire phase; a wùzǐ ( 戊子 ) day and a 72-day earth phase; a gēngzǐ ( 庚子 ) day and a 72-day metal phase, and a rénzǐ ( 壬子 ) day followed by a water phase.

[ 13 ] Each phase consisted of two three-week months, making each year ten months long. Other days were tracked using the Yellow River Map ( He Tu ).

Another version is a four-quarters calendar ( 四時八節曆 ; 四时八节历 ; sìshí bājié lì ; 'four seasons eight solar terms calendar', or 四分曆 ; 四分历 ; sìfēn lì ; 'quarters calendar'). The weeks were ten days long, with one month consisting of three weeks. A year had 12 months, with a ten-day week intercalated in summer as needed to keep up with the tropical year. The 10 Heavenly Stems and 12 Earthly Branches were used to mark days.

[ 14 ] A third version is the balanced calendar ( 調曆 ; 调历 ; tiáo lì ). A year was 365.25 days, and a month was 29.5 days. After every 16th month, a half-month was intercalated. According to oracle bone records, the Shang dynasty calendar ( c.

1600 – c.

1046 BCE) was a balanced calendar with 12 to 14 months in a year; the month after the winter solstice was Zhēngyuè .

[ 15 ] A solar calendar called the Tung Shing , the Yellow Calendar or Imperial Calendar (both alluding to Yellow Emperor ) continued to see use as an almanac and agricultural guide throughout Chinese history.

[ 16 ] Lunisolar calendars by dynasty [ edit ] See also: Lunisolar calendar Lunisolar calendars involve correlations of the cycles of the sun (solar) and the moon (lunar).

Zhou dynasty [ edit ] The first lunisolar calendar was the Zhou calendar ( 周曆 ; 周历 ), introduced under the Zhou dynasty (1046 BCE – 256 BCE). This calendar sets the beginning of the year at the day of the new moon before the winter solstice.

Competing Warring states calendars [ edit ] See also: Warring States period Several competing lunisolar calendars were introduced as Zhou devolved into the Warring States, especially by states fighting Zhou control during the Warring States period (perhaps 475 BCE - 221 BCE).
From the Warring States period (ending in 221 BCE), six especially significant calendar systems are known to have begun to be developed. Later on, during their future course in history, the modern names for the ancient six calendars were also developed: Huangdi, Yin, Zhou, Xia, Zhuanxu, and Lu .

[ 17 ] Modern historical knowledge and records are limited for the earlier calendars. These calendars are known as the six ancient calendars ( 古六曆 ; 古六历 ), or quarter-remainder calendars, ( 四分曆 ; 四分历 ; sìfēnlì ), since all calculate a year as 365 + 1 ⁄ 4 days long. Months begin on the day of the new moon, and a year has 12 or 13 months. Intercalary months (a 13th month) are added to the end of the year.

The state of Lu issued its own Lu calendar ( 魯曆 ; 鲁历 ).

The state of Jin issued the Xia calendar ( 夏曆 ; 夏历 ) [ 18 ] with a year beginning on the day of the new moon nearest the March equinox .

The state of Qin issued the Zhuanxu calendar ( 顓頊曆 ; 颛顼历 ), with a year beginning on the day of the new moon nearest the winter solstice .

The Qiang and Dai calendars are modern versions of the Zhuanxu calendar, used by highland peoples.

The Song state 's Yin calendar ( 殷曆 ; 殷历 ) began its year on the day of the new moon after the winter solstice.

Qin and early Han dynasties [ edit ] See also: Qin dynasty and Han dynasty After Qin Shi Huang unified China under the Qin dynasty in 221 BCE, the Qin calendar ( 秦曆 ; 秦历 ) was introduced. It followed most of the rules governing the Zhuanxu calendar , but the month order was that of the Xia calendar ; the year began with month 10 and ended with month 9, analogous to a Gregorian calendar beginning in October and ending in September. The intercalary month, known as the second Jiǔyuè ( 後九月 ; 后九月 ), was placed at the end of the year. The Qin calendar was used going into the Han dynasty.

Han dynasty Tàichū calendar [ edit ] Further information: Han dynasty and Emperor Wu of Han § Calendar reform Emperor Wu of Han r.

141 – 87 BCE introduced reforms in the seventh of the eleven named eras of his reign, Tàichū ( 太初 ; 'Grand Beginning'), 104 BCE – 101 BCE. His Tàichū calendar ( 太初曆 ; 太初历 ; 'grand beginning calendar') defined a solar year as 365 + 385 ⁄ 1539 days (365;06:00:14.035), and the lunisolar month had 29 + 43 ⁄ 81 days (29;12:44:44.444). 
Since ( 365 + 385 1539 ) × × 19 = ( 29 + 43 81 ) × × ( 19 × × 12 + 7 ) {\displaystyle \left(365+{\frac {385}{1539}}\right)\times 19=\left(29+{\frac {43}{81}}\right)\times \left(19\times 12+7\right)} the 19 years cycle used for the 7 additional months was taken as an exact one, and not as an approximation.

This calendar introduced the 24 solar terms , dividing the year into 24 equal parts of 15° each. Solar terms were paired, with the 12 combined periods known as climate terms . The first solar term of the period was known as a pre-climate ( 節氣 ; 节气 ), and the second was a mid-climate ( 中氣 ; 中气 ). Months were named for the mid-climate to which they were closest, and a month without a mid-climate was an intercalary month.

[ 19 ] The Taichu calendar established a framework for traditional calendars, with later calendars adding to the basic formula.

Northern and Southern Dynasties Dàmíng calendar [ edit ] See also: Northern and Southern dynasties § Southern dynasties The Dàmíng calendar ( 大明曆 ; 大明历 ; 'brightest calendar'), created in the Northern and Southern Dynasties by Zu Chongzhi (429 CE – 500 CE), introduced the equinoxes.

Tang dynasty Wùyín Yuán calendar [ edit ] See also: Tang dynasty Further information: Syzygy (astronomy) The use of syzygy to determine the lunisolar month was first described in the Tang dynasty Wùyín Yuán calendar ( 戊寅元曆 ; 戊寅元历 ; 'earth tiger epoch calendar').

Yuan dynasty Shòushí calendar [ edit ] See also: Yuan dynasty The Yuan dynasty Shòushí calendar ( 授時曆 ; 授时历 ; 'season granting calendar') used spherical trigonometry to find the length of the tropical year .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] The calendar had a 365.2425-day year, identical to the Gregorian calendar .

[ 23 ] Ming and Qing Shíxiàn calendar [ edit ] Main article: Chongzhen calendar From 1645 to 1913 the Shíxiàn or Chongzhen calendar was developed. During the late Ming dynasty , the Chinese Emperor appointed Xu Guangqi in 1629 to be the leader of the Shixian calendar reform. Assisted by Jesuits, he translated Western astronomical works and introduced new concepts, such as those of Nicolaus Copernicus , Johannes Kepler , Galileo Galilei , and Tycho Brahe ; however, the new calendar was not released before the end of the dynasty.

In the early Qing dynasty , Johann Adam Schall von Bell submitted the calendar which was edited by the lead of Xu Guangqi to the Shunzhi Emperor .

[ 24 ] The Qing government issued it as the Shíxiàn (seasonal) calendar . In this calendar, the solar terms are 15° each along the ecliptic and it can be used as a solar calendar . However, the length of the climate term near the perihelion is less than 30 days and there may be two mid-climate terms. The Shíxiàn calendar changed the mid-climate-term rule to "decide the month in sequence, except the intercalary month." [ 25 ] The present "traditional calendar" follows the Shíxiàn calendar, except: The baseline is Chinese Standard Time, rather than Beijing local time.

Modern astronomical data, rather than mathematical calculations, is used.

Modern Chinese calendar [ edit ] The Chinese calendar lost its place as the country's official calendar at the beginning of the 20th century, [ 26 ] its use has continued.

The Republic of China Calendar published by the Beiyang government of the Republic of China still listed the dates of the Chinese calendar in addition to the Gregorian calendar.

In 1929, the Nationalist government tried to ban the traditional Chinese calendar. The Kuómín Calendar published by the government no longer listed the dates of the Chinese calendar. 
However, Chinese people were used to the traditional calendar and many traditional customs were based on the Chinese calendar. The ban failed and was lifted in 1934.

[ 27 ] The latest Chinese calendar was "New Edition of Wànniánlì , revised edition", edited by Beijing Purple Mountain Observatory, People's Republic of China.

[ 28 ] In China, the modern calendar is defined by the Chinese national standard GB/T 33661–2017, [ 29 ] "Calculation and Promulgation of the Chinese Calendar", issued by the Standardization Administration of China on 12 May 2017.

Although modern-day China uses the Gregorian calendar , the traditional Chinese calendar governs holidays, such as the Chinese New Year and Lantern Festival , in both China and overseas Chinese communities. It also provides the traditional Chinese nomenclature of dates within a year which people use to select auspicious days for weddings , funerals, moving or starting a business.

[ 30 ] The evening state-run news program Xinwen Lianbo in the People's Republic of China continues to announce the months and dates in both the Gregorian and the traditional lunisolar calendar.

To optimize the Chinese calendar, astronomers have proposed a number of changes.

Kao Ping-tse ( 高平子 ; 1888–1970), a Chinese astronomer who co-founded the Purple Mountain Observatory , proposed that month numbers be calculated before the new moon and solar terms to be rounded to the day. Since the intercalary month is determined by the first month without a mid-climate and the mid-climate time varies by time zone, countries that adopted the calendar but calculate with their own time could vary from the time in China.

[ 31 ] Contributions from Chinese astronomy [ edit ] Main article: Chinese astronomy The Chinese calendar has been a development involving much observation and calculation of the apparent movements of the Sun, Moon, planets, and stars, as observed from Earth.

Many Chinese astronomers have contributed to the development of the Chinese calendar. Many were of the scholarly or shi class ( Chinese : 士 ; pinyin : shì ), including writers of history, such as Sima Qian .

Notable Chinese astronomers who have contributed to the development of the calendar include Gan De , Shi Shen , and Zu Chongzhi Further information: Chinese star maps and Armillary sphere Early technological developments aiding in calendar development include the development of the gnomon .  Later technological developments useful to the calendar system include naming, numbering and mapping of the sky, the development of analog computational devices such as the armillary sphere and the water clock, and the establishment of observatories.

Phenology [ edit ] Main article: Phenology Early calendar systems, including the Chinese calendar, often were closely tied to natural phenomena.

Phenology is the study of periodic events in biological life cycles and how these are influenced by seasonal and interannual variations in climate , as well as habitat factors (such as elevation ).

[ 32 ] The plum-rains season ( 梅雨 ), the rainy season in late spring and early summer, begins on the first bǐng day after Mangzhong ( 芒種 ) and ends on the first wèi day after Xiaoshu ( 小暑 ). The Three Fu ( 三伏 ; sānfú ) are three periods of hot weather, counted from the first gēng day after the summer solstice. The first fu ( 初伏 ; chūfú ) is 10 days long. The mid- fu ( 中伏 ; zhōngfú ) is 10 or 20 days long. The last fu ( 末伏 ; mòfú ) is 10 days from the first gēng day after the beginning of autumn.

[ 33 ] The Shujiu cold days ( 數九 ; shǔjǐu ; 'counting to nine') are the 81 days after the winter solstice (divided into nine sets of nine days), and are considered the coldest days of the year. Each nine-day unit is known by its order in the set, followed by "nine" ( 九 ).

[ 34 ] In traditional Chinese culture , "nine" represents the infinity, which is also the number of "Yang". According to one belief nine times accumulation of "Yang" gradually reduces the "Yin", and finally the weather becomes warm.

[ 35 ] Names of months [ edit ] Lunisolar months were originally named according to natural phenomena. Current naming conventions use numbers as the month names. Every month is also associated with one of the twelve Earthly Branches .

Month number Starts on Gregorian date Phenological name Earthly Branch name Modern name 1 between 21 January – 20 February * 陬月 ; zōuyuè ; 'corner month'. square of Pegasus month 寅月 ; yínyuè ; 'tiger month' 正月 ; zhēngyuè ; 'first month' 2 between 20 February – 21 March * 杏月 ; xìngyuè ; ' apricot month' 卯月 ; mǎoyuè ; 'rabbit month' 二月 ; èryuè ; 'second month' 3 between 21 March – 20 April * 桃月 ; táoyuè ; ' peach month' 辰月 ; chényuè ; 'dragon month' 三月 ; sānyuè ; 'third month' 4 between 20 April – 21 May * 梅月 ; méiyuè ; ' plum month' 巳月 ; sìyuè ; 'snake month' 四月 ; sìyuè ; 'fourth month' 5 between 21 May – 21 June * 榴月 ; liúyuè ; ' pomegranate month' 午月 ; wǔyuè ; 'horse month' 五月 ; wǔyuè ; 'fifth month' 6 between 21 June – 23 July * 荷月 ; héyuè ; ' lotus month' 未月 ; wèiyuè ; 'goat month' 六月 ; liùyuè ; 'sixth month' 7 between 23 July – 23 August * 蘭月 ; 兰月 ; lányuè ; ' orchid month' 申月 ; shēnyuè ; 'monkey month' 七月 ; qīyuè ; 'seventh month' 8 between 23 August – 23 September * 桂月 ; guìyuè ; ' osmanthus month' 酉月 ; yǒuyuè ; 'rooster month' 八月 ; bāyuè ; 'eighth month' 9 between 23 September – 23 October * 菊月 ; júyuè ; ' chrysanthemum month' 戌月 ; xūyuè ; 'dog month' 九月 ; jiǔyuè ; 'ninth month' 10 between 23 October – 22 November * 露月 ; lùyuè ; ' dew month' 亥月 ; hàiyuè ; 'pig month' 十月 ; shíyuè ; 'tenth month' 11 between 22 November – 22 December * 冬月 ; dōngyuè ; 'winter month'; 葭月 ; jiāyuè ; ' reed month' 子月 ; zǐyuè ; 'rat month' 十一月 ; 'eleventh month' or 冬月 ; dōngyuè ; 'eleventh month' 12 between 22 December – 21 January * 冰月 ; bīngyuè ; 'ice month' 丑月 ; chǒuyuè ; 'ox month' 十二月 ; 'twelfth month' or 臘月 ; 腊月 ; làyuè ; 'end-of-year month' Gregorian dates are approximate and should be used with caution. Many years have intercalary months.

Though the numbered month names are often used for the corresponding month number in the Gregorian calendar, it is important to realize that the numbered month names are not interchangeable with the Gregorian months when talking about Chinese calendar dates.

Incorrect : The Dragon Boat Festival falls on 5 May in the traditional Chinese calendar, whereas the Double Ninth Festival , Lantern Festival , and Qixi Festival fall on 9 September, 15 January, and 7 July in the traditional Chinese calendar, respectively.

Correct : The Dragon Boat Festival falls on Wǔyuè 5th in the traditional Chinese calendar, whereas the Double Ninth Festival , Lantern Festival and Qixi Festival fall on Jiǔyuè 9th, Zhēngyuè 15th and Qīyuè 7th in the traditional Chinese calendar, respectively.

[ a ] Alternate Chinese Zodiac correction : The Dragon Boat Festival falls on Horse Month 5th in the traditional Chinese calendar, whereas the Double Ninth Festival , Lantern Festival and Qixi Festival fall on Dog Month 9th, Tiger Month 15th and Monkey Month 7th in the traditional Chinese calendar, respectively (see Sexagenary system below).

Horology [ edit ] See also: Chronometry Further information: Chinese astronomy and Chinese astrology Horology, or chronometry, refers to the measurement of time. In the context of the Chinese calendar, horology involves the definition and mathematical measurement of terms or elements such observable astronomic movements or events such as are associated with days, months, years, hours, and so on. These measurements are based upon objective, observable phenomena. Calendar accuracy is based upon accuracy and precision of measurements.

The Chinese calendar is lunisolar , similar to the Hindu , Hebrew and ancient Babylonian calendars. In this case the calendar is in part based in objective, observable phenomena and in part by mathematical analysis to correlate the observed phenomena. Lunisolar calendars especially attempt to correlate the solar and lunar cycles, but other considerations can be agricultural and seasonal or phenological, or religious, or even political.

Basic horologic definitions include that days begin and end at midnight, and months begin on the day of the new moon . Years start on the second (or third) new moon after the winter solstice .

Solar terms govern the beginning, middle, and end of each month. A sexagenary cycle , comprising the heavenly stems ( Chinese : 干 ; pinyin : gān ) and the earthly branches ( Chinese : 支 ; pinyin : zhī ), is used as identification alongside each year and month, including intercalary months or leap months. Months are also annotated as either long ( Chinese : 大 ; lit.

'big' for months with 30 days) or short ( Chinese : 小 ; lit.

'small' for months with 29 days). There are also other elements of the traditional Chinese calendar.

Day [ edit ] See also: Day Days are Sun oriented, based upon divisions of the solar year. A day ( 日 ; rì ) is considered both traditionally and currently to be the time from one midnight to the next. Traditionally days (including the night-time portion) were divided into 12 double-hours, and in modern times the 24 hour system has become more standard.

Week [ edit ] For more information on the adoption of the seven-day week, see Names of the days of the week § East Asian tradition .

For more information on the ten-day week, see Decan .

As early as the Bronze Age Xia dynasty , days were grouped into nine- or ten-day weeks known as xún ( 旬 ).

[ 36 ] Months consisted of three xún . The first 10 days were the early xún ( 上旬 ), the middle 10 the mid xún ( 中旬 ), and the last nine (or 10) days were the late xún ( 下旬 ). Japan adopted this pattern , with 10-day-weeks known as jun ( 旬 ) . In Korea, they were known as sun ( 순 , 旬 ).

The structure of xún led to public holidays every five or ten days. Officials of the Han dynasty were legally required to rest every five days (twice a xún , or 5–6 times a month). The name of these breaks became huàn ( 澣 ; 浣 ; 'wash').

Grouping days into sets of ten is still used today in referring to specific natural events. "Three Fu" ( 三伏 ), a 29–30-day period which is the hottest of the year, reflects its three- xún length.

[ 33 ] After the winter solstice, nine sets of nine days were counted to calculate the end of winter.

[ 37 ] Seven-day week and 28-day cycle [ edit ] The seven-day week was adopted from the Hellenistic system by the 4th century CE [ citation needed ] , although its method of transmission into China is unclear. It was again transmitted to China in the 8th century by Manichaeans via Kangju ,  spoken in a variant of Sogdian language (a Central Asian kingdom near Samarkand ), [ 38 ] [ b ] [ c ] . Its meaning is derived from the five classical planets, along with the Sun and Moon, making a total of seven celestial bodies highly visible in the sky, in Chinese translation 七曜. At that time, people created simple handwritten almanacs, where Sunday was marked with the character 密.

[ 39 ] The seven-day week had fallen out of favour for a long time, only to be revived when Christianity gained a foothold in China and later made mandatory by the government.

"星房虛昴" donated  Sunday "牛", "女" and "虛" of 28-day cycle in almanac, falling on Friday, Saturday and Sunday correspondingly,  (Line read from right to left) In between, a 28-day cycle system was used, borrowing from the Twenty-Eight Mansions system. Originally, these mansions tracked the moon's position against the stars in the sky, much like the sun and zodiac, and became part of the Chinese constellations . However, in this context, the 28-day cycle had no connection to astronomy and was used purely for fortune-telling. This information was documented and is still referenced in the Tung Shing , a Chinese almanac. When Westerners introduced the seven-day week system to China, whether for religious, business, or colonial reasons, both the Chinese and the Westerners found the 28-day cycle useful. Sunday, for instance, was written as "星房虛昴," indicating the corresponding four days on the 28-day cycle, as easily found in the almanac.

[ 40 ] Following the calendrical reforms in China during the era of the Republic of China, a period marked by both rejection and integration, the seven-day week system became the most widely used, aligning with the Western world.

[ 41 ] Seven-day week comparison Chinese 日 月 火星 水星 木星 金星 土星 Literal meaning sun moon fire star water star wood star metal star earth star English meaning Sun Moon Mars Mercury Jupiter Venus Saturn 七曜, the seven shiny 日曜日 月曜日 火曜日 水曜日 木曜日 金曜日 土曜日 literal meaning Sun-day Moon-day Mars-day Mercury-day Jupiter-day Venus-day Saturn-day Sogdian names Mīr Māq Wnqān Tīr Wrnzt Nāqit Kēwān Chinese phonic translation 密/蜜 莫 雲漢 咥/嘀 溫沒司/嗢沒司/鶻勿斯 那頡/那歇/般頡 雞緩/枳浣 Modern English Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Modern Chinese 星期日 星期一 星期二 星期三 星期四 星期五 星期六 Hong Kong variant 禮拜日 禮拜一 禮拜二 禮拜三 禮拜四 禮拜五 禮拜六 28-day cycle, borrowing from Twenty-Eight Mansions 星 張 翼 軫 角 亢 氐 房 心 尾 箕 斗 牛 女 虛 危 室 室 壁 奎 婁 昴 畢 觜 參 井 鬼 柳 Month [ edit ] See also: Month Months are Moon oriented.

Month ( 月 ; yuè ), the time from one new moon to the next. These synodic months are about 29 + 17 ⁄ 32 days long. This includes the Date ( 日期 ; rìqī ), when a day occurs in the month. Days are numbered in sequence from 1 to 29 (or 30). And, a Calendar month ( 日曆月 ; rìlì yuè ), is when a month occurs within a year. Some months may be repeated.

Months are defined by the time between new moons , which averages approximately 29 + 17 ⁄ 32 days. There is no specified length of any particular Chinese month, so the first month could have 29 days (short month, 小月 ) in some years and 30 days (long month, 大月 ) in other years.

Since the beginning of the month is determined by when the new moon occurs, other countries using this calendar use their own time standards to calculate it; this results in deviations. The first new moon in 1968 was at 16:29 UTC on 29 January. Since North Vietnam used UTC+07:00 to calculate their Vietnamese calendar and South Vietnam used UTC+08:00 (Beijing time) to calculate theirs, North Vietnam began the Tết holiday at 29 January at 23:29 while South Vietnam began it on 30 January at 00:15. The time difference allowed asynchronous attacks in the Tet Offensive .

[ 12 ] Because astronomical observation determines month length, dates on the calendar correspond to moon phases. The first day of each month is the new moon. On the seventh or eighth day of each month, the first-quarter moon is visible in the afternoon and early evening. On the 15th or 16th day of each month, the full moon is visible all night. On the 22nd or 23rd day of each month, the last-quarter moon is visible late at night and in the morning.

Different eras used different systems to determine the length of each month. The synodic month of the Taichu calendar was 29 + 43 ⁄ 81 days long. The 7th-century, Tang-dynasty Wùyín Yuán Calendar was the first to determine month length by synodic month instead of the cycling method. Since then, month lengths have primarily been determined by observation and prediction.

The days of the month are always written with two characters and numbered beginning with 1. Days one to 10 are written with the day's numeral, preceded by the character Chū ( 初 ); Chūyī ( 初一 ) is the first day of the month, and Chūshí ( 初 十 ) the 10th. Days 11 to 20 are written as regular Chinese numerals ; Shíwǔ ( 十五 ) is the 15th day of the month, and Èrshí ( 二十 ) the 20th. Days 21 to 29 are written with the character Niàn ( 廿 ) before the characters one through nine; Niànsān ( 廿三 ), for example, is the 23rd day of the month. Day 30 (when applicable) is written as the numeral Sānshí ( 三十 ).

Year [ edit ] See also: Year A year ( 年 ; nián ) is based upon the time of one revolution of Earth around the Sun, rounded to whole days. Traditionally, the year is measured from the first day of spring (lunisolar year) or the winter solstice (solar year).

A 12-month-year using this system has 354 days, which would drift significantly from the tropical year . To fix this, traditional Chinese years have a 13-month year approximately once every three years. The 13-month version has the same long and short months alternating, but adds a 30-day leap month ( 閏月 ; rùnyuè ). Years with 12 months are called common years, and 13-month years are known as long years.

A solar year is astronomically about 365 + 31 ⁄ 128 days. A lunisolar calendar year is either 353–355 or 383–385 days long. The lunisolar calendar ( 日曆 ; rìlì ) year usually begins on the new moon closest to Lichun , the first day of spring.

[ 12 ] This is typically the second and sometimes third new moon after the winter solstice.

The lunisolar year begins with the first spring month, Zhēngyuè ( 正月 ; 'capital month'), and ends with the last winter month, Làyuè ( 臘月 ; 腊月 ; 'sacrificial month'). All other months are named for their number in the month order. See below on the timing of the Chinese New Year.

Solar year and solar terms [ edit ] Main article: Solar term The solar year ( traditional Chinese : 歲 ; simplified Chinese : 岁 ; pinyin : Suì ), the time between winter solstices , is divided into 24 solar terms known as jié qì ( 節氣 ). Each term is a 15° portion of the ecliptic. These solar terms mark both Western and Chinese seasons, as well as equinoxes, solstices, and other Chinese events. Pairs of solar terms are referred to as climate terms. The first solar term in a pair is the "pre-climate" ( 節氣 ; 节气 ; Jiéqì ), and the second is the "mid-climate" ( 中氣 ; 中气 ; Zhōngqì ). The Zhōngqì are considered "major terms", while the Jiéqì are deemed "minor terms".

[ 12 ] The solar terms qīng míng ( 清明 ) on 5 April and dōng zhì ( 冬至 ) on 22 December are both celebrated events in China.

[ 12 ] The solar year ( suì , 歲 ; 岁 ) begins on the December solstice and proceeds through the 24 solar terms.

[ 12 ] Since the speed of the Sun's apparent motion in the elliptical is variable, the time between major terms/mid-climates is not fixed. This variation in time between major terms results in different solar year lengths. There are generally 11 or 12 complete lunisolar months, plus two incomplete lunisolar months around the winter solstice, in a solar year. The complete lunisolar months are numbered from 0 to 10, and the incomplete lunisolar month is considered the 11th month. If there are 12 complete (and one incomplete) lunisolar months within a solar year, it is known as a leap year (a year possessing an intercalary month).

[ 12 ] Different versions of the traditional calendar might have different average solar year lengths. For example, one solar year of the 1st century BCE Tàichū calendar is 365 + 385 ⁄ 1539 (365.25016) days. A solar year of the 13th-century Shòushí calendar is 365 + 97 ⁄ 400 (365.2425) days, identical to the Gregorian calendar. The additional .00766 day from the Tàichū calendar leads to a one-day shift every 130.5 years.

24 solar terms Number Pinyin name Chinese name Translation Approximate date Corresponding astrological sign J1 Lì chūn 立春 Beginning of spring 5 February ♒️ Aquarius Z1 Yǔ shuǐ 雨水 Rain water 19 February ♓️ Pisces J2 Jīng zhé 驚蟄 ； 惊蛰 Waking of insects 6 March Z2 Chūn fēn 春分 Spring divide 21 March ♈️ Aries J3 Qīng míng 清明 Pure brightness 5 April Z3 Gǔ yǔ 穀雨 ； 谷雨 Grain rain 20 April ♉️ Taurus J4 Lì xià 立夏 Beginning of summer 6 May Z4 Xiǎo mǎn 小滿 ； 小满 Grain full 21 May ♊️ Gemini J5 Máng zhòng 芒種 ； 芒种 Grain in ear 6 June Z5 Xià zhì 夏至 Summer extremity 22 June ♋️ Cancer J6 Xiǎo shǔ 小暑 Slight heat 7 July Z6 Dà shǔ 大暑 Great heat 23 July ♌️ Leo J7 Lì qiū 立秋 Beginning of autumn 8 August Z7 Chǔ shǔ 處暑 ； 处暑 Limit of heat 23 August ♍️ Virgo J8 Bái lù 白露 White dew 8 September Z8 Qiū fēn 秋分 Autumn divide 23 September ♎️ Libra J9 Hán lù 寒露 Cold dew 8 October Z9 Shuāng jiàng 霜降 Descent of frost 24 October ♏️ Scorpio J10 Lì dōng 立冬 Beginning of winter 8 November Z10 Xiǎo xuě 小雪 Slight snow 22 November ♐️ Sagittarius J11 Dà xuě 大雪 Great snow 7 December Z11 Dōng zhì 冬至 Winter extremity 22 December ♑️ Capricorn J12 Xiǎo hán 小寒 Slight cold 6 January Z12 Dà hán 大寒 Great cold 20 January ♒️ Aquarius If there are 12 complete lunisolar months within a solar year, [ d ] the first lunisolar month that does not contain any mid-climate is designated the leap , or intercalary, month.

[ 12 ] Leap months are numbered with rùn 閏 , the character for "intercalary", plus the name of the month they follow. In 2017, the intercalary month after month six was called Rùn Liùyuè , or "intercalary sixth month" ( 閏 六月 ) and written as 6i or 6+ . The next intercalary month (in 2020, after month four) will be called Rùn Sìyuè ( 閏 四月 ) and written 4i or 4+ .

Planets [ edit ] The movements of the Sun, Moon, Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter and Saturn (sometimes known as the seven luminaries ) are the references for calendar calculations.

The distance between Mercury and the sun is less than 30° (the sun's height at chénshí : 辰時 , 8:00 to 10:00 am), so Mercury was sometimes called the "chen star" ( 辰 星 ); it is more commonly known as the "water star" ( 水星 ).

Venus appears at dawn and dusk and is known as the "bright star" ( 啟明 星 ; 启明 星 ) or "long star" ( 長庚 星 ; 长庚 星 ).

Mars looks like fire and occurs irregularly, and is known as the "fire star" ( 熒惑 星 ; 荧惑 星 or 火星 ). Mars is the punisher in Chinese mythology. When Mars is near Antares ( 心宿二 ), it is a bad omen and can forecast an emperor's death or a chancellor's removal ( 荧惑 守 心 ).

Jupiter's revolution period is 11.86 years, so Jupiter is called the "age star" ( 歲星 ; 岁星 ); 30° of Jupiter's revolution is about a year on earth.

Saturn's revolution period is about 28 years. Known as the "guard star" ( 鎮星 ), Saturn guards one of the 28 Mansions every year.

Stars [ edit ] Big Dipper [ edit ] Main article: Big Dipper The Big Dipper is the celestial compass, and its handle's direction indicates the season and month.

3 Enclosures and 28 Mansions [ edit ] Main article: Chinese constellations Further information: Twenty-Eight Mansions and Lunar station The stars are divided into Three Enclosures and 28 Mansions according to their location in the sky relative to Ursa Minor , at the center. Each mansion is named with a character describing the shape of its principal asterism . The Three Enclosures are Purple Forbidden , ( 紫微 ), Supreme Palace ( 太微 ), and Heavenly Market ( 天市 ). The eastern mansions are 角 , 亢 , 氐 , 房 , 心 , 尾 , 箕 . Southern mansions are 井 , 鬼 , 柳 , 星 , 張 , 翼 , 軫 . Western mansions are 奎 , 婁 , 胃 , 昴 , 畢 , 參 , 觜 . Northern mansions are 斗 , 牛 , 女 , 虛 , 危 , 室 , 壁 . The moon moves through about one lunar mansion per day, so the 28 mansions were also used to count days. In the Tang dynasty , Yuan Tiangang ( 袁天罡 ) matched the 28 mansions, seven luminaries and yearly animal signs to yield combinations such as "horn-wood-flood dragon" ( 角 木 蛟 ).

List of lunar mansions [ edit ] The names and determinative stars of the mansions are: [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Four Symbols ( 四象 ) Mansion (宿) Number Name ( Pinyin ) Translation Determinative star Azure Dragon of the East ( 東方青龍 ; Dōngfāng Qīnglóng ) Spring 1 角 ; Jiǎo Horn α Vir 2 亢 ; Kàng Neck κ Vir 3 氐 ; Dī Root α Lib 4 房 ; Fáng Room π Sco 5 心 ; Xīn Heart α Sco 6 尾 ; Wěi Tail μ¹ Sco 7 箕 ; Jī Winnowing Basket γ Sgr Black Tortoise of the North ( 北方玄武 ; Běifāng Xuánwǔ ) Winter 8 斗 ; Dǒu (Southern) Dipper φ Sgr 9 牛 ; Niú Ox β Cap 10 女 ; Nǚ Girl ε Aqr 11 虛 ; Xū Emptiness β Aqr 12 危 ; Wēi Rooftop α Aqr 13 室 ; Shì Encampment α Peg 14 壁 ; Bì Wall γ Peg White Tiger of the West ( 西方白虎 ; Xīfāng Báihǔ ) Fall 15 奎 ; Kuí Legs η And 16 婁 ; Lóu Bond β Ari 17 胃 ; Wèi Stomach 35 Ari 18 昴 ; Mǎo Hairy Head 17 Tau 19 畢 ; Bì Net ε Tau 20 觜 ; Zī Turtle Beak λ Ori 21 参 ; Shēn Three Stars ζ Ori Vermilion Bird of the South ( 南方朱雀 ; Nánfāng Zhūquè ) Summer 22 井 ; Jǐng Well μ Gem 23 鬼 ; Guǐ Ghost θ Cnc 24 柳 ; Liǔ Willow δ Hya 25 星 ; Xīng Star α Hya 26 張 ; Zhāng Extended Net υ¹ Hya 27 翼 ; Yì Wings α Crt 28 軫 ; Zhěn Chariot γ Crv Sexagenary system [ edit ] Several coding systems are used to avoid ambiguity. The Heavenly Stems is a decimal system. The Earthly Branches , a duodecimal system, mark dual hours ( 時 ; 时 ; shí or 時辰 ; 时辰 ; shíchen ) and climatic terms. The 12 characters progress from the first day with the same branch as the month (first Yín day ( 寅 日 ) of Zhēngyuè ; first Mǎo day ( 卯 日 ) of Èryuè ), and count the days of the month.

Main article: Sexagenary cycle Years, months, days of the month and hours could traditionally numbered by the terminology of the Chinese sexagenary cycle.

The stem-branches is a sexagesimal system. The Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches make up 60 stem-branches . The stem branches mark days and years. The five Wu Xing elements are assigned to each stem, branch, or stem branch.

Heavenly Stem Meaning Original meaning Modern 甲 turtle shell first (book I, person A etc.) , methyl group , helmet, armor, words related to beetles, crustaceans, fingernails, toenails 乙 fishguts second (book II, person B etc.) , ethyl group , twist 丙 fishtail [ e ] third , bright, fire, fishtail (rare) 丁 nail fourth , male adult, robust, T-shaped, to strike, a surname 戊 halberd (not used) 己 threads on a loom [ f ] self 庚 evening star age (of person) 辛 to offend superiors [ 44 ] bitter, piquant, toilsome 壬 burden [ g ] to shoulder, to trust with office 癸 grass for libation [ h ] (not used) Earthly Branch Chinese Direction Season Lunisolar Month Double Hour Mandarin Zhuyin Mandarin Pinyin 1 子 ㄗˇ zǐ 鼠 Rat 0° (north) winter Month 11 11 pm to 1 am (midnight) 2 丑 ㄔㄡˇ chǒu 牛 Cow 30° Month 12 1am to 3 am 3 寅 ㄧㄣˊ yín 虎 Tiger 60° spring Month 1 3 am to 5 am 4 卯 ㄇㄠˇ mǎo 兎 Rabbit 90° (east) Month 2 5 am to 7 am 5 辰 ㄔㄣˊ chén 竜 (龍) Dragon 120° Month 3 7 am to 9 am 6 巳 ㄙˋ sì 蛇 Snake 150° summer Month 4 9 am to 11 am 7 午 ㄨˇ wǔ 馬 Horse 180° (south) Month 5 11 am to 1 pm (noon) 8 未 ㄨㄟˋ wèi 羊 Sheep 210° Month 6 1 pm to 3 pm 9 申 ㄕㄣ shēn 猿 Monkey 240° autumn Month 7 3 pm to 5 pm 10 酉 ㄧㄡˇ yǒu 鶏 (鳥) Chicken 270° (west) Month 8 5 pm to 7 pm 11 戌 ㄒㄩ xū 犬 Dog 300° Month 9 7 pm to 9 pm 12 亥 ㄏㄞˋ hài 猪 Wild boar 330° winter Month 10 9 pm to 11 pm For example, the year from 12 February 2021 to 31 January 2022 was a Xīnchǒu year ( 辛丑 年 ) of 12 months or 354 days. The 60 stem-branches have been used to mark the year since the Shang dynasty (1600 BCE – 1046 BCE). Astrologers knew that the orbital period of Jupiter is about 12×361 = 4332 days, which they divided into 12 years ( 歲 ; 岁 ; suì ) of 361 days each. The stem-branches system solved the era system's problem of unequal reign lengths.

Hubei military government founded ROC Gazette ( 中華民國公報 ), dated YE 4609-10-15 ( 黃帝紀元4609年10月15日 , yyyy-mm-dd) See also: Month Current naming conventions use numbers as the month names, although each month is also associated with one of the twelve Earthly Branches . Correspondences with Gregorian dates are approximate and should be used with caution. Many years have intercalary months.

Historically, Chinese had days of the month numbered with the 60 stem-branches: 天聖元年… 二月 … 丁 巳 ，奉安太祖、太宗御容于南京鴻慶宮 .

Tiānshèng 1st year… Èryuè … Dīngsì , the emperor's funeral was at his temple, and the imperial portrait was installed in Nanjing's Hongqing Palace .

— History of Song Dynasty , "卷009" [Volume 9].

宋史 [ History of Song Dynasty ] (in Chinese) – via Wikisource .

Fortune-tellers identify the heavenly stem and earthly branch corresponding to a particular day in the month, and those corresponding to its month, and those to its year, to determine the Four Pillars of Destiny associated with it, for which the Tung Shing , also referred to as the Chinese Almanac of the year, or the Huangli , and containing the essential information concerning Chinese astrology , is the most convenient publication to consult. Days rotate through a sexagenary cycle marked by coordination between heavenly stems and earthly branches , hence the referral to the Four Pillars of Destiny as, "Bazi", or " Birth Time Eight Characters ", with each pillar consisting of a character for its corresponding heavenly stem, and another for its earthly branch. Since Huangli days are sexagenaric , their order is quite independent of their numeric order in each month, and of their numeric order within a week (referred to as True Animals in relation to the Chinese zodiac ). Therefore, it does require painstaking calculation for one to arrive at the Four Pillars of Destiny of a particular given date, which rarely outpaces the convenience of simply consulting the Huangli by looking up its Gregorian date.

The Tang dynasty used the Earthly Branches to mark the months from December 761 to May 762.

[ 45 ] Over this period, the year began with the winter solstice.

Main article: Traditional Chinese timekeeping Explanatory chart for traditional Chinese time China has used the Western hour-minute-second system to divide the day since the Qing dynasty .

[ 46 ] Several systems were in use historically; systems using multiples of twelve and ten were popular, since they could be easily counted and aligned with the Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches.

Age reckoning [ edit ] Main article: East Asian age reckoning In modern China, a person's official age is based on the Gregorian calendar. For traditional use, age is based on the Chinese Sui calendar. A child is considered one year old at birth. After each Chinese New Year, one year is added to their traditional age. Their age therefore is the number of Chinese calendar years in which they have lived. Due to the potential for confusion, the age of infants is often given in months instead of years.

After the Gregorian calendar was introduced in China, the Chinese traditional-age was referred to as the "nominal age" ( 虛歲 ; 虚岁 ; xūsuì ; 'incomplete age') and the Gregorian age was known as the "real age" ( 實歲 ; 实岁 ; shísùi ; 'whole age'). In Hong Kong, they are named as hui ling 虛齡 and sut ling 實齡 respectively.

Holidays [ edit ] Main article: List of observances set by the Chinese calendar See also: List of festivals in China Various traditional and religious holidays shared by communities throughout the world use the Chinese (Lunisolar) calendar: Chinese New Year [ edit ] Main article: Chinese New Year The date of the Chinese New Year accords with the patterns of the lunisolar calendar and hence is variable from year to year.

The invariant between years is that the winter solstice, Dongzhi is required to be in the eleventh month of the year [ 47 ] This means that Chinese New Year will be on the second new moon after the previous winter solstice, unless there is a leap month 11 or 12 in the previous year.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] This rule is accurate, however there are two other mostly (but not completely) accurate rules that are commonly stated: [ 48 ] The new year is on the new moon closest to Lichun (typically 4 February).

The new year is on the first new moon after Dahan (typically 20 January) It has been found that Chinese New Year moves back by either 10, 11, or 12 days in most years. If it falls on or before 31 January, then it moves forward in the next year by either 18, 19, or 20 days.

[ 12 ] Holidays with the same day and same month [ edit ] The Chinese New Year (known as the Spring Festival/ 春節 in China) is on the first day of the first month and was traditionally called the Yuan Dan ( 元旦 ) or Zheng Ri ( 正日 ). In Vietnam it is known as Tết Nguyên Đán ( 節元旦 ). Traditionally it was the most important holiday of the year. It is an official holiday in China including Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan regions,and, Vietnam, Korea, the Philippines, Malaysia , Singapore , Indonesia, and Mauritius . It is also a public holiday in Thailand's Narathiwat , Pattani , Yala and Satun provinces, and is an official public school holiday in New York City.

The Double Third Festival is on the third day of the third month.

The Dragon Boat Festival , or the Duanwu Festival ( 端午節 ), is on the fifth day of the fifth month and is an official holiday in China including Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan regions.

The Qixi Festival ( 七夕節 ) is celebrated in the evening of the seventh day of the seventh month.

The Double Ninth Festival ( 重陽節 ) is celebrated on the ninth day of the ninth month.

Full moon holidays (holidays on the fifteenth day) [ edit ] The Lantern Festival is celebrated on the fifteenth day of the first month and was traditionally called the Yuan Xiao ( 元宵 ) or Shang Yuan Festival ( 上元節 ).

The Zhong Yuan Festival is celebrated on the fifteenth day of the seventh month.

The Mid-Autumn Festival is celebrated on the fifteenth day of the eighth month.

The Xia Yuan Festival is celebrated on the fifteenth day of the tenth month.

Celebrations of the twelfth month [ edit ] The Laba Festival is on the eighth day of the twelfth month. It is the enlightenment day of Sakyamuni Buddha and in Vietnam is known as Lễ Vía Phật Thích Ca thành đạo .

The Kitchen God Festival is celebrated on the twenty-third day of the twelfth month in northern regions of China and on the twenty-fourth day of the twelfth month in southern regions of China.

Chinese New Year's Eve is also known as the Chuxi Festival and is celebrated on the evening of the last day of the traditional Chinese calendar. It is celebrated wherever the traditional Chinese calendar is observed.

Celebrations of solar-term holidays [ edit ] The Qingming Festival ( 清明 节 ) is celebrated on the fifteenth day after the Spring Equinox.

The Dongzhi Festival ( 冬至 ) or the Winter Solstice is celebrated.

Religious holidays based on the Chinese calendar [ edit ] East Asian Mahayana , Daoist , and some Cao Dai holidays and/or vegetarian observances are based on the traditional Chinese calendar.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Celebrations in Japan [ edit ] Many of the above holidays of the traditional Chinese calendar are also celebrated in Japan, but since the Meiji era on the similarly numbered dates of the Gregorian calendar.

Double celebrations due to intercalary months [ edit ] In the case when there is a corresponding intercalary month , the holidays may be celebrated twice. For example, in the hypothetical situation in which there is an additional intercalary seventh month, the Zhong Yuan Festival will be celebrated in the seventh month followed by another celebration in the intercalary seventh month. The next such occasion will be 2033, the first such since the calendar reform of 1645.

[ 12 ] Similar calendars [ edit ] Like Chinese characters , variants of the Chinese calendar have been used in different parts of the Sinosphere throughout history: this includes Vietnam, Korea, Singapore, Japan and Ryukyu, Mongolia, and elsewhere.

Outlying areas of China [ edit ] Calendars of ethnic groups in mountains and plateaus of southwestern China and grasslands of northern China are based on their phenology and algorithms of traditional calendars of different periods, particularly the Tang and pre-Qin dynasties.

[ 53 ] Non-Chinese areas [ edit ] Korea , Vietnam , and the Ryukyu Islands adopted the Chinese calendar. In the respective regions, the Chinese calendar has been adapted into the Korean , Vietnamese , and Ryukyuan calendars , with the main difference from the Chinese calendar being the use of different meridians due to geography, leading to some astronomical events — and calendar events based on them — falling on different dates. The traditional Japanese calendar was also derived from the Chinese calendar (based on a Japanese meridian), but Japan abolished its official use in 1873 after Meiji Restoration reforms. Calendars in Mongolia [ 54 ] and Tibet [ citation needed ] have absorbed elements of the traditional Chinese calendar but are not direct descendants of it.

See also [ edit ] China portal History portal Chinese calendar correspondence table Guo Shoujing , an astronomer tasked with calendar reform during the 13th century List of festivals in Asia Metonic cycle of 19 years is used to reckon leap years with intercalary months in the Hebrew and Babylonian calendars Notes [ edit ] ^ The Chinese or Pinyin names are not required. It is acceptable to say these dates as " 5th day of the fifth month", "9th day of the ninth month", "15th day of the first month", and "7th day of the seventh month", as long it is clear that these months are in the traditional Chinese calendar.

^ The 4th-century date, according to the Cihai encyclopedia, [ year needed ] is due to a reference to Fan Ning ( 範寧 ; 范宁 ), an astrologer of the Jin dynasty .

[ full citation needed ] ^ The renewed adoption from Manichaeans by the 8th century ( Tang dynasty ) is documented by the writings of the Chinese Buddhist monk Yi Jing and the Ceylonese Buddhist monk Bu Kong .

[ full citation needed ] ^ In the modern calendar where the solar terms are defined using astronomical calculation, it is possible to have only 11 complete months but with a month without a mid-climate, as in year 2033 .

[ citation needed ] ^ Wenlin Dictionary: Picture of a fish tail.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Wenlin Dictionary: 己 may have depicted thread on a loom ; an ancient meaning was 'unravel threads', which was later written 紀 jì.

己 was borrowed both for the word jǐ 'self', and for the name of the sixth Heavenly Stem ( 天干 ).

[ full citation needed ] ^ Wenlin Dictionary: 壬 rén depicts "a 丨 carrying pole supported 一 in the middle part and having one object attached at each end, as always done in China" —Karlgren (1923). (See 扁担 biǎndan). Now the character 任 rèn has the meaning of carrying a burden, and the original character 壬 is used only for the ninth of the ten heavenly stems ( 天干 ).

[ full citation needed ] ^ Wenlin Dictionary: 癶 "stretch out the legs" + 天 ; The nicely disposed grass, on which the Ancients poured the libations offered to the Manes [ full citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ "中国历史上产生过102部历法" .

lsqn.ybask.com . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ "1978年中秋節雙胞事件 天文台編曆的重要性" .

www.hkchronicles.org.hk (in Traditional Chinese) . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ "中國哲學書電子化計劃字典" .

ctext.org (in Chinese (Taiwan)) . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ "中國哲學書電子化計劃字典" .

ctext.org (in Chinese (Taiwan)) . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ "_彝学研究网" .

www.yixueyanjiu.com . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ 秝 .

漢語多功能字庫 .

^ 朱文哲 (2019).

西曆·國曆·公曆——近代中國的曆法"正名" .

史林 .

6 .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2023 . Retrieved 27 January 2023 .

^ 中華民國三十六年標準農曆通書 .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2023 . Retrieved 27 January 2023 .

^ Liu, Rong (2004).

春秋依附关系探讨 [Subsidiary Relations in the Pre-Qin Period].

辽宁大学学报：哲社版 Journal of Liaoning University: Philosophy and Social Science Edition .

32 (6): 43– 50.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ "The Origin of the Yellow Emperor Era Chronology" (PDF) . 1 August 2020. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ Cohen (2012) , p. 1, 4.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Aslaksen (2010) .

^ "第41篇五行" [Chapter 41: Five Elements].

zh:管子 [ Guanzi ] (in Chinese) – via Wikisource .

^ "第40篇四時" [Chapter 40: Four Sections].

管子 [ Guanzi ] (in Chinese) – via Wikisource .

^ 中国农历发展简史 [A brief history of the development of Chinese Lunar calendar]. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ Palmer, Martin (1986).

T'ung Shu: the Ancient Chinese Almanac . Boston: Shambhala. pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 9780394742212 .

^ Yuk Tung Liu, 2018–2024, at GitHub ^ Petersen, Jens Østergård (1992).

"The Taiping Jing and the AD 102 Clepsydra Reform" .

Acta Orientalia .

53 : 122– 158.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ "Chinese calendar | Lunar Year, Solar Eclipses & Solstices | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 23 June 2024 .

^ Needham, Joseph (1986) [1954].

Science and Civilization in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth . Vol. 3. pp.

109– 110.

Bibcode : 1959scc3.book.....N .

^ Ho, Peng Yoke (2000).

Li, Qi, and Shu: An Introduction to Science and Civilization in China . Mineola: Dover Publications. p. 105.

ISBN 978-0-486-41445-4 .

^ Restivo, Sal (1992).

Mathematics in Society and History: Sociological Inquiries . Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. p. 32.

ISBN 978-1-4020-0039-3 .

^ Asiapac Editorial, ed. (2004).

Origins of Chinese Science and Technology . Translated by Yang Liping; Y.N. Han. Singapore: Asiapac Books. p. 132.

ISBN 978-981-229-376-3 .

^ Stone, Richard (2 November 2007).

"Scientists Fete China's Supreme Polymath" .

Science .

318 (5851): 733.

doi : 10.1126/science.318.5851.733 .

PMID 17975042 .

S2CID 162156995 .

^ 本世纪仅有4次！闰二月为何少见？-新华网 .

www.news.cn .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ Sun Yat-sen (1982) [Telegram originally sent 1 January 1912].

临时大总统改历改元通电 [Provisional President's open telegram on calendar change and era change].

孙中山全集 [ The Complete Works of Sun Yat-sen ] (PDF) . Vol. v. 2. Beijing: 中华书局 . p. 5.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 January 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ "Rules for the Chinese Calendar" .

ytliu0.github.io .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 .

^ CAS, Purple Mountain Observatory (1986).

New Edition of Wànniánlì, revised edition . Popular Science Press.

^ 国家标准 | GB/T 33661-2017 .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2023 . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ Xiao, Fang; Zhang, Juwen; Long, Bill (2017). "The Predicament, Revitalization, and Future of Traditional Chinese Festivals".

Western Folklore .

76 (2): 181– 196.

JSTOR 44790971 .

^ Martzloff, Jean-Claude (1 September 2016).

Astronomy and Calendars – The Other Chinese Mathematics: 104 BCE - 1644 CE . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-662-49718-0 .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 October 2022 .

^ "Phenology" .

Merriam-Webster . 2020.

^ a b 陳浩新 .

「冷在三九，熱在三伏」 [Cold is in the Three Nines, heat is in the Three Fu].

Educational Resources – Hong Kong Observatory (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 15 June 2018 . Retrieved 15 May 2018 .

^ 孙蕾.

都说数九寒冬，可你知道"数九"怎么"数"？-新华网 .

m.xinhuanet.com .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ 五九六九沿河看柳……"数九"知识你知道多少？-新华网 .

www.xinhuanet.com .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ 海上 (2005).

Zhongguo ren de sui shi wen hua 中國人的歲時文化 [ Timekeeping of the Chinese culture ] (in Chinese).

岳麓書社 . p. 195.

ISBN 978-7-80665-620-4 .

^ 数九从哪一天开始到哪一天结束 数九寒冬中的数九从什么时候开始 .

万年历 .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ "Days of the week in Japanese" .

CJVLang .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2017 . Retrieved 15 May 2018 .

^ 沙畹; 馮承鈞 (1931).

摩尼教流行中國攷 . 商務印書館.

^ 允祿; 梅瑴成 (1739).

欽定協紀辨方書 (in Literary Chinese).

^ "Calendrical Reform in China, 1911-Present" .

studylib.net . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ "The Chinese Sky" .

International Dunhuang Project . Archived from the original on 4 November 2015 . Retrieved 25 June 2011 .

^ Sun, Xiaochun (1997).

Helaine Selin (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures . Kluwer Academic Publishers. p. 517.

ISBN 0-7923-4066-3 . Retrieved 25 June 2011 .

^ Wenlin Dictionary: "The seal has 𢆉 'knock against, offend' below, and 亠 above; the scholastic commentators say: to offend ( 亠 = ) 上 the superiors" [ full citation needed ] ^ "卷006" [Volume 6].

新唐書 [ New Book of Tang ] (in Chinese) – via Wikisource .

上元…。二年……，九月壬寅，大赦，去「乾元大圣光天文武孝感」号，去「上元」号，称元年，以十一月为岁首，月以斗所建辰为名。…。 元年建子月癸巳[2]，…。己亥[9]，…。丙午[16]，…。己酉[29]，…。庚戌[30]，…。[初一壬午大雪，十七冬至] 建丑月辛亥[1]，…。己未[9]，…。乙亥[25]，…。[初一辛亥，初三小寒，十八大寒] 宝应元年建寅月甲申[4]，…。乙酉[5]，…。丙戌[3]，…。甲辰[24]，…。戊申[28]，…。[初一辛巳，初三立春，十八雨水] 建卯月辛亥[1]，…。壬子[2]，…。癸丑[3]，…。乙丑[15]，…。戊辰[18]，…。庚午[20]，…。壬申[22]，…。[初一辛亥，初四惊蛰，十九春分] 建辰月壬午[3]，…。甲午[5]，…。戊申[19]，…。[初一庚辰，初五清明，二十谷雨] 建巳月庚戌[1]，…。壬子[3]，…。甲寅[5]，…。乙丑[16]，…。大赦，改元年为宝应元年，复以正月为岁首，建巳月为四月。丙寅，…。[初一庚戌，初五甲寅立夏]。 ^ Sôma, Mitsuru; Kawabata, Kin-aki; Tanikawa, Kiyotaka (25 October 2004). "Units of Time in Ancient China and Japan".

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan .

56 (5): 887– 904.

doi : 10.1093/pasj/56.5.887 .

^ Reingold & Dershowitz (2018) , pp. 313.

^ a b Aslaksen (2010) , pp. 31, 32.

^ Reingold & Dershowitz (2018) , pp. 313–316.

^ "2020 Buddhist Calendar" .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ "Mahayana Buddhist Vegetarian Observances" .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ 道教節日有哪些?

[What are Some of the Holidays of Daoism?] (in Traditional Chinese). Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ 朱, 文鑫 (1934).

曆法通志 (in Chinese) (1st ed.). Shanghai: 商務印書館.

Archived from the original on 2 May 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

^ Kennedy, E. S. (1964). "The Chinese-Uighur Calendar as Described in the Islamic Sources".

Isis .

55 (4): 435– 443.

doi : 10.1086/349900 .

JSTOR 228314 .

S2CID 144085088 .

Sources [ edit ] Aslaksen, Helmer (17 July 2010).

"The Mathematics of the Chinese Calendar" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 August 2016.

Cohen, Alvin P. (2012). "Brief Note: The Origin of the Yellow Emperor Era Chronology".

Asia Major .

25 (2): 1– 13.

JSTOR 43486143 .

Reingold, Edward M; Dershowitz, Nachum (2018).

Calendrical Calculations (Ultimate ed.). Cambridge University press.

ISBN 978-1-107-05762-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Kai-Lung, Ho (2006). "The Political Power and the Mongolian Translation of the Chinese Calendar During the Yuan Dynasty".

Central Asiatic Journal .

50 (1): 57– 69.

JSTOR 41928409 .

External links [ edit ] Calendars Chinese months Gregorian-Lunar calendar years (1901–2100) Chinese calendar and holidays Chinese calendar with Auspicious Events Chinese Calendar Online Calendar conversion 2000-year Chinese-Western calendar converter From 1 CE to 2100 CE. Useful for historical studies. To use, put the western year 年 month 月day 日in the bottom row and click on 執行.

Western-Chinese calendar converter Rules Mathematics of the Chinese Calendar The Structure of the Chinese Calendar v t e Calendars Systems Lunar Lunisolar Solar In wide use Astronomical Buddhist Chinese Ethiopian Gregorian Hindu Lunar Hijri Solar Hijri ISO Unix time In more limited use Akan Armenian Assamese (Bhāshkarābda) Assyrian Baháʼí Badí‘ Bali Pawukon Saka Bengali Bangladeshi Berber Borana Burmese Chinese Earthly Branches Heavenly Stems Minguo Solar term Germanic heathen Georgian Hebrew Hindu Vikram Samvat Saka Hmong Igbo Iranian Jalali medieval Zoroastrian Irish Gaelic Islamic Fasli Tabular Jain Japanese Javanese Korean Juche Kurdish Lithuanian Maithili Malayalam Mandaean Manipuri (Meitei) Melanau Mizo (Lushai) Mongolian Nepal Nepal Sambat Vikram Samvat Yele Sambat Nanakshahi Nisg̱a'a Odia Punjabi Romanian Shona Somali Sesotho Slavic Slavic Native Faith Macedonian Tamil Thai lunar solar Tibetan Tripuri Tulu Vietnamese Wicca Xhosa Yoruba Zulu Types Runic Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar round Christian variants Coptic Ethiopian and Eritrean Julian Revised Liturgical year Eastern Orthodox Saints Historical Arabian Attic Aztec Tōnalpōhualli Xiuhpōhualli Babylonian Bulgar Byzantine Cappadocian Celtic Cham Culāsakaraj Coligny Egyptian Enoch Florentine French Republican Germanic Greek Hindu Inca Macedonian Maya Haabʼ Tzolkʼin Muisca Pentecontad Pisan Qumran Rapa Nui Roman Rumi Sexagenary Soviet Swedish Turkmen By specialty Holocene anthropological Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian historiographical Darian Martian Dreamspell New Age Discordian 'Pataphysical Reform proposals Hanke–Henry Permanent International Fixed Pax Positivist Sexagesimal Symmetry454 World Displays and applications Electronic Perpetual Wall Year naming and numbering Terminology Era Epoch Leap year New Year Regnal name Regnal year Year zero Systems Ab urbe condita Anka year Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Lucis Anno Martyrum Anno Mundi Assyrian Before Present Chinese Imperial Chinese Minguo English and British regnal year Hijri year Human (Holocene) Japanese Korean Nirayana system Seleucid Spanish Yugas Satya Treta Dvapara Kali Vietnamese Fictional Discworld ( Discworld ) Greyhawk ( Dungeons & Dragons ) Middle-earth ( The Lord of the Rings ) Stardate ( Star Trek ) List of calendars Category v t e Chinese New Year Culture of China Topics Dashuhua Nian Lion dance Dragon dance New Year picture Red envelope Reunion dinner Fireworks Firecracker Chinese dragon Fu Food Nian gao Spring pancake Jiaozi Bakkwa Buddha's delight Fa gao Fat choy Yau gok Kralan Kuih Lotus seed Pineapple tart Squab Taro cake Turnip cake Yusheng Melon seed Mandarin orange Fish Other CCTV New Year's Gala Chinese calendar Chunyun Color in Chinese culture San Francisco Chinese New Year Festival and Parade Christmas and holiday season Related Lunar New Year Golden Week v t e Science and technology in China Advanced materials Aircraft carrier Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Automotive industry Aviation Battery Biotechnology Bioenergy Canal Cloud Chemical Cyberwarfare Drone Interbank Payment System Internet Logic Manufacturing Mathematics Medicine Metallurgy Mining Mobile payments Navigation System Nuclear power Petroleum Railways Rare earth Renewable energy Semiconductors Shipping Skyscrapers Software Space program Steel Supercomputing Telecommunications Telescope Thorium Reactor Virology History Inventions Discoveries History of measurement systems Calendar History of metallurgy Ancient coinage Printing Cartography Maritime history Military history Education Academic grading Higher education Research institutes Science museums People Astronomers Biologists Chemists Computer programmers Computer scientists Earth scientists Engineers Food scientists Inventors Mathematicians Nobel laureates Pharmacologists Physicians Physicists Science writers Social scientists Institutes and programs 863 Program Research institutes Chinese Academy of Engineering Chinese Academy of Sciences Chinese Academy of Social Sciences National Natural Science Foundation of China v t e East Asia Countries and regions China Hong Kong Macau Mainland Japan Ryukyu Korea North Korea South Korea Jeju Mongolia Taiwan Ethnic groups Ainu Han Chinese subgroups Hui Japanese Yamato Koreans in China in Japan in Sakhalin Manchu Miao Mongolic Mongols in China Khalkha in Mongolia Qiang Ryukyuans Indigenous Taiwanese Tibetans Tujia Uyghurs Yi Zhuang other ethnic groups in China unrecognized historical Culture Age reckoning Architecture‎ Art Chinese Japanese Korean Taiwanese Blepharoplasty Buddhism Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Sinosphere Dance Chinese knotting Chinese dragon Festivals Gardens Chinese characters Hip-and-gable roof Languages Literature Mādhyamaka Music Mythology Philosophy Religion Scripts Seal Sino-Xenic pronunciations Surnames Television Typography Yogācāra Chinese zodiac Environment East Asia Climate Partnership Monsoon Rainy season Flora Economy and Politics China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summit Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia Capitalism East Asia Summit East Asian Bureau of Economic Research East Asian Community Four Asian Tigers Human rights in East Asia Ports Stock exchanges History Archaeology Archaeological cultures Bronze Age Iron Age Former countries Sports China–Japan–Korea Friendship Athletic Meeting East Asian Football Federation East Asian Games East Asian Judo Championships East Asian martial arts East Asian Youth Games EAFF E-1 Football Championship Education Association of East Asian Research Universities CrossAsia East Asian Economic Review East Asia Image Collection East Asia Law Review East Asian studies Journal of East Asian Studies Ludwigshafen East Asia Institute Military Horses in East Asian warfare Bansenshūkai Miyamoto Musashi Sun Tzu The Art of War The Book of Five Rings Yi Sun-sin Science and technology Needham Research Institute Printing Swords Traditional medicine Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kpqtj
Cached time: 20250817043834
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.847 seconds
Real time usage: 2.129 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26625/1000000
Revision size: 100635/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 406561/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21737/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 51/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 266725/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.059/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26118081/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1681.676      1 -total
 17.37%  292.087      2 Template:Reflist
  9.34%  157.068    144 Template:Lang-zh
  8.77%  147.519      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
  8.40%  141.313    137 Template:Lang
  6.77%  113.835     25 Template:Cite_web
  6.54%  110.020      4 Template:Cite_wikisource
  6.27%  105.509      1 Template:Blockquote
  5.38%   90.542      1 Template:Unfocused
  5.18%   87.048      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6966:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043834 and revision id 1305642011. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chinese_calendar&oldid=1305642011 " Categories : Chinese calendars Chinese culture Horology Lunisolar calendars Specific calendars Hidden categories: Articles needing the year an event occurred from April 2015 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from October 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with incomplete citations from February 2025 Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 Traditional Chinese-language sources (zh-hant) CS1 Chinese (Taiwan)-language sources (zh-tw) CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles lacking focus from November 2023 All Wikipedia articles lacking focus Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles containing Yue Chinese-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 Articles with unsourced quotes Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 07:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chinese calendar 99 languages Add topic

