Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the sarcophagus 2 United States 3 Asia 4 India 5 Spain 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Sarcophagus 60 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stone coffin For other uses, see Sarcophagus (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sarcophagus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ancient Egyptian sarcophagus lid.

Roman sarcophagus with the myth of Medea , c.

140–150 AD , from Rome, exhibited in the Antikensammlung Berlin (Berlin) Roman sarcophagus with Apollo , Minerva and the Muses , c.

200 AD , from Via Appia , exhibited in the Antikensammlung Berlin The Gothic sarcophagi of Don Àlvar Rodrigo de Cabrera, count of Urgell and his wife Cecília of Foix , c.

1300–1350 , made of limestone, traces of paint, exhibited in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) A sarcophagus ( pl.

: sarcophagi or sarcophaguses ) is a coffin , most commonly carved in stone, and usually displayed above ground, though it may also be buried. The word sarcophagus comes from the Greek σάρξ sarx meaning "flesh", and φαγεῖν phagein meaning "to eat"; hence sarcophagus means "flesh-eating", from the phrase lithos sarkophagos ( λίθος σαρκοφάγος ), "flesh-eating stone". The word also came to refer to a particular kind of limestone that was thought to rapidly facilitate the decomposition of the flesh of corpses contained within it due to the chemical properties of the limestone itself.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History of the sarcophagus [ edit ] Sarcophagi were most often designed to remain above ground.

[ citation needed ] The earliest stone sarcophagi were used by Egyptian pharaohs of the 3rd dynasty, which reigned from about 2686 to 2613 BC.

The Hagia Triada sarcophagus is a stone sarcophagus elaborately painted in fresco ; one style of later Ancient Greek sarcophagus in painted pottery is seen in Klazomenian sarcophagi , produced around the Ionian Greek city of Klazomenai , where most examples were found, between 550 BC (Late Archaic) and 470 BC. They are made of coarse clay in shades of brown to pink. Added to the basin-like main sarcophagus is a broad, rectangular frame, often covered with a white slip and then painted. The huge Lycian Tomb of Payava , now in the British Museum , is a royal tomb monument of about 360 BC designed for an open-air placing, a grand example of a common Lycian style.

Relief on a Roman sarcophagus, which represents the triumph of Dionysos , c.

260–270 AD , marble, exhibited in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) Ancient Roman sarcophagi —sometimes metal or plaster as well as limestone —were popular from about the reign of Trajan , [ 3 ] and often elaborately carved, until the early Christian burial preference for interment underground, often in a limestone sepulchre , led to their falling out of favor.

[ 2 ] However, there are many important Early Christian sarcophagi from the 3rd to 4th centuries. Most Roman examples were designed to be placed against a wall and were decorated on three sides only. Sarcophagi continued to be used in Christian Europe for important figures, especially rulers and leading church figures, and by the High Middle Ages often had a recumbent tomb effigy lying on the lid. More plain sarcophagi were placed in crypts. The most famous examples include the Habsburg Imperial Crypt in Vienna , Austria. The term tends to be less often used to describe Medieval, Renaissance, and later examples.

In the early modern period , lack of space tended to make sarcophagi impractical in churches, but chest tombs or false sarcophagi, empty and usually bottomless cases placed over an underground burial, became popular in outside locations such as cemeteries and churchyards, especially in Britain in the 18th and 19th centuries, where memorials were mostly not highly decorated and the extra cost of a false sarcophagus over a headstone acted as an indication of social status.

[ citation needed ] United States [ edit ] Warner Tomb in Laurel Hill Cemetery ( Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ) Sarcophagi, usually "false", made a return to the cemeteries of America during the last quarter of the 19th century, at which time, according to a New York company which built sarcophagi, "it was decidedly the most prevalent of all memorials in our cemeteries".

[ 4 ] They continued to be popular into the 1950s, at which time the popularity of flat memorials (making for easier grounds maintenance) made them obsolete. Nonetheless, a 1952 catalog from the memorial industry still included eight pages of them, broken down into Georgian and Classical detail, a Gothic and Renaissance adaptation, and a Modern variant.

[ 5 ] The image shows sarcophagi from the late 19th century located in Laurel Hill Cemetery in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The one in the back, the Warner Monument created by Alexander Milne Calder (1879), features the spirit or soul of the deceased being released.

Asia [ edit ] In the Mekong Delta in southwestern Vietnam, it is common for families to inter their members in sarcophagi near their homes, thus allowing ready access for visits as a part of the indigenous tradition of ancestor worship .

[ citation needed ] In Sulawesi , Indonesia, waruga are a traditional form of sarcophagus.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] Nearly 140 years after British archaeologist Alexander Rea unearthed a sarcophagus from the hillocks of Pallavaram in Tamil Nadu, an identical artifact dating back by more than 2,000 years was discovered in the same locality.

[ 6 ] Spain [ edit ] Phoenician and Paleochristian sarcophagi have been found in the Iberian Peninsula .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Crypt Mausoleum Ossuary Tomb effigy References [ edit ] ^ WordInfo etymology.

As a noun, the Greek term was further adopted to mean " coffin " and was carried over into Latin , where it was used in the phrase lapis sarcophagus , "flesh-eating stone", referring to those same properties of limestone.

^ a b "Columbia University Department of Archaeology" . Archived from the original on 2012-12-18 . Retrieved 2008-01-01 .

^ Presbrey – Leland, "Commemoration: The Book of Presbrey – Leland Memorials", Presbrey -Leland Inc., 1952 p. 79 ^ Veit, Richard Francis (2008).

New Jersey Cemeteries and Tombstones: History in the Landscape . Rutgers University Press/Rivergate Books. p.

169 .

ISBN 978-0813542362 .

^ Presbrey-Leland, "Commemoration: The Book of Presbrey - Leland Memorials", Presbrey-Leland Inc., 1952 pp. 79–85 ^ Kabirdoss, Yogesh (28 June 2018).

"ASI finds 2,300-year-old sarcophagus in Tamil Nadu" .

The Times of India .

Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd.

Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ "Sarcófagos antropomorfos fenicios de Cádiz" .

Cultura en Andalucía (in Spanish) . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ "Sarcófago paleocristiano" .

España es Cultura (in Spanish). Sociedad Mercantil Estatal para la Gestión de la Innovación y las Tecnologías Turísticas, S.A.M.P. (SEGITTUR).

Ministerio de Cultura y Deporte . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Mont Allen, "Sarcophagus", in The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome , edited by Michael Gagarin, vol. 6, p. 214–218 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010).

Robert Manuel Cook, Clazomenian Sarcophagi (Mainz: Philipp von Zabern, 1981).

R. R. R. Smith, Sculptured for Eternity: Treasures of Hellenistic, Roman, and Byzantine Art from Istanbul Archaeological Museum (Istanbul: Ertuǧ and Kocabıyık, 2001).

Paul Zanker and Björn C. Ewald, Living with Myths: The Imagery of Roman Sarcophagi (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sarcophagi .

Egyptian sarcophagi sarcophagi in the Istanbul Archaeological Museum Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Sarcophagus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 209.

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sarcophagus&oldid=1301080435 " Categories : Sarcophagi Burial monuments and structures Sculpture Stone monuments and memorials Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 00:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sarcophagus 60 languages Add topic

