Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Joining the Franciscans 1.3 Preaching and teaching 2 Miracles 3 Death 4 Saint and Doctor of the Church 5 Veneration as patron saint Toggle Veneration as patron saint subsection 5.1 North America 5.2 Portugal, Spain and Brazil 5.3 The rest of Europe 5.4 Asia 5.5 Africa 6 In art Toggle In art subsection 6.1 In music 6.2 In films 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 8.3 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Anthony of Padua 70 languages Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kaszëbsczi Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Malti مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Fɔ̀ngbè Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Portuguese Catholic priest (1195–1231) For the Italian film, see Anthony of Padua (film) . For others known as Saint Anthony, see Saint Anthony .

"Saint Anthony of Padua" redirects here. For the painting by El Greco, see Saint Anthony of Padua (El Greco) .

Saint Anthony of Padua OFM Anthony of Padua by Francisco de Zurbarán , 1627–1630 Doctor of the Church Born Fernando Martins de Bulhões 15 August 1195 Lisbon , Kingdom of Portugal Died 13 June 1231 (1231-06-13) (aged 35) Padua , Lombard League , Holy Roman Empire (now Italy ) Venerated in Catholic Church , Anglican Communion Canonized 30 May 1232, Spoleto, Italy by Pope Gregory IX Major shrine Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua , Church of Saint Anthony of Lisbon Feast 13 June Attributes Religious habit of a Friar Minor , lily, book, tonsure , holding the Infant Jesus , mule Patronage Custody of the Holy Land , miracles, travelers, finding one's spouse, pregnancy, harvests, animals, lost items, lost people, lost souls, poverty, sterility, the sick, the disabled, the oppressed, the hungry, the elderly, faith in the Blessed Sacrament , sailors , fishermen , watermen , swineherds , mail carriers , counter-revolutionaries , indigenous peoples of the Americas , Tigua , Padua , Lisbon , Portugal , Brazil , Albania , Pila, Laguna , Iriga, Camarines Sur , Camaligan, Camarines Sur , Gubat, Sorsogon , Tuburan , Cebu , Barotac Nuevo, Iloilo , Cusco, Peru , Kandy, Sri Lanka , Anthony of Padua , OFM , ( Portuguese : António/Antônio de Pádua ; Italian : Antonio di/da Padova ; Latin : Antonius Patavinus ) or Anthony of Lisbon ( Portuguese : António/Antônio de Lisboa ; Italian : Antonio da/di Lisbona ; Latin : Antonius Olisiponensis ; born Fernando Martins de Bulhões ; 15 August 1195 – 13 June 1231) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was a Portuguese Catholic priest and member of the Order of Friars Minor .

Anthony was born and raised by a wealthy family in Lisbon , Portugal, and died in Padua , Italy. Noted by his contemporaries for his powerful preaching, expert knowledge of scripture, and undying love and devotion to the poor and the sick, he was one of the most quickly canonized saints in church history, being canonized less than a year after his death.

He was proclaimed a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius XII on 16 January 1946.

Life [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Church of Saint Anthony , in Lisbon , Portugal , built over the original house where the Portuguese saint was born Birthplace of St. Anthony, in Lisbon , Portugal , located in the crypt of the church dedicated to him Anthony was born Fernando Martins de Bulhões in Lisbon , Portugal .

[ 3 ] While 15th-century writers state that his parents were Vicente Martins and Teresa Pais Taveira, and that his father was the brother of Pedro Martins de Bulhões, the ancestor of the Bulhão or Bulhões family, Niccolò Dal-Gal views this as less certain.

[ 3 ] His wealthy and noble family arranged for him to be instructed at the local cathedral school . At the age of 15, he was received into the Canons Regular of the Order of the Holy Cross at the Abbey of Saint Vincent on the outskirts of Lisbon.

[ 3 ] In 1212, distracted by frequent visits from family and friends, he asked to be transferred to the motherhouse of the congregation, the Monastery of the Holy Cross in Coimbra , then the capital of Portugal.

[ 4 ] There, the young Fernando studied theology and Latin .

Joining the Franciscans [ edit ] In Alvise Vivarini 's painting, Anthony is distinguished from the other saints by his attributes: the book and the white lily stalk.

After his ordination to the priesthood, Fernando was named guestmaster at the age of 19, and placed in charge of hospitality for the abbey . While he was in Coimbra, some Friars Minor arrived and settled at a small hermitage outside Coimbra dedicated to St.

Anthony the Great .

[ 4 ] Fernando was strongly attracted to the simple, evangelical lifestyle of the friars, whose order had been founded only 11 years prior. News arrived that five Franciscans had been beheaded in Morocco , the first of their order to be killed . King Afonso II of Portugal ransomed their bodies to be returned and buried as martyrs in the Monastery of the Holy Cross .

[ 4 ] Inspired by their example, Fernando obtained permission from church authorities to leave the Canons Regular to join the new Franciscan order. Upon his admission to the life of the friars, he joined the small hermitage in Olivais , adopting the name Anthony (from the name of the chapel located there, dedicated to Anthony the Great), by which he was to be known.

[ 5 ] Anthony then set out for Morocco, in fulfilment of his new vocation . However, he fell seriously ill in Morocco and set sail back for Portugal in hope of regaining his health. On the return voyage, the ship was pushed off course and landed in Sicily .

[ 6 ] From Sicily, he made his way to Tuscany , where he was assigned to a convent of the order, but he was met with difficulty on account of his sickly appearance. He was finally assigned to the rural hermitage of Montepaolo [ it ] di Dovadola ('mount of Saint Paul of Dovadola '), near Forlì , in Romagna, a choice made after considering his poor health. There, he had recourse to a cell one of the friars had made in a nearby cave, spending time in private prayer and study.

[ 7 ] Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Preaching and teaching [ edit ] Saint Anthony of Padua holding the Infant Jesus by Strozzi , c.

1625 ; the white lily represents purity.

In 1222, in the town of Forlì , a number of visiting Dominican friars were present for the occasion of an ordination, and a misunderstanding arose over who should preach. The Franciscans had expected that one of the Dominicans would occupy the pulpit, being renowned for their preaching. However, the Dominicans had come unprepared, thinking a Franciscan would be the homilist . In this quandary, the head of the hermitage, who did not think any of his own humble friars could give a homily for the occasion, called upon Anthony, whom he suspected was most qualified, and entreated him to speak whatever the Holy Spirit might inspire.

[ 6 ] Anthony objected, but was overruled, and his impromptu sermon created a deep impression on his audience. His audience was moved not only by his rich voice and arresting manner, but also by the theme and substance of his discourse, his deep knowledge of scripture, and the eloquence with which he delivered his message.

Anthony was then sent by Brother Gratian, the local minister provincial , to the Franciscan province of Romagna , based in Bologna .

[ 6 ] He soon came to the attention of the founder of the order, Francis of Assisi . Francis had held a strong distrust of the place of theological studies in the life of his brotherhood , fearing it might lead to an abandonment of their commitment to a life of real poverty and service. In Anthony, however, he found a kindred spirit who shared his vision and could also provide the teaching any young members of the order seeking ordination might need. In 1224, he entrusted the pursuit of studies for any of his friars to the care of Anthony.

The traditional practice of praying for St. Anthony's help in finding lost or stolen things is traced to an incident during his lifetime that occurred in Bologna. According to the story, Anthony had a book of psalms that was important to him, as it contained his notes and comments for use in teaching his students. A novice who had chosen to leave had taken the psalter with him. Prior to the invention of the printing press , any book was hand-copied , and thus, an item of high value; a Franciscan friar in particular, given his vow of poverty, would have found such an item difficult to replace. When Anthony realized his psalter was missing, he prayed it would be found or returned, after which the thief was moved to not only return the book to Anthony, but also return to the order. The stolen book is said to be preserved in the Franciscan friary in Bologna.

[ 8 ] Occasionally, Anthony took another post as a teacher at universities like University of Montpellier and University of Toulouse in southern France, but his preaching was considered to be his supreme gift. According to historian Sophronius Clasen, Anthony preached "the grandeur of Christianity".

[ 7 ] His method included allegory and symbolical explanation of scripture. In 1226, after attending the general chapter of his order held at Arles , France, and preaching in the region of Provence , Anthony returned to Italy and was appointed Provincial superior of northern Italy. He chose the city of Padua as his location.

In 1228, he served as envoy from the general chapter to Pope Gregory IX . At the papal court , his preaching was hailed as a "jewel case of the Bible " and he was commissioned to produce his collection of sermons, Sermons for Feast Days (Sermones in Festivitates) . Gregory IX described Anthony as the " Ark of the Testament" (Doctor Arca testamenti) .

Miracles [ edit ] Saint Anthony Preaching to the Fishes , c.

1630 The story of Anthony "preaching to the fish" originated in Rimini , where he had gone to preach. When heretics there treated him with contempt, Anthony was said to have gone to the shoreline, where he began to preach at the water's edge until a great crowd of fish was seen gathered before him. The people of the town and even heretics flocked to see this marvelous thing and were moved to listen to Anthony's preaching.

[ 9 ] In another often-told story, which took place also in Rimini, Anthony was challenged by a heretic to prove the reality of the presence of Christ in the Eucharist . The man, who sought to mock Anthony, brought out a half-starved mule and showed it fresh fodder . Saint Anthony showed the mule the monstrance containing the Blessed Sacrament. The mule ignored the fodder and bowed before the Blessed Sacrament.

[ 9 ] The Tempietto of Sant'Antonio marks the spot where the miracle took place. Other versions of this miracle place it in Toulouse or Bourges .

Another account tells of an occasion in Italy when Anthony was dining with heretics. He realized the food they put before him was poisoned, and he confronted them. The men admitted to attempting to kill him, but then challenged him to eat if he truly believed the words spoken in Mark 16:18 about the apostles of Christ: "and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not harm them". Anthony is said to have blessed the food and eaten it without harm, much to the amazement of his hosts.

[ 9 ] Death [ edit ] Anthony of Padua with the Infant Jesus by Antonio de Pereda , detail Anthony became sick with ergotism in 1231 and went to the woodland retreat at Camposampiero with two other friars for a respite. There, he lived in a room built for him under the branches of a walnut tree. Anthony died on the way back to Padua on 13 June 1231 at the Poor Clare monastery at Arcella (now part of Padua), at the age of 35.

As he had requested, Anthony was buried in the small church of Santa Maria Mater Domini—probably dating from the late 12th century—near a convent he had founded in 1229. Because of his notability, the construction of a large church, now the Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua , was begun around 1232 and completed in 1301. The smaller church was incorporated into the structure as the Cappella della Madonna Mora or Chapel of the Dark Madonna. Today the basilica is commonly referred to as "Il Santo" (The Saint).

Various accounts also surround the death of Anthony. One holds that when he died, children cried in the streets and all the church bells rang of their own accord. According to another account, when he was initially buried his tongue, jaw, and vocal cords were chosen as relics for veneration and displayed in a large reliquary . When his body was exhumed 30 years after his death, it was found turned to dust, but the tongue was observed to have glistened and looked as if it were still part of a live body; a further observation being made that this was a sign of his gift of preaching.

[ 10 ] On 1 January 1981, Pope John Paul II authorized a scientific team to study Anthony's remains and the tomb was opened five days later.

Saint and Doctor of the Church [ edit ] St Anthony of Padua and St Francis of Assisi by Friedrich Pacher Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua – Padua, Italy Anthony was canonized by Pope Gregory IX on 30 May 1232, at Spoleto , Italy, less than one year after his death.

[ 3 ] In the words of Pope Benedict XVI : The richness of spiritual teaching contained in the Sermons was so great that in 1946 Venerable Pope Pius XII proclaimed Anthony a Doctor of the Church, attributing to him the title Doctor evangelicus , since the freshness and beauty of the Gospel emerge from these writings.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Veneration as patron saint [ edit ] Anthony's fame spread through Portuguese evangelization, and he has been known as the most celebrated of the followers of Francis of Assisi. He is the patron saint of Padua and many places in Portugal and in the countries of the former Portuguese Empire .

[ 13 ] He is especially invoked and venerated all over the world as the patron saint for the recovery of lost items and is credited with many miracles involving lost people, lost things and even lost spiritual goods.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] St. Anthony Chaplets help devotees to meditate on the thirteen virtues of the saint. Some of these chaplets were used by members of confraternities that had Anthony as their patron saint.

North America [ edit ] First class relic of Anthony displayed at the National Shrine of St. Anthony of Padua and Friary ( Cincinnati, Ohio ) In 1692, Spanish missionaries came across a small Payaya Indian community along what was then known as the Yanaguana River on the feast day of Saint Anthony, 13 June. The Franciscan chaplain, Father Damien Massanet, with agreement from General Domingo de Teran, renamed the rivers in his honor, and eventually built a mission nearby , as well. This mission became the focal point of a small community that eventually grew in size and scope to become the seventh-largest city in the country, the U.S. city of San Antonio, Texas .

[ 15 ] In New York City , the Shrine Church of St. Anthony in Greenwich Village , Manhattan celebrates his feast day , starting with the traditional novena of prayers asking for his intercession on the 13 Tuesdays preceding his feast. This culminates with a week-long series of services and a street fair. A traditional Italian-style procession is held that day through the streets of its South Village neighborhood, during which a relic of the saint is carried for veneration .

[ 16 ] Miraculous Image of Saint Anthony, by Franciszek Lekszycki OFM, 1649, Przeworsk , Poland Each year on the weekend of the last Sunday in August, Boston's North End holds a feast in honor of Saint Anthony. Referred to as the "Feast of All Feasts", Saint Anthony's Feast in Boston's North End was begun in 1919 by Italian immigrants from Montefalcione , a small town near Naples , where the tradition of honoring Saint Anthony goes back to 1688.

[ 17 ] José Guadalupe Posada print of Saint Anthony, about 1910 Each year the Sandia Pueblo along with Santa Clara Pueblo celebrates the feast day of Saint Anthony with traditional Native American dances.

[ 18 ] On 27 January 1907, in Beaumont, Texas , a church was dedicated and named in honor of Saint Anthony. The church was later designated a cathedral in 1966 with the formation of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Beaumont , but was not formally consecrated. On 28 April 1974, St. Anthony Cathedral was dedicated and consecrated by Bishop Warren Boudreaux. In 2006, Pope Benedict XVI granted the cathedral the designation of minor basilica.

St. Anthony Cathedral Basilica celebrated its 100th anniversary on 28 January 2007.

[ 19 ] St. Anthony gives his name to Mission San Antonio de Padua , the third Franciscan mission dedicated along El Camino Real in California in 1771.

[ 20 ] In Ellicott City, Maryland , southwest of Baltimore , the Conventual Franciscans of the St. Anthony Province dedicated their old novitiate house as the Shrine of St. Anthony which since 1 July 2004 serves as the official shrine to Saint Anthony for the Archdiocese of Baltimore .

[ 21 ] Portugal, Spain and Brazil [ edit ] Santo Antônio (Saint Anthony) Church in Teresópolis , Brazil Cathedral of the diocese of Santo Antônio, in the municipality of Frederico Westphalen , northwest of the state of Rio Grande do Sul , Brazil .

Saint Anthony is known in Portugal, Spain, and Brazil as a marriage saint, because legends exist of him reconciling couples. His feast day, 13 June, is Lisbon's municipal holiday, celebrated with parades and marriages. He is one of the saints celebrated in the Brazilian Festa Junina , along with John the Baptist and Saint Peter . The festivities arount him, specifically, is known as the "Trezena de Junho", or thirteenth of June, when devotion to St. Anthony intensifies in the days leading up to his feast. Saint Anthony is patron saint of at least 105 cities through Brazil, in 10 states, being one of the most venerated saints in that country.

[ 22 ] He is venerated in Mogán Village in Gran Canaria , where his feast day is celebrated every year with oversized objects carried through the streets for the fiesta.

[ 23 ] The rest of Europe [ edit ] Saint-Antoine de Padoue parish in Wavre, Belgium In Albania , the Franciscans arrived in 1240 spreading the word of Saint Anthony (Shna Ndou) . The St. Anthony Church, Laç ( Albanian : Kisha e Shna Ndout or Kisha e Laçit ) in Laç was built in his honor.

[ 24 ] Saint Anthony is one of the most important saints amongst Albanians and the pilgrimage to his church is done yearly by a considerable number of Eastern Orthodox and Muslim Albanians as well.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Saint Anthony lived and died during the episcopates of Eastern Orthodox Patriarch Mark III of Alexandria and Patriarch Nicholas I of Alexandria , both of whom still maintained communion with the Pope of Rome.

In the town of Brusciano , Italy, located near Naples, an annual feast in honor of Saint Anthony is held in late August. This tradition dates back to 1875. The tradition started when a man prayed to Saint Anthony for his sick son to get better. He vowed that if his son would become healthy he would build and dance a giglio like the people of Nola do for their patron San Paolino during the annual Fest Dei Gigli. (A giglio is a tall tower topped with a statue of the saint that is carried through the streets in carefully choreographed maneuvers that resemble a dance.) The celebration has grown over the years to include six giglio towers built in honor of the saint. This tradition has also carried over to America, specifically the East Harlem area of New York, where the immigrants from the town of Brusciano formed the Giglio Society of East Harlem and have been holding their annual feast since the early 1900s.

[ 27 ] In Poland , he is the patron saint of Przeworsk . The icon of Saint Anthony, dating from 1649, is housed in a local Franciscan church, Kaplica Świętego Antoniego w Przeworsku [ pl ] .

Asia [ edit ] Saint Anthony is honored in Uvari , in Tamil Nadu , India, where legend holds that the crew of a Portuguese ship was cured of cholera through the intercession of St. Anthony. The local church is dedicated to St. Anthony and houses an ancient wooden statue believed to have been carved by one of the crew.

[ 28 ] In Kerala, where Vasco da Gama had landed in 1498 and where the Portuguese had their first stations in India some of the most ancient churches were renamed after St. Antony and new churches were dedicated to him.

In the Philippines , the devotion to St. Anthony of Padua began in 1581, in the town of Pila, Laguna , where Franciscans established the first church in the country dedicated to St. Anthony of Padua, now elevated as the National Shrine of St. Anthony of Padua under the Diocese of San Pablo .

In Siolim , a village in the Indian state of Goa , St. Anthony is always shown holding a serpent on a stick. This is a depiction of the incident which occurred during the construction of the church wherein a snake was disrupting construction work. The people turned to St. Anthony for help and placed his statue at the construction site. The next morning, the snake was found caught in the cord placed in the statue's hand.

[ 29 ] St. Anthony's Shrine, Kochchikade , located in Sri Lanka , is dedicated to the saint. The church is designated a national shrine [ 30 ] and minor basilica.

[ 31 ] A tiny piece of St. Anthony's tongue is said to be preserved in a special reliquary, which is located in a glass case together with a statue of the saint, at the entrance to the church.

St. Anthony of Padua in St. Joseph's Church, Macao St Antony Shrine, Kundara in Kerala State of India National Shrine of St. Anthony of Padua , Pila, Laguna , Philippines where Franciscans established the first church in the country dedicated to St. Anthony of Padua under the Diocese of San Pablo Africa [ edit ] Antonianism ( Portuguese : antonianismo ) was a syncretic Bakongo Catholic movement formed in the Kingdom of Kongo between 1704 and 1708 as a development out of the Roman Catholic Church in Kongo , yet without denying the authority of the Pope . Its founder was a young charismatic woman named Beatriz Kimpa Vita who said she was possessed by Saint Anthony of Padua.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Beatriz became known for healing and other miracles. It was eventually suppressed by King Pedro IV of Kongo , and Dona Beatriz was burned at the stake as a heretic.

[ 34 ] In art [ edit ] Maso di Banco's painting of Anthony of Padua, c. 1340. Part The Met collection, it was originally within a polyptych.

As the number of Franciscan saints increased, iconography struggled to distinguish Anthony from the others. Because of a legend that he had once preached to the fish by the mouth of the river Marecchia in Rimini , this was sometimes used as his attribute. He is also often seen with a white lily stalk, representing his purity. Other conventions referred to St. Anthony's visionary fervor. Thus, one attribute in use for some time was a flaming heart. He is also sometimes depicted along with the mule in Rimini that allegedly bowed down to him holding the Eucharist .

In 1511, Titian painted three large frescoes in the Scuola del Santo in Padua, depicting scenes of the miracles from the life of Saint Anthony: The Miracle of the Jealous Husband , which depicts the murder of a young woman by her husband; A Child Testifying to Its Mother's Innocence ; and The Saint Healing the Young Man with a Broken Limb .

[ 35 ] Another key pattern has him meditating on an open book in which the Christ Child himself appears, as in the El Greco below. Over time the child came to be shown considerably larger than the book and some images even do without the book entirely. He typically appears carrying the infant Jesus and holding a cross.

[ 36 ] In popular votive offerings , Anthony is often depicted as miraculously saving individuals in various accidents.

[ 37 ] Anthony of Padua in Art El Greco 's painting , 1580, shows the book with an image of the Christ child on the page.

St. Antony of Padua by Giacomo Farelli An early work by Raphael , 1503, at the Dulwich Picture Gallery , London, UK Baby Jesus with St. Anthony of Padua , Elisabetta Sirani , 1656, Bologna, Italy Anthony of Padua with the Infant Jesus by Antonio de Pereda St Antony Reading , early 17th century, by Marco Antonio Bassetti Triptych of Saint Antonius by Ambrosius Benson Saint Anthony of Padua with the Infant Christ by Guercino , 1656, Bologna, Italy Vision of Saint Anthony, by Alonso Cano St. Antony with Christ Child , from, Carinthia , in Austria Saint Anthony of Padua and the miracle of the mule , by Anthony van Dyck .

St. Anthony of Padua Preaching to the Fish , by Victor Wolfvoet II .

Devotional image of the apparition of the Child Jesus to Saint Anthony St Anthony holding Baby Jesus Image in Lisbon.

In music [ edit ] The Austrian composer Gustav Mahler 's song cycle Des Knaben Wunderhorn contains the song Des Antonius von Padua Fischpredigt , whose lyrics recount the story of Saint Anthony's sermon to the fish. This song later formed the basis for the scherzo movement of Mahler's Symphony No. 2 . In correspondence, Mahler expressed amusement that his sinuous musical setting could imply St. Anthony of Padua was himself drunk as he preached to the fish.

[ 38 ] In films [ edit ] The 1931 silent film Saint Anthony of Padua (Antonio di Padova, il santo dei miracoli) was directed by Giulio Antamoro .

He was played in the 1949 Italian film Anthony of Padua by Aldo Fiorelli .

Punitha Anthoniyar (Saint Anthony) , a 1977 Indian Tamil -language film directed by Nanjil Durai, starring R. Muthuraman and Lakshmi in the lead roles.

[ 39 ] Umberto Marino 's 2002 Sant'Antonio di Padova or Saint Anthony: The Miracle Worker of Padua is an Italian TV movie about the saint.

[ 40 ] While the VHS format is without English subtitles, [ 41 ] the DVD version released in 2005 is simply called Saint Anthony and is subtitled.

[ 42 ] Antonello Belluco's 2006 Antonio guerriero di Dio or Anthony, Warrior of God [ 43 ] is a biopic about the saint.

[ 44 ] João Pedro Rodrigues directed the 2016 film The Ornithologist , a sort of modern-day fantastic allegory of the life of St. Anthony.

See also [ edit ] Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua Church of Saint Anthony of Lisbon Monument of Saint Anthony, Lisbon Catholic Church in Italy List of Catholic saints List of Latin nicknames of the Middle Ages: Doctors in theology Marian doctrines of St. Anthony References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Purcell 1960 , pp. 19, 275–276.

^ Foley & McCloskey 2013 .

^ a b c d Dal-Gal 1907 .

^ a b c Monti 2008 .

^ Silva 2011 , p. 1.

^ a b c "Anthony of Padua: The Italian Years – June 2007 Issue of St. Anthony Messenger Magazine Online" . 30 June 2007. Archived from the original on 30 June 2007.

^ a b Foley, Leonard.

"Who Is St. Anthony?" . American Catholic. Archived from the original on 17 October 2000 . Retrieved 27 June 2011 .

^ "Finding the Real St. Anthony: Devotion to St. Anthony of Padua" . 8 December 2000. Archived from the original on 8 December 2000.

^ a b c Arnald 2010 , pp. 122–125.

^ "When Anthony spoke again" .

Messenger of Saint Anthony . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 21 March 2015 .

^ "Saints and Study" . 26 June 2019.

^ Pope Benedict XVI (10 February 2010).

"GENERAL AUDIENCE" . Retrieved 13 June 2013 .

^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ "Novena to Saint Anthony to Find a Lost Article – Prayer to Saint Anthony of Padua – Novena to Find a Lost Item" . 14 November 2007.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2007.

^ "San Antonio: The City of St. Anthony" .

St. Anthony Messenger Magazine Online . Americancatholic.org. June 2004 . Retrieved 30 June 2010 .

^ "Mass Schedule" .

stanthonynyc.org . Archived from the original on 5 November 2009.

^ Aluia, Jason (19 August 2013).

"94th St. Anthony's Feast Schedule Highlights – Friday, August 23 – Monday, August 26, 2013" .

North End Waterfront.com . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ Sweet 2004 .

^ "St. Anthony Cathedral Basilica" .

Forest Trail Region .

^ "The History of our Mission" .

Mission San Antonio de Padua .

^ "At Shrine of St. Anthony, a taste of history and a sense of peace" .

The Baltimore Sun . Archived from the original on 6 June 2013 . Retrieved 28 August 2012 .

^ "Santo Antônio: devoção, missão, milagres e tradições - Vatican News" .

www.vaticannews.va (in Portuguese). 13 June 2024 . Retrieved 5 May 2025 .

^ Media, Mogan.

"Church of San Antonio El Chico" .

www.moganguide.com .

^ Merlika, Eugjen (13 June 2015).

"Historia e Kishës së Laçit! Shenjti portugez i shqiptarëve" . Mapo . Retrieved 9 November 2018 .

^ "Shna Ndou, vendi i shenjtë që i pranon të gjithë mëkatarët – Gazeta Fjala" .

fjala.al . 4 May 2022 . Retrieved 17 April 2023 .

^ "St. Anthony Pilgrimage – Laç, Albania" . 14 December 2023.

^ Green, Frank (7 August 2014).

"Parishioners will hoist nearly 4-ton wooden tower during Dance of the Giglio Festival" .

New York Daily News .

^ Raj 2017 .

^ "Siolim The Village Everyone Loves | St.Mary's Goan Community Dubai" . 6 June 2012. Archived from the original on 11 January 2014.

^ "St. Anthony's – Kochchikade" .

christian.gov.lk . Ministry of Christian Affairs Sri Lanka. Archived from the original on 18 June 2017 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

^ "National Shrines in Sri Lanka, Maldives" .

GCatholic.org . Retrieved 23 April 2019 .

^ Stearns 2001 , p. 394.

^ Thornton 1998 .

^ Wessinger 2011 , p. 391.

^ Morosini 1999 , pp. 163–164.

^ Chong 2016 , p. 189.

^ Museum of Popular Devotion , Basilica of Saint Anthony, Padua ^ "Des Knaben Wunderhorn" . kennedy-center.org . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .

^ Saregama Tamil (11 March 2015).

Punitha Anthoniyar . Archived from the original on 7 June 2021.

^ Sant'Antonio di Padova aka Saint Anthony: The Miracle Worker of Padua at IMDb .

^ VHS on Amazon .

^ DVD on Amazon.

^ DVD on Amazon with English subtitles.

^ Antonio guerriero di Dio aka Anthony, Warrior of God at IMDb.

Sources [ edit ] Arnald (2010).

Chronicle of the Twenty-Four Generals of the Order of Friars Minor . Translated by Noel Muscat. Malta: Ordo Fratrum Minorum.

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Anthony of Padua, Saint" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Chong, A., ed. (2016).

Christianity in Asia: Sacred Art and Visual Splendour . Asian Civilisations Museum.

ISBN 978-981-09-9685-7 .

Dal-Gal, Niccolò (1907).

"St. Anthony of Padua" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Foley, Leonard; McCloskey, Patrick, eds. (2013).

Saint of the day (7th, updated and expanded ed.). Cincinnati, Ohio (US): Franciscan Media.

ISBN 978-1-61636-667-4 .

OCLC 882106791 .

Monti, Dominic V. (2008).

Francis and His Brothers. A Popular History of the Franciscan Friars .

Cincinnati , Ohio : Franciscan Media .

ISBN 978-0-86716855-6 . D. V. Monti (OFM).

Morosini, Sergio Rossetti (March 1999). "New Findings in Titian's Fresco Technique at the Scuola del Santo in Padua".

The Art Bulletin .

81 (1): 163– 164.

doi : 10.2307/3051293 .

JSTOR 3051293 .

Purcell, Mary (1960).

Saint Anthony and His Times .

Garden City, New York : Hanover House. pp. 19, 275– 6.

Raj, Selva J. (2017). "Being Catholic the Tamil way". In Locklin, Reid B. (ed.).

Vernacular Catholicism, vernacular saints . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-1-4384-6505-0 .

OCLC 956984843 .

Silva, José Manuel Azevedo (2011), Câmara Municipal (ed.), A criação da freguesia de Santo António dos Olivais: Visão Histórica e Perspectivas Actuais (PDF) (in Portuguese), Santo António dos Olivias (Coimbra), Portugal: Câmara Municipal de Santo António dos Olivais, archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2011 , retrieved 5 September 2011 Stearns, P.N. (2001).

The Encyclopedia of World History: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern, Chronologically Arranged . Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0-395-65237-4 .

Sweet, Jill Drayson (2004).

Dances of the Tewa Pueblo Indians: expressions of new life . Santa Fe: School of American Research Press.

ISBN 978-1-930618-29-9 .

Thornton, J. (1998).

The Kongolese Saint Anthony: Dona Beatriz Kimpa Vita and the Antonian Movement, 1684-1706 . ACLS Humanities E-Book. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-59649-7 – via American Council of Learned Societies.

Wessinger, Catherine (2011).

The Oxford Handbook of Millennialism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195301052 .

Further reading [ edit ] St. Anthony, Doctor of the Church , Franciscan Institute Publications, 1973, ISBN 978-0-8199-0458-4 Anthony of Padua, Sermones for the Easter Cycle , Franciscan Institute Publications, 1994, ISBN 978-1-57659-041-6 Attwater, Donald; John, Catherine Rachel (1993), The Penguin Dictionary of Saints (3rd ed.), New York, New York: Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0-14-051312-7 External links [ edit ] Anthony of Padua at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Franciscan Media: Who Was St. Anthony of Padua?

Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua – Official website Church of Saint Anthony of Lisbon – Official website "Saint Anthony of Padua" at the Christian Iconography website "St Anthony of Padua – St Peter's Square Colonnade Saints" "Saint Anthony of Padua" . Invisible Monastery of charity and fraternity – Christian family prayer.

Archived from the original on 28 February 2018.

v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Biography Christianity Portugal Saints Religion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Belgium Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ssxvf
Cached time: 20250817100539
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.004 seconds
Real time usage: 1.266 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6265/1000000
Revision size: 45992/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 265462/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8434/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 237115/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.582/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17590166/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  964.346      1 -total
 19.75%  190.462      1 Template:Reflist
 14.90%  143.686     20 Template:Cite_web
 12.91%  124.521      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.40%   90.648      1 Template:Christian_mysticism
  8.70%   83.929      8 Template:Langx
  8.50%   82.008     22 Template:Sfn
  6.08%   58.678      1 Template:Short_description
  5.69%   54.910      2 Template:Navbox
  5.66%   54.571      1 Template:Infobox_saint Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:86895:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817100539 and revision id 1304675000. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anthony_of_Padua&oldid=1304675000 " Categories : 1195 births 1231 deaths 13th-century Christian saints 13th-century Portuguese people 13th-century Roman Catholic theologians 13th-century Christian mystics Augustinian canons Burials at the Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua Deaths from edema Disease-related deaths in Veneto Franciscan Doctors of the Church Franciscan mystics Franciscan saints Franciscan spirituality Franciscan theologians June observances Clergy from Lisbon Portuguese Friars Minor Portuguese Roman Catholic saints Christian miracle workers Fish in Christianity Monastic theologians Patrons of World Youth Day Portuguese Franciscans Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Albanian-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 13:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anthony of Padua 70 languages Add topic

