Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Works by Čapek 3.2 Works about Čapek and his thought 4 See also 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Milič Čapek 3 languages Čeština Eesti Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Czech–American philosopher (1909–1997) Milič Čapek Born ( 1909-01-26 ) 26 January 1909 Třebechovice , Bohemia , Austria-Hungary Died 17 November 1997 (1997-11-17) (aged 88) Little Rock, Arkansas , United States Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Process philosophy Main interests Metaphysics , Modern physics , Philosophy of space and time Notable ideas Process philosophy Milič Čapek , (26 January 1909 – 17 November 1997) was a Czech – American philosopher . Čapek was strongly influenced by the process philosophy of Henri Bergson and to a lesser degree by Alfred North Whitehead . Much of his work was devoted to the relation of philosophy and modern physics , especially the philosophy of space and time and metaphysics .

Life [ edit ] Čapek was born in the municipality of Třebechovice in present-day Czech Republic (then part of Austria-Hungary ).

[ 1 ] He was married to Stephanie Čapek (born Štěpánka Řežábková), who was a school teacher in Czechoslovakia and later a housewife, and died on July 14, 1998 (aged 82), in Little Rock, Arkansas .

[ 2 ] Together they have a daughter, Dr.

Stella M. Čapek from Conway, Arkansas .

[ 3 ] In 1935 Čapek received his Ph.D. in philosophy at Charles University in Prague . Following the German occupation , he escaped from Czechoslovakia and studied at the Sorbonne in Paris, where he also directed Czech-language broadcasts back to his homeland. Ten days before the Nazi invasion, Čapek left Paris and went to America after an odyssey via Dakar , Casablanca and a Vichy concentration camp in Morocco. During the war he taught physics in the Army Specialized Training Program at the University of Iowa , the V-12 Navy College Training Program at Doan College, and at the University of Nebraska . After the war he returned to Czechoslovakia, where he taught briefly at the Palacký University of Olomouc . One month before the 1948 communist coup d'état he was fleeing once again, to take up permanent residence and citizenship in the United States .

[ 1 ] In 1948  joined the Carleton College philosophy faculty. In 1962 he accepted a position as professor of philosophy at Boston University , where he served with distinction until his retirement in 1974. His visiting professorships included the Davis Campus of the University of California, Emory University , University of North Texas , Yale University , and, again, Carleton, as the Donald J. Cowling Distinguished Visiting professor of philosophy. In 1983 Čapek was honored by Carleton with a Doctor of Letters degree.

[ 1 ] Work [ edit ] Čapek was the author of numerous articles in scholarly journals [ 4 ] [ 5 ] as well as of several books. Milič Čapek made major contributions to the understanding of the philosophical implications of relativity theory and quantum mechanics , and to the philosophy of time .

[ 1 ] He supported a dynamic view of time with real flow and genuine becoming , as opposed to the common block universe view with its static interpretation of time.

[ 6 ] Čapek stated that the reason why we think of time and space as "space-time" and rather than "time-space" is because we give priority to the spatial aspect in our effort to geometrize events and moments, or to render them "space-like", as Einstein said.

[ 7 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Works by Čapek [ edit ] 1961.

The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics . Van Nostrand, ISBN 0-442-01452-X .

1971.

Bergson and Modern Physics: A Re-Interpretation and Re-Evaluation . Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 7. D. Reidel Publ. Comp., ISBN 978-90-277-0186-2 ( Google Books ).

1976 (edited by M. Čapek).

The Concepts of Space and Time: Their Structure and Their Development . D. Reidel Publ. Comp, ISBN 90-277-0355-8 ( Google Books ).

1977.

Immediate and Mediate Memory . Process Studies 7(2): 90-96 ( fulltext online ).

1988.

Do the New Concepts of Space and Time Require a New Metaphysics?

Chapter 6 pp. 90–104 in Kitchener, R. F. (ed.).

The World View of Contemporary Physics: Does It Need a New Metaphysics?

. SUNY Press, ISBN 0-88706-741-7 .

1991.

The New Aspects of Time: Its Continuity and Novelties . Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Kluwer Academic, ISBN 0-7923-0911-1 .

Works about Čapek and his thought [ edit ] Van Fraassen, Bas C., 1962.

Capek on Eternal Recurrence . Journal of Philosophy 59(14): 371-375 ( Abstract ).

Lenzen, V. F., 1963.

Book Review: Milič Capek. The philosophical impact of contemporary physics . Philosophy of Science 30(1): 81–83.

Sipfle, David A., 1998.

Milič Čapek 1909-1997 . Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 71(5): 138.

Brogaard, Berit, 2000.

The Coup de Grâce for Mechanistic Metaphysics: Čapek's New Philosophy of Nature . Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 36(1): 75–108.

See also [ edit ] Biography portal Process philosophy American philosophy Philosophy of space and time Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d SVU Obituaries' Archive 1998-2001 ^ Log Cabin Democrat Orbituaries 7/17/98 ^ Log Cabin Democrat Orbituaries 11/20/97 ^ Google Scholar ^ philpapers ^ Russell, Robert J. (ed.) 2004.

Fifty years in science and religion: Ian G. Barbour and his legacy . p. 151, Ashgate Publ. LTD, ISBN 0-7546-4118-X ( Google Books ) ^ Berg Olsen, Jan-Kyrre 2002.

Time in Experience and Science . Ph.D. thesis, Roskilde University ( PDF Archived 2012-03-31 at the Wayback Machine ) External links [ edit ] [1] , Czechoslovak Society of Arts & Sciences (SVU) Obituaries' Archive (1998–2001) Links to related articles v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Milič_Čapek&oldid=1282685558 " Categories : 1909 births 1997 deaths 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century Czech philosophers 20th-century American essayists American male essayists American male non-fiction writers American people of Czech descent Boston University faculty Carleton College alumni Czech essayists Epistemologists Metaphysics writers Ontologists Academic staff of Palacký University Olomouc People from Little Rock, Arkansas Philosophers of science Philosophers of time Process philosophy 20th-century American male writers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 00:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Milič Čapek 3 languages Add topic

