Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Works 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gérard Edelinck 9 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Nederlands Русский Svenska Татарча / tatarça Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from G. Edelinck ) Flemish engraver (1640–1707) Portrait of Gérard Edelinck by his son Nicolas Gérard Edelinck (20 October 1640 (baptized) – 2 April 1707) was a copper-plate engraver and print publisher of Flemish origin, who worked in Paris from 1666 and became a naturalized French citizen in 1675.

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Edelinck was born in Antwerp , where he received his early training under the engravers Gaspar Huybrechts (1619–1684) and Cornelius Galle the Younger . He went to Paris in 1666, where he worked with his fellow Fleming Nicolas Pitau the elder. To improve himself further he subsequently studied under François de Poilly , Robert Nanteuil , and Philippe de Champaigne .

[ 1 ] These masters likewise had soon done all they could to help him onwards, and Edelinck ultimately took the first rank among line engravers.

[ 2 ] Philippe de Champaigne His excellence was generally acknowledged; and having become known to Louis XIV he was appointed, on the recommendation of Le Brun , teacher at the academy established at the Gobelins manufactory for the training of workers in tapestry . He was also entrusted with the execution of several important works.

[ 2 ] In 1677 he won admission to the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture (Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture) with his Portrait of Philippe de Champaigne , engraved after a self-portrait.

[ 3 ] Work [ edit ] Alexander and Hephaistion visit the family of Darius in their tent after the battle of Issus, engraved by Gérard Edelinck from a painting by Charles le Brun The work of this great engraver constitutes an epoch in the art. His prints number more than four hundred. Edelinck stands above and apart from his predecessors and contemporaries in that he excelled, not in some one respect, but in all respects, that while one engraver attained excellence in correct form, and another in rendering light and shade, and others in giving color to their prints and the texture of surfaces, he, as supreme master of the burin , possessed and displayed all these separate qualities, in so complete a harmony that the eye is not attracted by any one of them in particular, but rests in the satisfying whole.

[ 2 ] Edelinck was especially good as an engraver of portraits , and executed prints of many of the most eminent persons of his time. Among these are those of Le Brun, Rigaud , Champaigne, Nanteuil, La Fontaine , Colbert , John Dryden , Descartes , Jean-Baptiste Lully , etc. He died at Paris in 1707. His younger brother Jean , and his son Nicholas , were also engravers.

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] Among his most famous works are: Holy Family , after Raphael Penitent Magdalene , after Charles le Brun Alexander at the Tent of Darius , after Le Brun Combat of Four Knights , after Leonardo da Vinci Christ surrounded with Angels , after Le Brun St. Louis praying , after Le Brun St Charles Borromeo before a crucifix , after Le Brun [ 2 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Préaud 1998.

^ a b c d e Chisholm 1911 .

^ Grund 2006, vol. 5, p. 65.

References [ edit ] Gründ, publisher (2006).

Benezit: Dictionary of Artists . Paris: Gründ.

ISBN 9782700030709 .

Préaud, Maxime (1998), "Edelinck, Gérard", vol. 9, p. 718, in The Dictionary of Art , edited by Jane Turner. London: Macmillan.

ISBN 9781884446009 .

Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Edelinck, Gerard ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 923.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Gérard Edelinck at Wikimedia Commons ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Victoria Scientific illustrators Auckland National Gallery of Canada South Australia 2 People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gérard_Edelinck&oldid=1302923655 " Categories : 1640 births 1707 deaths Emigrants from the Spanish Netherlands Immigrants to France 17th-century French engravers 18th-century French engravers 17th-century Flemish engravers Flemish Baroque painters Portrait engravers Artists from Antwerp Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 04:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gérard Edelinck 9 languages Add topic

