Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Jet 1.2 High velocity 1.3 Propelling 1.4 Magnetic 1.5 Spray 1.6 Vacuum 1.7 Shaping 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Nozzle 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Magyar മലയാളം မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Device used to direct the flow of a fluid This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Nozzle" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A water nozzle Center pivot irrigation sprinkler nozzles, used in crop irrigation Rotator style pivot applicator sprinkler End Gun style pivot applicator sprinkler A nozzle is a device designed to control the direction or characteristics of a fluid flow (specially to increase velocity) as it exits (or enters) an enclosed chamber or pipe .

A nozzle is often a pipe or tube of varying cross sectional area, and it can be used to direct or modify the flow of a fluid ( liquid or gas ). Nozzles are frequently used to control the rate of flow, speed, direction, mass, shape, and/or the pressure of the stream that emerges from them. In a nozzle, the velocity of fluid increases at the expense of its pressure energy.

Types [ edit ] Look up nozzle in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Jet [ edit ] A gas jet , fluid jet , or hydro jet is a nozzle intended to eject gas or fluid in a coherent stream into a surrounding medium. Gas jets are commonly found in gas stoves , ovens , or barbecues . Gas jets were commonly used for light before the development of electric light . Other types of fluid jets are found in carburetors , where smooth calibrated orifices are used to regulate the flow of fuel into an engine, and in jacuzzis or spas .

Another specialized jet is the laminar jet. This is a water jet that contains devices to smooth out the pressure and flow, and gives laminar flow , as its name suggests. This gives better results for fountains .

The foam jet is another type of jet which uses foam instead of a gas or fluid.

Nozzles used for feeding hot blast into a blast furnace or forge are called tuyeres .

Jet nozzles are also used in large rooms where the distribution of air via ceiling diffusers is not possible or not practical. Diffusers that uses jet nozzles are called jet diffuser where it will be arranged in the side wall areas in order to distribute air. When the temperature difference between the supply air and the room air changes, the supply air stream is deflected upwards, to supply warm air, or downwards, to supply cold air.

[ 1 ] High velocity [ edit ] A nozzle from the Ariane 5 rocket Frequently, the goal of a nozzle is to increase the kinetic energy of the flowing medium at the expense of its pressure and internal energy .

Nozzles can be described as convergent (narrowing down from a wide diameter to a smaller diameter in the direction of the flow) or divergent (expanding from a smaller diameter to a larger one). A de Laval nozzle has a convergent section followed by a divergent section and is often called a convergent-divergent (CD) nozzle ("con-di nozzle").

Convergent nozzles accelerate subsonic fluids. If the nozzle pressure ratio is high enough, then the flow will reach sonic velocity at the narrowest point (i.e. the nozzle throat ). In this situation, the nozzle is said to be choked .

Increasing the nozzle pressure ratio further will not increase the throat Mach number above one. Downstream (i.e. external to the nozzle) the flow is free to expand to supersonic velocities; however, Mach 1 can be a very high speed for a hot gas because the speed of sound varies as the square root of absolute temperature. This fact is used extensively in rocketry where hypersonic flows are required and where propellant mixtures are deliberately chosen to further increase the sonic speed.

Divergent nozzles slow fluids if the flow is subsonic, but they accelerate sonic or supersonic fluids.

Convergent-divergent nozzles can therefore accelerate fluids that have choked in the convergent section to supersonic speeds. This CD process is more efficient than allowing a convergent nozzle to expand supersonically externally.
The shape of the divergent section also ensures that the direction of the escaping gases is directly backwards, as any
sideways component would not contribute to thrust.

Propelling [ edit ] Main article: Propelling nozzle A jet exhaust produces thrust from the energy obtained from burning fuel. The hot gas is at a higher pressure than the outside air and escapes from the engine through a propelling nozzle , which increases the speed of the gas.

[ 2 ] Exhaust speed needs to be faster than the aircraft speed in order to produce thrust but an excessive speed difference wastes fuel (poor propulsive efficiency). Jet engines for subsonic flight use convergent nozzles with a sonic exit velocity. Engines for supersonic flight, such as used for fighters and SST aircraft (e.g.

Concorde ) achieve the high exhaust speeds necessary for supersonic flight by using a divergent extension to the convergent engine nozzle which accelerates the exhaust to supersonic speeds.

Multiple large spiral nozzles (also known as pigtail nozzles) used in a scrubber application. Spiral nozzles typically have the largest free passage design to help prevent clogging.

Rocket motors maximise thrust and exhaust velocity by using convergent-divergent nozzles with very large area ratios and therefore extremely high pressure ratios. Mass flow is at a premium because all the propulsive mass is carried with vehicle, and very high exhaust speeds are desirable.

Magnetic [ edit ] Main article: Magnetic nozzle Magnetic nozzles have also been proposed for some types of propulsion, such as VASIMR , in which the flow of plasma is directed by magnetic fields instead of walls made of solid matter.

Spray [ edit ] Main article: Spray nozzle Many nozzles produce a very fine spray of liquids.

Atomizer nozzles are used for spray painting, perfumes, carburetors for internal combustion engines , spray on deodorants , antiperspirants and many other similar uses.

Air-aspirating nozzles use an opening in the cone shaped nozzle to inject air into a stream of water based foam (CAFS/AFFF/FFFP) to make the concentrate "foam up". Most commonly found on foam extinguishers and foam handlines.

Swirl nozzles inject the liquid in tangentially, and it spirals into the center and then exits through the central hole. Due to the vortexing this causes the spray to come out in a cone shape.

Water spray nozzles are designed to distribute water in a controlled pattern for cooling, dust suppression, fire protection, and industrial applications. They ensure efficient liquid dispersion for various needs.

[ 3 ] Vacuum [ edit ] Vacuum cleaner nozzles come in several different shapes. Vacuum nozzles are used in vacuum cleaners.

Shaping [ edit ] Some nozzles are shaped to produce a stream that is of a particular shape. For example, extrusion molding is a way of producing lengths of metals or plastics or other materials with a particular cross-section. This nozzle is typically referred to as a die .

See also [ edit ] Fire hose#Forces on fire hoses and nozzles Rocket engine nozzle SERN References [ edit ] ^ Jet nozzles Type DUK (PDF) . TROX GmbH. December 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2013 . Retrieved 15 October 2013 .

^ Saravanamuttoo, H. I. H.; Rogers, G. F. C.; Cohen, H. (2001) [1951].

Gas Turbine Theory (PDF) (5th ed.). Pearson Education. p. 108.

ISBN 978-81-7758-902-3 .

^ "Future of Process Equipment Cleaning | | Jetspray Innovation" .

www.jetspray.in .

External links [ edit ] Look up nozzle in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Nozzle design (converging/diverging - CD nozzle)" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 20 March 2009 . Retrieved 19 January 2009 .

Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐dq6d8
Cached time: 20250812022350
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.290 seconds
Real time usage: 0.372 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 975/1000000
Revision size: 9028/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 25202/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1083/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26545/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.202/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5667759/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  327.720      1 -total
 25.31%   82.956      1 Template:Reflist
 23.07%   75.606      1 Template:Authority_control
 20.81%   68.193      2 Template:Cite_book
 16.12%   52.839      1 Template:Short_description
 14.25%   46.691      1 Template:Refimprove
 13.52%   44.295      1 Template:Ambox
  9.82%   32.183      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.86%   19.202      2 Template:Wiktionary
  5.42%   17.757      3 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:316824:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022350 and revision id 1278738908. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nozzle&oldid=1278738908 " Categories : Nozzles Fluid mechanics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2017 Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 08:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nozzle 42 languages Add topic

