Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General description Toggle General description subsection 1.1 Actors 1.2 Financial products 1.3 Principles 2 Worldwide development Toggle Worldwide development subsection 2.1 Europe 2.2 United States 2.3 Eastern Orthodox finance 3 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Christian finance 5 languages العربية Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of ethical finance following Christian ethic Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Christian finance is a kind of ethical finance following Christian ethics . Although not widely used, [ 1 ] the notion of "Christian finance" or "Catholic finance" refers to banking and financial activities which came into existence several centuries ago [ citation needed ] . Whether the activities of the Knights Templar (12th century), Mounts of Piety (appeared in 1462) or the Apostolic Chamber attached directly to the Vatican , a number of operations of a banking nature (money loan , guarantee ) or a financial nature (issuance of securities , investments ) were practiced, despite the prohibition of usury and the Catholic Church 's distrust against exchange activities (opposed to production activities).

[ 2 ] Christian finance is characterized by the existence of three dimensions: personal (actors), operational (operations), and dogmatic (principles).

General description [ edit ] Actors [ edit ] In the modern era , Catholic clerical finance continues to be conducted through the Vatican Bank (IOR), and many Catholic lay financial players also exist, both in Germany (e.g.

Pax-Bank , [ 3 ] Liga Bank , [ 4 ] Darlehenskasse DKM) or the United States of America (e.g. Catholic Family Federal Credit Union, [ 5 ] Holy Rosary Credit Union, [ 6 ] Emerging Capital Funding [ 7 ] )). Other Christian community actors exist (e.g. Christian Community Credit Union, [ 8 ] Kingdom Bank [ 9 ] ).

In France, if the General Union presented ostensibly as a Catholic credit institution, today, social finance (non-religious ethical finance) seems to have completely replaced Christian finance (e.g. Credit coopératif, Caisses de crédit municipal). However, with regard to ethical principles implemented and their historically Catholic origin, many actors of the solidarity finance can be attached to the category of Christian finance ("Catho-compatible players" [ 10 ] ).

Financial products [ edit ] If certain financial transactions were explicitly condemned because they circumvented the prohibition of usury (e.g.

Mohatra contract ), the operations of contemporary Catholic bank is characterized by their search for solidarity and the distribution of benefits in favor of the poor.

[ 11 ] For example, Liga Bank offers credit cards whose commissions are donated to charities supporting children.

Principles [ edit ] As with Islamic finance , Catholic finance aims to supervise banking operations and financial activities with moral principles directly from the interpretation of Christian religious texts ( Bible ) and from the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church (Treaty of virtues and vices, Catholic social teaching ). Also, since the subprime financial crisis, it was found that the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace took more often positions on financial matters. In October 2011, someone published a note "Reform of the international financial system with a view toward a general public Authority".

[ citation needed ] In his book "Catholic Finance" (in French: “Finance catholique”), Dr. Antoine Cuny de la Verryère presents seven principles for a Catholic finance (named "princificats"). Some of them are inspired from the principles of Islamic finance: prohibition of short-termism, prohibition of non-virtuous investment, obligation to give priority to virtuous savings, prohibition of unjust profits, obligation to share profits, obligation of transparency, and obligation of financial exemplary.

[ 12 ] Worldwide development [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] The Christian Finance Observatory ("OFCCFO"), a non-profit international organization, gathering professionals of Christian ethical finance, announced in 2015 the publication of a "Fundamental Charter of Christian Ethical Finance". The Charter considers the various schools of Christian thoughts (Protestant, Catholic and Orthodox) on financial matters and is available in many languages.

[ 13 ] Beyond general principles, the Charter set out a practical codification of financial practices, and makes sorting between practices considered as virtuous and those considered as non-virtuous. The drafting committee brought together participants from several countries (Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Germany and France).

[ 14 ] United States [ edit ] S&P Dow Jones Indices created in August 2015 a new index that excludes companies apparently involved in activities that are deemed inconsistent with Catholic values.

[ 15 ] The OFCCFO's EXCELSIS Rating Committee considered that the product "S&P 500 Catholic Values Index" is eligible to the Quality Label EXCELSIS, rating should be "B−" (best is A+, worst is C−).

[ 16 ] Eastern Orthodox finance [ edit ] Main article: Eastern Orthodox Christianity According to Russian press, a group of businessmen have started working December 2014 to the creation of an Orthodox bank and investment fund.

Archpriest Vsevolod Chaplin has welcomed the project because it would rectify usurious mechanisms.

[ 17 ] Notes and references [ edit ] ^ N. Ferrier/V. Maymo, Peut-on parler d'une finance catholique ?, Revue Banque n°750, juin 2012 ^ J. Le Goff, Marchands et banquiers au Moyen Âge, Puf Quadrige, 2011, p. 75 ^ Christoph Berndorff; Gerd Greven; Winfried Hinzen.

"Bank of Church and Caritas" . Pax-Bank . Retrieved 2016-06-10 .

^ "Privatkunden - LIGA Bank eG" . Ligabank.de . Retrieved 2016-06-10 .

^ "Catholic Family Federal Credit Union" . Cffcu.com. Archived from the original on 2016-03-23 . Retrieved 2016-06-10 .

^ "Holy Rosary Credit Union" . Hrcu.org . Retrieved 2016-06-10 .

^ "Emerging Capital Funding" . Emerging Capital Funding . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ "Homepage" .

Christian Community Credit Union .

^ "Kingdom Bank" . Kingdom Bank . Retrieved 2016-06-10 .

^ A.R. Cuny de la Verryère, Finance catholique, edit. EMS, 2013, p. 39 et s.

^ A.R. Cuny de la Verryère, Finance catholique, edit. EMS, 2013, p. 135 et s.

^ A.R. Cuny de la Verryère, Finance catholique, edit. EMS, 2013, p. 122 et s.

^ "The Charta – Observatoire de Finance Chrétienne – Christian Finance Observatory" . Archived from the original on 2016-12-23 . Retrieved 2016-12-22 .

^ A.R. Cuny de la Verryère, The advent of Christian investment,global pulse magazine, September 18, 2015 ^ Brinded, Lianna (2015-08-19).

"Standard and Poors launch S&P 500 Catholic Values Index" .

Business Insider . Archived from the original on 2017-07-15 . Retrieved 2024-06-15 .

^ "Quality Label EXCELSIS – Observatoire de Finance Chrétienne – Christian Finance Observatory" . Archived from the original on 2016-12-23 . Retrieved 2016-12-22 .

^ "Archpriest Vsevolod Chaplin: Orthodox banking rescue from crisis | Russian news and facts" .

ru-facts.com . 2014-12-22. Archived from the original on 2015-12-22 . Retrieved 2024-06-15 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_finance&oldid=1300025996 " Categories : Christian ethics Economy and Christianity Financial services Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 21:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian finance 5 languages Add topic

