Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principles or laws 2 Combining stratigraphic contexts for interpretation 3 Stratigraphic dating Toggle Stratigraphic dating subsection 3.1 Residual and intrusive finds 3.2 Archiving Stratigraphic Data 4 Trivia 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Stratigraphy (archaeology) 14 languages Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Italiano עברית Latina Norsk bokmål Polski Português Shqip தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of archaeological sedimentation for dating purposes This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Stratigraphy" archaeology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Archaeological stratigraphy at the Iron Age site of Goosehill Camp on Bow Hill , West Sussex in Southern England.

Neat stratification in Athens (Ceramicus Cemetery).

Stratigraphy is a key concept to modern archaeological theory and practice. Modern excavation techniques are based on stratigraphic principles. The concept derives from the geological use of the idea that sedimentation takes place according to uniform principles.
When archaeological finds are below the surface of the ground (as is most commonly the case), the identification of the context of each find is vital in enabling the archaeologist to draw conclusions about the site and about the nature and date of its occupation. It is the archaeologist's role to attempt to discover what contexts exist and how they came to be created. Archaeological stratification or sequence is the dynamic superimposition of single units of stratigraphy, or contexts.

Contexts are single events or actions that leave discrete, detectable traces in the archaeological sequence or stratigraphy. They can be deposits (such as the back-fill of a ditch), structures (such as walls), or "zero thickness surfaces", better known as " cuts ". Cuts represent actions that remove other solid contexts such as fills, deposits, and walls. An example would be a ditch "cut" through earlier deposits. Stratigraphic relationships are the relationships created between contexts in time, representing the chronological order in which they were created. One example would be a ditch and the back-fill of said ditch. The temporal relationship of "the fill" context to the ditch "cut" context is such that "the fill" occurred later in the sequence; you have to dig a ditch before you can back-fill it. A relationship that is later in the sequence is sometimes referred to as "higher" in the sequence, and a relationship that is earlier, "lower", though this does not refer necessarily to the physical location of the context. It is more useful to think of "higher" as it relates to the context's position in a Harris matrix , a two-dimensional representation of a site's formation in space and time.

Principles or laws [ edit ] Archaeological stratigraphy is based on a series of axiomatic principles or "laws". They are derived from the principles of stratigraphy in geology but have been adapted to reflect the different nature of archaeological deposits.

E.C. Harris notes two principles that were widely recognised by archaeologists by the 1970s: [ 1 ] The principle of superposition establishes that within a series of layers and interfacial features, as originally created, the upper units of stratification are younger and the lower are older, for each must have been deposited on, or created by the removal of, a pre-existing mass of archaeological stratification.

The principle that layers can be no older than the age of the most recent artefact discovered within them. This is the basis for the relative dating of layers using artefact typologies. It is analogous to the geological principle of faunal succession , although Harris argued that it was not strictly applicable to archaeology.

He also proposed three additional principles: [ 2 ] The principle of original horizontality states that any archaeological layer deposited in an unconsolidated form will tend towards a horizontal deposition. Strata which are found with tilted surfaces were so originally deposited, or lie in conformity with the contours of a pre-existing basin of deposition.

The principle of lateral continuity states that any archaeological deposit, as originally laid down, will be bounded by the edge of the basin of deposition, or will thin down to a feather edge. Therefore, if any edge of the deposit is exposed in a vertical plane view, a part of its original extent must have been removed by excavation or erosion : its continuity must be sought, or its absence explained.

The principle of stratigraphic succession states that any given unit of archaeological stratification exists within the stratigraphic sequence from its position between the undermost of all higher units and the uppermost of all lower units and with which it has a physical contact.

Combining stratigraphic contexts for interpretation [ edit ] Illustration of the principles of archaeological stratigraphy Understanding a site in modern archaeology is a process of grouping single contexts together in ever larger groups by virtue of their relationships. The terminology of these larger clusters varies depending on the practitioner, but the terms interface, sub-group, and group are common. An example of a sub-group could be the three contexts that make up a burial; the grave cut, the body, and the back-filled earth on top of the body. Sub-groups can then be clustered together with other sub-groups by virtue of their stratigraphic relationship to form groups, which in turn form "phases." A sub-group burial could cluster with other sub-group burials to form a cemetery, which in turn could be grouped with a building, such as a church, to produce a " phase ". Phase implies a nearly contemporaneous Archaeological horizon , representing "what you would see if you went back to time X". The production of phase interpretations is the first goal of stratigraphic interpretation and excavation.

Stratigraphic dating [ edit ] Archaeologists investigating a site may wish to date the activity rather than artifacts on site by dating the individual contexts which represents events. Some degree of dating objects by their position in the sequence can be made with known datable elements of the archaeological record or other assumed datable contexts deduced by a regressive form of relative dating which in turn can fix events represented by contexts to some range in time. For example, the date of formation of a context which is totally sealed between two datable layers will fall between the dates of the two layers sealing it. However the date of contexts often fall in a range of possibilities so using them to date others is not a straightforward process.

Figure A Figure B Take the hypothetical section figure A . Here we can see 12 contexts, each numbered with a unique context number and whose sequence is represented in the Harris matrix in figure B .

A horizontal layer Masonry wall remnant Backfill of the wall construction trench (sometimes called construction cut) A horizontal layer, probably the same as 1 Construction cut for wall 2 A clay floor abutting wall 2 Fill of shallow cut 8 Shallow pit cut A horizontal layer A horizontal layer, probably the same as 9 Natural sterile ground formed before human occupation of the site Trample in the base of cut 5 formed by workmen's boots constructing the structure wall 2 and floor 6 is associated with.

If we know the date of context 1 and context 9 we can deduce that context 7, the backfilling of pit 8, occurred sometime after the date for 9 but before the date for 1, and if we recover an assemblage of artifacts from context 7 that occur nowhere else in the sequence, we have isolated them with a reasonable degree of certainty to a discrete range of time. In this instance we can now use the date we have for finds in context 7 to date other sites and sequences. In practice a huge amount of cross referencing with other recorded sequences is required to produce dating series from stratigraphic relationships such as the work in seriation .

Residual and intrusive finds [ edit ] One issue in using stratigraphic relationships is that the date of artifacts in a context does not represent the date of the context, but just the earliest date the context could be. If one looks at the sequence in figure A , one may find that the cut for the construction of wall 2, context 5, has cut through layers 9 and 10, and in doing so has introduced the possibility that artifacts from layers 9 and 10 may be redeposited higher up the sequence in the context representing the backfill of the construction cut, context 3. These artifacts are referred to as "residual" or "residual finds". It is crucial that dating a context is based on the latest dating evidence drawn from the context. We can also see that if the fill of cut 5 – the wall 2, backfill 3 and trample 12 — are not removed entirely during excavation because of " undercutting ", non-residual artifacts from these later "higher" contexts 2, 3 and 12 could contaminate the excavation of earlier contexts such as 9 and 10 and give false dating information. These artifacts may be termed intrusive finds .

Archiving Stratigraphic Data [ edit ] Stratigraphic data is a required component in archaeological archives, but there is a growing problem for digital data archives, where stratigraphic data are often only held on paper or as scanned image copies (PDFs) of matrix diagrams. This means that they cannot be easily re-used in further analysis. Some recommendations are being made to address this problem.

[ 3 ] Trivia [ edit ] In contemporary archaeology , stratigraphical layers may even be formed by nesting birds, breeding on plastic litter.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] As plastic does not decompose, layers are formed year after year, documenting our throw-away society.

[ 6 ] These plastic stratigraphies can go multiple decades back in time. A nest from a Eurasian coot found in Amsterdam , the Netherlands , collected in 2021, could be traced back all the way to the early 1990s by checking the expiration dates of all the food packaging in the nest layers.

[ 7 ] The oldest nest layer included the packaging of a Mars bar advertising the 1994 FIFA World Cup .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Archaeological culture – Group of artifact types and structure layouts that often occur together Christian Maclagan – British antiquary and archaeologist (1811–1901) – Scottish antiquarian and archaeologist Relative dating – Determination of the relative order of archaeological layers and artifacts Reverse stratigraphy or inverted stratigraphy Sequence (archaeology) – Stratigraphy of the archaeological record, used as part of the 'seriation' method of relative dating Sequence dating – Archaeological relative dating method based on linking pottery styles to time periods References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Harris 1979 , p. 29.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFHarris1979 ( help ) ^ Harris 1979 , pp. 30–33.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFHarris1979 ( help ) ^ May, K; Taylor, J.S.; Binding, C (2023).

"Stratigraphic Analysis and The Matrix: connecting and reusing digital records and archives of archaeological investigations" .

Internet Archaeology (61).

doi : 10.11141/ia.61.2 .

^ Hiemstra, Auke-Florian; Gravendeel, Barbara; Schilthuizen, Menno (2025).

"Birds documenting the Anthropocene: Stratigraphy of plastic in urban bird nests" .

Ecology .

106 (2): e70010.

doi : 10.1002/ecy.70010 .

ISSN 1939-9170 .

PMC 11851049 .

PMID 39995282 .

^ "Plastic waste in bird nests can act like a tiny time capsule" .

www.science.org . Retrieved 2025-06-24 .

^ Keenan, Rachel (2025-04-04).

"From burger wrappers to masks, bird nests tell story of throwaway culture" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-06-24 .

^ "From Steno to Snickers: the Anthropocene through the eyes of a coot" .

Leiden University . 2025-05-08 . Retrieved 2025-06-24 .

^ "One Bird Nest, 30 Years of Human Trash" .

The New York Times . 2025-04-03.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2025-06-24 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Harris, E. C.

(1989) Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy, 2nd Edition . Academic Press: London and San Diego.

ISBN 0-12-326651-3 A. Carandini, Storie dalla terra. Manuale di scavo archeologico , Torino, Einaudi, 1991 v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Wikimedia Commons has media related to Archaeological stratigraphy .

Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stratigraphy_(archaeology)&oldid=1297758812 " Category : Methods in archaeology Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2018 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 08:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stratigraphy (archaeology) 14 languages Add topic

