Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Structure 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Ancient sources 5.2 Modern sources Toggle the table of contents Ecclesia (Sparta) 22 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano ქართული Magyar Монгол Nederlands Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Citizens' assembly in ancient Sparta Not to be confused with Apellai .

Part of a series on Sparta Spartan Constitution Great Rhetra Legislators Lycurgus Chilon Epitadeus Agis IV Cleomenes III Government List of Kings of Sparta Agiads Eurypontids Gerousia Ephorate Ekklesia Navarchy Social groups Spartiates Perioeci Helots Neodamodes Trophimoi Mothax Sciritae Epeunacti Partheniae Society Agoge Crypteia Spartan army Syssitia Xenelasia Women Cults Aphrodite Ambologera Areia Temple Artemis Caryatis Isora Orthia ) Hyacinth Menelaion Festivals Carneia Gymnopaedia Hyacinthia Xanthika Legacy Laconophilia Laconism Spartan mirage v t e The ecclesia or ekklesia ( Greek : ἐκκλησία) was the citizens' assembly in the Ancient Greek city-state of Sparta . Unlike its more famous counterpart in Athens , the Spartan assembly had limited powers, as it did not debate; citizens could only vote for or against proposals.

In the pre-War [ which?

] literature, the assembly was often called the apella ( Greek : Ἀπέλλα ), but this word refers to a festival of Apollo , the Apellai , during which the ekklesia originally met.

Name [ edit ] The pre-War academic literature often refers to the Spartan ekklesia as the apella.

[ 1 ] However, this word is never found in ancient sources in the singular, and never in a political context.

[ 2 ] The Apellai were a festival of Apollo during which the ekklesia originally met. They were organised once a month, with perhaps one more important feast once a year (called Apellaios), during which elections were presumably organised. In later times, the two events (religious and political) were possibly split.

[ 2 ] Ancient sources use instead the word ecclesia to designate the political assembly of the Spartans, like in any other Greek city-state . The most important mention comes from Thucydides , who reproduces a verbatim sentence of a decree between Sparta and Argos concluded in 418 or 417, which uses "ecclesia" for the Spartan assembly.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The confusion arose from the Rhetra cited by Plutarch , mentioning apellazein , which Plutarch tells it means "to assemble the people", but only in reference to Apollo, the god at the origins of the Rhetra.

[ 5 ] [ 2 ] Structure [ edit ] The meetings had in all probability taken place originally in the Agora but were later transferred to the neighbouring building, known as the Skias.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] According to Plutarch , a Great Rhetra [ 8 ] was given by Pythia to Lycurgus . The old aristocratic council was substituted by the gerousia (thirty elders, including the two kings). Meetings of the ekklesia should take place from time to time, and citizens should have the power to debate and take decisions.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] That right of the citizens was very soon limited. Kings Theopompus and Polydorus, probably during the 7th century BC, added to the "rhetra" that the kings and the elders ( gerousia ) could set aside any "crooked" decision of the people.

[ 11 ] [ 10 ] The presiding officers were at first the kings but in historical times the ephors , and the voting was conducted by assessing the loudness of shouting in the crowd. If the president was doubtful as to the majority of voices, a division was taken, and the votes were counted.

[ 7 ] The ekklesia simply accepted or rejected the proposals submitted to it. In later times, too, the actual debate was almost, if not wholly, confined to the kings, elders, ephors and perhaps the other magistrates. The apella voted on peace and war, treaties and foreign policy in general. It decided the king who should conduct a campaign and settled questions of disputed succession to the throne. It elected elders, ephors and other magistrates, emancipated helots and perhaps voted on legal proposals.

[ 7 ] There is a single reference to a "small assembly" ( ἡ μικρὰ καλουμένη ἐκκλησία ) at Sparta, but nothing is known as to its nature or competence.

[ 12 ] The ekklesia was responsible for electing men to the gerousia for life. Candidates were selected from the aristocrats and presented before the apella. The candidate who received the loudest applause became a member of the gerousia.

The ekklesia also elected the five ephors annually. Ephors presided over meetings of the gerousia and the apella. They could not run for re-election.

The ephorate presented motions before the ekklesia. The ekklesia then voted on the motions. However, unlike the ecclesia in Athens , the ekklesia did not debate; it merely approved or disapproved of measures. Moreover, the gerousia always had the power to veto the decision of the ekklesia.

See also [ edit ] Apellai Great Rhetra Apellaia Notes [ edit ] ^ Tod, "Apella", in Chisholm (ed.), Encyclopædia Britannica , Vol. 2 (11th ed.), p. 160, is typical of the old view.

^ a b c Ste. Croix, Origins of the Peloponnesian War , p. 347.

^ Thucydides, v. 77 § 1 .

^ Ste. Croix, Origins of the Peloponnesian War , p. 346.

^ Plutarch, Lycurgus , 6.

^ Paus . iii. 12. 10 ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Tod, Marcus Niebuhr (1911). " Apella ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 160.

^ D. Ogden, Crooked speech : the genesis of the Spartan rhetra, Journal of Hellenic Studies 114 (1994) 85-102.

^ Plut .

Lycurg . VI, 1-2.

^ a b C. Mosse, p. 168-171 ^ Plut .

Lycurg .

VI,4,5 [1] ^ Xen .

Hell .

iii. 3. 8 Bibliography [ edit ] Ancient sources [ edit ] Plutarch, Parallel Lives ( Lycurgus) .

Thucydides , History of the Peloponnesian War ( translation by Richard Crawley on Wikisource ).

Modern sources [ edit ] G. E. M. de Ste. Croix , The Origins of the Peloponnesian War , London, Duckworth, 1972.

ISBN 0-7156-0640-9 v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecclesia_(Sparta)&oldid=1264131441 " Categories : Government of Sparta Historical legislatures Popular assemblies Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2024 Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 20 December 2024, at 17:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecclesia (Sparta) 22 languages Add topic

