Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Constituent halls 3 Notable alumni 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Kirkland House 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′15″N 71°07′13″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3709°N 71.1204°W ﻿ / 42.3709; -71.1204 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kirkland House" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kirkland House Residential House at Harvard University Harvard University Kirkland House Courtyard Shield Location 95 Dunster Street Coordinates 42°22′15″N 71°07′13″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3709°N 71.1204°W ﻿ / 42.3709; -71.1204 Full name John Thornton Kirkland House Established 1931 ; 94 years ago ( 1931 ) Named for John Thornton Kirkland Sister college Grace Hopper College and Pauli Murray College Faculty Deans Peter Huybers and Downing Lu (interim) Dean Jack Huguley HoCo chairs Nena King and Giselle Chiprez Tutors 20 Website kirkland .harvard .edu Kirkland House is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University , located near the Charles River in Cambridge, Massachusetts . It was named after John Thornton Kirkland , president of Harvard University from 1810 to 1828.

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Some of the buildings were built in 1914 but construction was not completed until 1933. Kirkland is one of the smallest Houses at Harvard, but has nevertheless managed to win many intramural and house-spirit contests, most recently the 2022, 2023, and 2024 Straus Cups. Before Harvard opted to use a lottery system to assign housing to upperclassmen, Kirkland was considered the "jock house" because its location near Anderson Bridge and the Soldiers Field made it a desirable home and convenient place to dine for Harvard athletes.

The Kirkland House Boat Club last won the Agassiz Cup in 2003 The first Master of Kirkland House was Edward A. Whitney.

Walter Eugene Clark succeeded Whitney as the second Master on September 1, 1935.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The title of "House Master" was done away with at Harvard University in 2016 and was replaced with the title "Faculty Dean." In 2025, after faculty dean David Deming was announced as the next dean of Harvard College , Deming and his wife Janine Santimauro announced they would be stepping down as deans of Kirkland House. Harvard climate scientist Peter Huybers and his wife Downing Lu were appointed as interim deans in June 2025.

[ 4 ] Kirkland House boasts many traditions , such as its opening ceremony (complete with Minutemen reenactors playing the drums and fife as they process around the House, followed by the house Faculty Deans, tutors, and students), Secret Santa week (an in-house-only series of gifts, jokes, and events) -- accompanied by bawdy skits in the dining hall, and a Holiday Dinner and Dance complete with a mock roast boar.

[ 1 ] Since the 1930s, the Kirkland Drama Society has put on plays for the house community, [ 5 ] and since 2021 it has also hosted a weekly "Choosening" ceremony where a new theme is selected at the start of each week.

[ 6 ] Kirkland House has a gym, lounge, game room, meditation room, movie theater, music rooms, and performance and event spaces for students. It also has a wall honoring the history of the Kirkland House Boat Club, which has one of the most decorated records in all of Harvard house rowing. Most recently, head coach Christopher D.H. Row—a resident tutor, art history doctorate and master of divinity—led the KHBC to five consecutive Agassiz Cup victories (1999-2003) and was awarded by the KHBC the title of "Admiral-for-Life" in recognition of that accomplishment. Among the most recent additions is a brewery, operated and maintained by the Kirkland House Brew Club, which occupies the space once used as the house darkroom.

Kirkland House is located four blocks south of Harvard Yard , adjacent to Eliot House , and across Dunster Street from the Malkin Athletic Center.

The House Shield contains a black fess with three white stars on a red field. The stars are drawn from the arms of the many branches of the Kirkland family. The shield previously contained a cross on the arms of the Diocese of Carlisle (where the name Kirkland originated), but due to the shield's perceived resemblance to the Confederate battle flag, a modified design was officially approved by the University and adopted on March 6, 2020.

[ 7 ] Constituent halls [ edit ] A view facing the Kirkland House dining hall, in May.

Kirkland House comprises the following buildings: Smith Halls Bryan Hall ("The Annex") Faculty Deans' Residence Hicks House 20 Prescott Street apartments Smith Halls, which were constructed in 1914 as freshman dormitories; Bryant Hall and the Masters' Residence, both constructed in 1931; and Hicks House, which dates from 1762 and serves as the House Library. Kirkland students also live in the Prescott Street apartments. Located in Smith Halls, the dining hall and Junior Common Room boast magnificent woodwork and high ceilings that highlight Kirkland's classic charm and elegance.

Notable alumni [ edit ] Mark Zuckerberg Alan Bersin Jeff Bingaman Antony Blinken George Conway Adam Aleksic Barney Frank Maura Healey Vivian Hunt Kevin Kallaugher Jared Kushner Eric Lesser Phil Murphy Charles Murray Amanda Nguyen Mehmet Oz Wallace Shawn Pat Toomey Franklin Raines Thomas Sowell Mortimer Sellers Matthew Yglesias Vivek Ramaswamy Don Sweeney George C. Homans References [ edit ] ^ a b "Kirkland's History" .

kirkland.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2022-09-16 .

^ "CLARK APPOINTED TO FILL VACANCY LEFT BY WHITNEY" .

The Harvard Crimson . 14 May 1935 . Retrieved 17 October 2013 .

^ Ward W. Briggs (1 January 1994).

Biographical Dictionary of North American Classicists . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

99– 100.

ISBN 978-0-313-24560-2 .

^ "Climate Scientist Peter Huybers, Health Administrator Downing Lu Named Interim Kirkland House Faculty Deans | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2025-06-14 .

^ "Kirkland Drama Society Brings Hocodysseus Home in 'Quadyssey' " .

The Harvard Crimson . 25 Oct 2022 . Retrieved 26 September 2023 .

^ "Every Week, It's a Week | Magazine | the Harvard Crimson" . Retrieved 26 September 2023 .

^ Kirkland's History . Retrieved 8 January 2021.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kirkland House .

Kirkland House official site v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kirkland_House&oldid=1303915215 " Categories : Harvard Houses 1931 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 20:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kirkland House 1 language Add topic

