Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope 2 Reasons to dive 3 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 3.1 Specialties 4 History 5 Standard equipment 6 Standard procedures 7 Training Toggle Training subsection 7.1 Diving skills 7.1.1 Entry level 7.1.2 Beyond entry level 7.2 Training standards 8 Risk 9 Legal status 10 Economic impact 11 Demographics 12 Venues for diving Toggle Venues for diving subsection 12.1 Dive site features 13 Marine citizen science 14 See also 15 Footnotes 16 References 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Recreational diving 13 languages العربية Deutsch Français Hrvatski Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Diving for the purpose of leisure and enjoyment, usually when using scuba equipment "Sport diving" redirects here. For the competitive underwater sport, see Sport diving (sport) .

Beginner diver in St. Croix , United States Virgin Islands Recreational diving or sport diving is diving for the purpose of leisure and enjoyment, usually when using scuba equipment . The term "recreational diving" may also be used in contradistinction to " technical diving ", a more demanding aspect of recreational diving which requires more training and experience to develop the competence to reliably manage more complex equipment in the more hazardous conditions associated with the disciplines.

[ nb 1 ] [ 1 ] Breath-hold diving for recreation also fits into the broader scope of the term, but this article covers the commonly used meaning of scuba diving for recreational purposes, where the diver is not constrained from making a direct near-vertical ascent to the surface at any point during the dive , and risk is considered low.

The equipment used for recreational diving is mostly open circuit scuba , though semi closed and fully automated electronic closed circuit rebreathers may be included in the scope of recreational diving. Risk is managed by training the diver in a range of standardised procedures and skills appropriate to the equipment the diver chooses to use and the environment in which the diver plans to dive. Further experience and development of skills by practice will improve the diver's ability to dive safely. Specialty training is made available by the recreational diver training industry and diving clubs to increase the range of environments and venues the diver can enjoy at an acceptable level of risk.

Reasons to dive and preferred diving activities may vary during the personal development of a recreational diver, and may depend on their psychological profile and their level of dedication to the activity. Most divers average less than eight dives per year, but some total several thousand dives over a few decades and continue diving into their 60s and 70s, occasionally older. Recreational divers may frequent local dive sites or dive as tourists at more distant venues known for desirable underwater environments . An economically significant diving tourism industry services recreational divers, providing equipment, training and diving experiences, generally by specialist providers known as dive centers , dive schools , live-aboard , day charter and basic dive boats .

Legal constraints on recreational diving vary considerably across jurisdictions . Recreational diving may be industry regulated or regulated by law to some extent. The legal responsibility for recreational diving service providers is usually limited as far as possible by waivers which they require the customer to sign before engaging in any diving activity. The extent of responsibility of recreational buddy divers is unclear, but buddy diving is generally recommended by recreational diver training agencies as safer than solo diving , and some service providers insist that customers dive in buddy pairs. The evidence supporting this policy is inconclusive: it may or may not reduce average risk to the clients by imposing a burden on some to the advantage of others, and may reduce liability risk for the service provider.

Scope [ edit ] Scuba diver in Panama Recreational diving may be considered to be any underwater diving that is not occupational, professional, or commercial, in that the dive is fundamentally at the discretion of the diver, who dives either to their own plan, or to a plan developed in consensus with the other divers in the group, though dives led by a professional dive leader or instructor for non-occupational purposes are also legally classified as recreational dives in some legislations.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The full scope of recreational diving includes breath-hold diving and surface supplied diving – particularly with lightweight semi-autonomous airline systems such as snuba – and technical diving (including penetration diving ), as all of these are frequently done for recreational purposes, but common usage is mostly for open water scuba diving with limited decompression.

Scuba diving implies the use of an autonomous breathing gas supply carried by the diver, the self-contained underwater breathing apparatus which provides the name for this mode of diving. Scuba may be the simpler and more popular open circuit configuration or one of the more complex and expensive closed or semi-closed rebreather arrangements. Rebreathers used for recreational diving are generally designed to require a minimum task loading on the diver and as far as possible to fail safe and give the diver ample warning to bail out to open circuit and abort the dive.

Open water is the definitive environment for recreational diving, and in this context implies that there is no physical or physiological barrier to the diver concluding the dive at any time by a direct ascent to the surface, either vertically, or via a clearly visible route adequately illuminated by ambient light . Some organisations extend the scope of recreational diving to allow short decompression obligations which can be done without gas switching . Depth limitations are imposed by the certification agencies, and relate to the competency associated with the specific certification. Entry level divers may be restricted to a depth of 18 or 20 metres (59 or 66 ft), and more advanced divers to 30, 40, 50 or 60 m depending on the certification and agency. Junior divers may be restricted to shallower depths generally confined to a depth of 12 metres (39 ft).

[ 5 ] Recreational diving is generally limited to the use of air or a single nitrox mixture with an oxygen fraction not exceeding 40% for the planned dive, but this does not preclude constant oxygen partial pressure nitrox provided by electronically controlled closed circuit rebreathers like the Poseidon Mk6 or variable nitrox mixtures such as provided by the earlier semi-closed circuit Dräger Ray rebreather. Emergency gas supplies are either by sharing with a dive buddy or from a bailout cylinder for open circuit diving, and by bailout to open circuit for rebreather diving.

Most recreational diving officially applies the buddy system , but in reality there are a significant proportion of dives which are either effectively solo dives or where larger groups of nominally paired divers follow a dive leader and may be escorted by another dive leader.

[ 5 ] Reasons to dive [ edit ] See also: Scuba diving tourism § Motivation The reasons to dive for recreational purposes are many and varied, and many divers will go through stages when their personal reasons for diving change, as the initial novelty of the alien environment becomes familiar and skills develop to the point where the diver is able to pay more attention to the surroundings.

Many people start diving for the adventure of experiencing a different environment and the ability to maneuver fairly freely in three dimensions, but the novelty wears off after a while. This may be replaced by the satisfaction of developing the skills to operate in a wider range of environments, and developing excellence in those skills, the addition of compatible interests and activities to complement the basic activity, like underwater photography and an interest in the details of the environment, including exploration and study and recording of aspects of the environment.

[ 6 ] Experience of the underwater environment varies depending on where the diver has access to suitable sites - there is more to see on a coastal reef than in most freshwater lakes, and scuba diving tourism can make a wide variety of more entertaining and challenging sites available. Exploration can also extend beyond tourism to the search for previously unvisited sites and the satisfaction of being the first to be there and in some cases, tell the story.

Reasons to dive include: Tourism and sight-seeing, including visiting a variety of places with different things to see.

[ 6 ] Extreme sport aspect: some divers wish to explore their personal limits and abilities under challenging conditions. This includes some competitive underwater sports, and environmental and physiological challenges.

Naturalist and underwater life observers.

[ 6 ] This may be combined with recording the environment and contributing to citizen science databases.

Exploration: the underwater environment is relatively unexplored, it is not difficult to find places where no-one has gone before or if they have, no-one has recorded the fact or described or surveyed the site, even quite close to heavily populated areas. The marine ecosystems are largely undescribed, and there are many undiscovered species yet to be found and described. There are shipwrecks and flooded caves to challenge the adventurous and foolhardy.

Stress management: recreational diving in reasonably good conditions which are comfortably managed by the diver can produce health benefits of mood improvement.

[ 7 ] Activities [ edit ] Free diver (breath hold) in Cyprus Freediving while snorkeling in shallow water, Red Sea There are many recreational diving activities, and equipment and environmental specialties which require skills additional to those provided by the entry level courses, These skills were originally developed by trial and error, but training programmes are offered by most diver training agencies for the convenience of the diver, and profit for the agency, or in the case of club oriented systems, for the overall benefit of the club community: Activities: Snorkeling – Swimming at the surface with a diving mask and snorkel to view the shallow underwater environment.

Free-diving (also called skin diving) – Swimming below the surface on breath-hold.

Identifying, surveying, and monitoring sea life and freshwater life: This may be associated with citizen science projects and underwater photography (see also marine biology ).

Maritime archeology or Underwater archeology – Also may be associated with citizen science and underwater photography Rescue Diver [ 8 ] – Usually considered a desirable diving skill, but may be part of the requirements and function of volunteer safety divers, and generally a requirement for any dive leadership certification.

Underwater navigation [ 8 ] – Enhanced competence at following and recording underwater routes, generally excluding the use of a guide-line, which is considered a separate competence, and using a compass and landmarks.

Underwater photography - Use of photographic equipment designed or modified for underwater use for recording the environment or artistic purposes.

Underwater search and recovery [ 8 ] Knowledge and procedural skills for conducting underwater searches and recovering relatively small objects from underwater.

Underwater videography – Use of video recording equipment designed or modified for underwater use for recording the environment or artistic purposes.

Underwater hunting and gathering for sport and food. The ecological impact is variable, but can be severe.

Specialties [ edit ] Some recreational diving activities require skills sufficiently beyond the basic recreational open water diving skill set that they are classed by the recreational diver training industry as specialties, and for which further training and certification is available. These can be broadly distinguished as environmental and equipment specialties.

Environmental specialties: Altitude diving [ 8 ] – Knowledge and skills associated with diving in waters where the surface pressure is significantly below average sea level pressure, and affects decompression.

Cave diving [ 8 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to managing risk in underwater cave environments.

Deep diving [ 9 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to managing risk at greater depths, and the decompression associated with deep exposure.

Drift diving – Procedures used to dive while transported by currents.

Ice diving [ 8 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to managing risk in very cold water and under an ice surface layer.

Low impact diving [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills intended to minimise the environmental impact of recreational diving, mainly by minimising contact with the sensitive reef life, but it also applies to diving on fragile structure of historical wrecks and in caves with delicate rock formations.

Night diving [ 13 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to managing risk while diving in very low levels of natural illumination.

Underwater surveys and mapping of dive sites, in caves, wrecks and open water reefs. A part of recording exploration, and of archaeological work.

Wreck diving [ 8 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to managing risk while diving inside wrecks.

Equipment specialties: Dry suit [ 8 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to managing risk associated with the use of dry suits, and optimising their usage.

Rebreather [ 8 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to managing risk related to diving with rebreathers. Type certification is often required for the specific model of rebreather.

Sidemount diving [ 14 ] – Knowledge and procedural skills related to use of side-mounted scuba equipment.

Nitrox diving [ 8 ] – Knowledge related to managing risk when using nitrox as a breathing gas.

Recreational trimix diving [ 8 ] – Knowledge related to managing risk when using trimix as a breathing gas. The depths which make trimix a preferred breathing gas also often imply obligatory decompression and gas switching for accelerated decompression.

Safe use of a diver propulsion vehicle (scooter). This activity is not generally associated with a formal training programme and certification, but some practice and knowledge is necessary for safe and effective use, particularly in combination with other complex or high risk activities or equipment.

Many diver training agencies such as ACUC , BSAC , CMAS , IANTD , NAUI , PADI , PDIC , SDI , and SSI offer training in these areas, as well as opportunities to move into professional dive leadership , instruction , technical diving , public safety diving and others.

History [ edit ] The invention of the aqua-lung in 1943 led to modern recreational diving Recreational scuba diving grew out of related activities such as Snorkeling and underwater hunting .

[ 15 ] For a long time, recreational underwater excursions were limited by breath-hold time. The invention of the aqualung in 1943 by Émile Gagnan and Jacques-Yves Cousteau and the wetsuit in 1952 by University of California, Berkeley physicist, Hugh Bradner [ 16 ] and its development over subsequent years led to a revolution in recreational diving.

[ 15 ] However, for much of the 1950s and early 1960s, recreational scuba diving was a sport limited to those who were able to afford or make their own kit, and prepared to undergo intensive training to use it.

[ citation needed ] As the sport became more popular, manufacturers became aware of the potential market, and equipment began to appear that was easy to use, affordable and reliable. Continued advances in SCUBA technology, such as buoyancy compensators , improved diving regulators , wet or dry suits , and dive computers , increased the safety, comfort and convenience of the gear encouraging more people to train and use it.

Until the early 1950s, navies and other organizations performing professional diving were the only providers of diver training, but only for their own personnel and only using their own types of equipment. The first scuba diving school was opened in France to train the owners of the Cousteau and Gagnan designed twin-hose scuba.

[ citation needed ] The first school to teach single hose scuba was started in 1953, in Melbourne, Australia , at the Melbourne City Baths.

RAN Commander Batterham organized the school to assist the inventor of the single hose regulator , Ted Eldred .

[ citation needed ] However, neither of these schools was international in nature.

There were no formal training courses available to civilians who bought the early scuba equipment. Some of the first training started in 1952 at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography where Andy Rechnitzer , Bob Dill and Connie Limbaugh taught the first scuba courses in the United States, [ 17 ] then in 1953 Trevor Hampton created the first British diving school, [ citation needed ] the British Underwater Centre and in 1954 when Los Angeles County [ 18 ] created an Underwater Instructor Certification Course based on the training that they received from the scientific divers of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography . Early instruction developed in the format of amateur teaching within a club environment, as exemplified by organizations such as the Scottish Sub Aqua Club and the British Sub Aqua Club from 1953, Los Angeles County from 1954 and the YMCA from 1959.

[ 19 ] Professional instruction started in 1959 when the non-profit NAUI was formed, [ 20 ] which later effectively was split, [ 21 ] to form the for-profit PADI in 1966.

[ 22 ] The National Association of Scuba Diving Schools (NASDS) started with their dive center based training programs in 1960 followed by SSI in 1970.

[ 23 ] Professional Diving Instructors College was formed in 1965, changing its name in 1984 to Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC).

[ 24 ] In 2009 PADI alone issued approximately 950,000 diving certifications.

[ 25 ] Approximately 550,000 of these certifications were "entry level" certifications and the remainder were more advanced certifications.

Scuba-diving has become a popular leisure activity, and many diving destinations have some form of dive shop presence that can offer air fills, equipment sale, rental and repair, and training. In tropical and sub-tropical parts of the world, there is a large market for 'holiday divers'; people who train and dive while on holiday, but rarely dive close to home.

[ citation needed ] Technical diving and the use of rebreathers are increasing, particularly in areas of the world where deeper wreck diving is the main underwater attraction.

[ citation needed ] Generally, recreational diving depths are limited by the training agencies to a maximum of between 30 and 40 meters (98 and 131 ft), beyond which a variety of safety issues such as oxygen toxicity and nitrogen narcosis significantly increase the risk of diving using recreational diving equipment and practices, and specialized skills and equipment for technical diving are needed.

[ citation needed ] Standard equipment [ edit ] See also: Diving equipment and Scuba set Scuba diver wearing a dry suit in a kelp forest off Point Lobos , California The standard recreational open circuit scuba equipment includes the following items: Basic equipment, which can be used for most modes of ambient pressure diving: a diving mask for underwater vision ; a snorkel to aid surface swimming; a pair of swimfins , for mobility; a diving suit , which may be a dry suit , wetsuit or dive skins , or a regular swimsuit , depending on the water temperature and other factors, for thermal and environmental protection; a diving weighting system such as a weight belt or BCD integrated weight system, to counteract the buoyancy of the fully equipped diver (mostly the diving suit); A scuba set, comprising: a single diving cylinder (also known as scuba tank), with cylinder valve, to supply breathing air, and a harness to support it. In the past, twin cylinders were also popular.

a buoyancy compensator , (also known as buoyancy control device or BCD), which is usually part of the harness used to carry the cylinder, to adjust buoyancy by controlled inflation and deflation.

a diving regulator to reduce the pressure of the air from the cylinder, with: a primary second stage, to supply the diver with ambient pressure air on demand; a secondary second stage (octopus) to supply emergency air to a buddy diver who needs assistance; a submersible pressure gauge (SPG) (also known as contents gauge), to monitor the remaining air supply; a low pressure inflation hose for the buoyancy compensator, and if applicable, for the dry suit, to inflate the BCD and suit for buoyancy control and to avoid suit squeeze.

Auxiliary equipment to enhance safety.

a dive computer (also known as personal decompression computer) or a depth gauge and timer , to monitor the dive profile, avoid decompression obligation and facilitate a controlled ascent; a surface marker buoy or other surface detection aid may be standard equipment in some regions to allow the surface crew and boats to monitor the diver's position.

a diver's cutting tool should be carried in areas where there is a significant risk of entanglement in ropes, lines, or nets. (usually lost or discarded fishing gear) For solo diving a bailout cylinder is considered standard for dives where there is an appreciable risk of entrapment, or where a direct controlled emergency swimming ascent is not an acceptable option to manage an out-of-air incident at any point in the planned dive profile.

Standard procedures [ edit ] Main article: Scuba skills Divers making a recommended shallow stop during ascent to the surface Some skills are generally accepted by recreational diver certification agencies as necessary for any scuba diver to be considered competent to dive without direct supervision, [ 26 ] and others are more advanced, though some diver certification and accreditation organizations may consider some of these to also be essential for minimum acceptable entry level competence. Divers are instructed and assessed on these skills during basic and advanced training, and are expected to remain competent at their level of certification, either by practice or refresher courses.

The skills include selection, functional testing, preparation and transport of scuba equipment, dive planning, preparation for a dive, kitting up for the dive, water entry, descent, breathing underwater, monitoring the dive profile (depth, time and decompression status), personal breathing gas management, situational awareness, communicating with the dive team, buoyancy and trim control, mobility in the water, ascent, emergency and rescue procedures, exit from the water, un-kitting after the dive, cleaning and preparation of equipment for storage, and recording the dive, within the scope of the diver's certification.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] A significant amount of harmonization of training standards and standard and emergency procedures has developed over the years, largely due to organisations like World Recreational Scuba Training Council . This allows divers trained by the various certifying organisations to dive together with a minimum of confusion, which enhances safety.

Diver communications is a particular aspect where most of the basic hand signals are common to most recreational diver training agencies.

[ 28 ] This does not mean that there is no variation. There are some procedures such as emergency donation of air which are quite strongly polarized between those who advocate donation of the secondary (octopus) regulator and those who advocate donating the primary regulator .

[ 29 ] Length of regulator hose and position of the secondary second stage depend on the donation technique.

There are also variations in procedures for self rescue in an out-of-air situation, and in procedures for bringing an unresponsive casualty to the surface .

[ 30 ] Solo diving, once considered technical diving and discouraged by most certification agencies , is now seen by many experienced divers and some certification agencies [ 31 ] as an acceptable practice for those divers suitably trained and experienced.

[ 32 ] Rather than relying on the traditional buddy diving safety system, solo divers rely on self-sufficiency and are willing to take responsibility for their own safety while diving.

[ 31 ] Buddy diving is the more generally advocated procedural alternative, on the principle that in case of an emergency, a dive buddy can assist the diver in difficulty, but this is only valid if the buddy is close enough to help, notices the problem, and is competent and willing to assist.

[ 33 ] Training [ edit ] Further information: Recreational diver training and List of diver certification organisations Diver off Carmen , Philippines Many recreational diver training organisations exist, throughout the world, offering diver training leading to certification: the issuing of a " diver certification card ", also known as a "C-card," or qualification card.

Recreational diver training courses range from minor specialties which require one classroom session and an open water dive, and which may be completed in a day, to complex specialties which may take several days to weeks, and require several classroom sessions, confined water skills training and practice, and a substantial number of open-water dives, followed by rigorous assessment of knowledge and skills. Details on the approximate duration of training can be found on the websites of most certification agencies, but accurate schedules are generally only available from the specific school or instructor who will present that course, as this will depend on the local conditions and other constraints.

Diving instructors affiliated to a diving certification agency may work independently or through a university, a dive club, a dive school or a dive shop. They will offer courses that should meet, or exceed, the standards of the certification organisation that will certify the divers attending the course.

Diving skills [ edit ] Diver training can be divided into entry-level training, which are those skills and knowledge considered essential for the diver to dive unsupervised at an acceptably low level of risk by the certifying agency, and further skills and knowledge which allow better performance and extend the environmental capacity and equipment choices of the diver.

Entry level [ edit ] There is a significant variation in entry-level training, with some training agencies requiring the bare minimum as specified by RSTC and ISO, and others requiring a greater level of competence with associated assumption of lower risk to the diver and dive buddy, and less likelihood of environmental damage. Entry level training may include skills for assisting or rescue of another diver, but this is not always the case. Divers without rescue training are routinely assigned to dive as buddy pairs to follow organizational protocols. This is not generally a contravention of the training agencies' recommendations.

The initial training for open water certification for a person who is medically fit to dive and a reasonably competent swimmer is relatively short. The minimum number of open-water dives required for certification is usually four, but instructors are generally required by training standards to ensure that the diver is sufficiently skilled to dive safely in the local environment before certification is issued, and this may require further training and experience beyond the required minimum. Many dive shops in popular holiday locations offer courses intended to teach a novice to dive in a few days, which can be combined with diving on the vacation. Other instructors and dive schools will provide more thorough training, which generally takes longer.

Beyond entry level [ edit ] Skills and knowledge beyond the minimum requirement are generally labelled Advanced skills , and these may include skills such as competent buoyancy control, which are included in the entry level skills by other agencies. Many skills which are considered advanced by recreational training agencies are considered basic entry-level skills for professional divers.

[ 34 ] Training standards [ edit ] Scuba diving education levels as used by ISO: PADI, CMAS, SSI and NAUI Each diver certification agency has its own set of diver training standards for each level of certification that they issue. Although these standards are usually available on request or on the organisation's website, the assessment criteria are often not available to the public, making a direct comparison of standards difficult. Most agencies comply with the minimum requirements of the World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) or ISO for the relevant certification (ISO 24801-2 Autonomous diver, [ 35 ] and ISO 24801-3 Dive leader [ 36 ] ), but most certification levels are not defined by the international standards.

[ 37 ] Under most entry-level programs ( SEI , SDI , PADI , BSAC, SSAC, NAUI , SSI , and PDIC ), divers can complete a certification with as few as four open water dives. This complies with the minimum requirements of ISO 24801-2 Autonomous diver.

[ 35 ] Such a qualification allows divers to rent equipment, receive air fills, and dive without supervision to depths typically restricted to 18 meters (59 feet) with an equally qualified buddy in conditions similar to, or easier than those in which they were trained.

[ 35 ] Certification agencies advise their students to dive within the scope of their experience and training, and to extend their training to suit the conditions in which they plan to dive.

In the 1980s, several agencies [ who?

] with DEMA collaborated to author ANSI Standard Z86.3 (1989), Minimum Course Content For Safe Scuba Diving which defines their training as the Accepted Industry Practices .

[ citation needed ] The International Standards Organisation has since published ISO 24801 and ISO 24802 which define minimum training standards for two levels of recreational diver and for recreational diving instructors.

[ 35 ] A few recreational certification agencies such as GUE , [ 38 ] and the commercial diver training standards of several countries, including the United Kingdom, Australia, South Africa, and Canada, consider the competence provided by the recreational diver training industry minimum standard to be inadequate for safe diving, particularly occupational diving, where the diver has a legal duty of care towards other members of the dive team, even though the responsibility for occupational dive planning and safety is held by a professional diving supervisor .

[ 4 ] [ 39 ] Risk [ edit ] See also: Diving safety and Scuba diving fatalities Recreational scuba diving involves physical and psychological risks and therefore can be classified as an extreme sport.

[ 40 ] Fatality rates of 16.4 deaths per 100,000 persons per year among DAN America members and 14.4 deaths per 100,000 persons per year the British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) members were similar and did not change during 2000–2006. This is comparable with jogging (13 deaths per 100,000 persons per year) and motor vehicle accidents (16 deaths per 100,000 persons per year), and within the range where reduction is desirable by Health and Safety Executive (HSE) criteria.

[ 41 ] Data for 17 million student-diver certifications during 63 million student dives over a 20-year period from 1989 to 2008 show a mean per capita death rate of 1.7 deaths per 100,000 student divers per year. This was lower than for insured DAN members during 2000–2006 at 16.4 deaths per 100,000 DAN members per year, but fatality rate per dive is a better measure of exposure risk, A mean annual fatality rate of 0.48 deaths per 100,000 student dives per year and 0.54 deaths per 100,000 BSAC dives per year and 1.03 deaths per 100,000 non-BSAC dives per year during 2007. The total size of the diving population is important for determining overall fatality rates, and the population estimates from the 1990s of several million U.S. divers need to be updated.

[ 41 ] The most frequent root cause for diving fatalities is running out of or low on gas. Other factors cited include loss of buoyancy control, entanglement or entrapment, rough water, equipment misuse or problems, and emergency ascent , which is often a response to a breathing gas problem. The most common injuries and causes of death were drowning or asphyxia due to inhalation of water, air embolism and cardiac events. Risk of cardiac arrest is greater for older divers, and greater for men than women, although the risks are equal by age 65.

[ 41 ] Several plausible opinions have been put forward but have not yet been empirically validated. Suggested contributing factors included inexperience, infrequent diving, inadequate supervision, insufficient predive briefings, buddy separation, and dive conditions beyond the diver's training, experience, or physical capacity.

[ 41 ] Legal status [ edit ] See also: List of legislation regulating underwater diving Ascending towards a dive boat , Hout Bay , South Africa Legal constraints on recreational diving vary considerably across jurisdictions. In many countries recreational diving is either not mentioned at all in laws and regulations, or specifically excluded from regulations covering occupational diving.

[ 4 ] In others, only diver training and dive-leading activities where the diver is either employed or takes a leadership position where they are responsible for the safety of others is covered by legislation.

[ 3 ] At the other extreme, countries such as Israel have statutory law covering all recreational diving activities.

[ 42 ] Recreational diver training and dive leading are industry regulated in some countries, and only directly regulated by government in a subset of them. In the UK, HSE legislation includes recreational diver training and dive leading for reward; [ 3 ] in the US and South Africa industry regulation is accepted, though non-specific health and safety legislation still applies.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] In Israel recreational diving activities are regulated by the Recreational Diving Act, 1979.

[ 42 ] The legal responsibility for recreational diving service providers is usually limited as far as possible by waivers which they require the customer to sign before engaging in any diving activity. The extent of responsibility of recreational buddy divers is unclear and has been the subject of considerable litigation. It is probable that it varies between jurisdictions. In spite of this lack of clarity, and conflicting evidence, buddy diving is recommended by recreational diver training agencies as safer than solo diving , and some service providers insist that customers dive in buddy pairs.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Economic impact [ edit ] See also: Scuba diving tourism This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( October 2017 ) Recreational diving provides a market for the diving equipment industry, the diver training industry and the diver services industry, all of which are interdependent, and at retail level, frequently provided by the same local specialist outlet, thus contributing to the local economy. These activities contribute to generation of revenue through dive tours, certification courses and equipment rentals which in turn, support wages for dive charter captains and crews, and hotel and its employees.

[ 46 ] Diving activities aid in marine ecosystem conservation, supporting the development of infrastructure and services like videography, scientific researches and other local businesses, simultaneously promoting tourism.

[ 47 ] The combined contribution of recreational scuba diving and snorkeling to the US gross domestic product was estimated at $11 billion in a 2019 report by the Diving Equipment and Marketing Association.

[ 48 ] Scuba diving tourism is the industry based on servicing the requirements of recreational divers at destinations other than where they live. It includes aspects of training, equipment sales, rental and service, guided experiences and environmental tourism .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Customer satisfaction is largely dependent on the quality of services provided, and personal communication has a strong influence on the popularity of specific service providers in a region.

[ 49 ] Demographics [ edit ] A 2014 survey of American divers indicates with a high level of confidence for the specified population, that about 3.145 million Americans (1.1 percent of population) took part in scuba diving at least once in the survey year, which is a 0.9 percent decrease over 2013, but participation increased by 1.3 percent on average for the previous five years. There were about 2.252 million casual participants who made between one and seven dives per year and 893,000 core participants who dived eight or more times per year. 66% of casual and 74% of core participants were male. The age distribution of casual and core participants differs. Core participants tend to be older. Casual participation tends to gradually rise to a peak in early middle age, then drop markedly after about 45 years old, while core participation tends to continue at a relatively consistent rate over age groups up to about 65 years, after which it drops markedly.

[ 51 ] Some training agencies will accept trainees as young as 8 years old for participation in supervised scuba experiences, [ 52 ] and 10 years for certification.

[ 53 ] The record age for a scuba dive as of January 2020 is 95 years.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Recreational scuba divers appear to be on average wealthier and better educated than the general population, as indicated by earlier surveys. There is a greater tendency than average for scuba divers to participate in other sporting and exercise activities than the general population, but lack of adequate physical fitness is frequently cited as a contributory factor in diving accidents.

[ 51 ] [ 56 ] The medical literature, anecdotal evidence and a small-scale survey suggest that a significant part of the recreational scuba diving population may have chronic medical conditions that affect their fitness to dive according to the Recreational Scuba Training Council's guidelines.

[ 57 ] This may have an influence on risk, as unfitness and preexisting medical conditions are frequently cited in incident reports where the incident was adequately investigated.

PADI worldwide certification statistics indicate a slow but steady trend of increasing proportion of certification of female divers at all levels from 34.4% in 2013 to 38.0% in 2018, and a decrease in the average age of certifications over the same period.

[ 58 ] Personality profiles of recreational divers were analysed in a 2010 study on entry level divers: The participants scored high on self-sufficiency, impulsiveness and boldness and low on warmth, sensitivity and conformity, and differed from the typical extreme sport participant's personality profile . Personality types identified include adventurer , dreamer , rationalist and passive-aggressive macho diver, and results suggested that the risk behaviour likely to be exhibited by the diver would depend on their personality type.

[ 40 ] Venues for diving [ edit ] Main article: Recreational dive sites Most types of bodies of water can be used as dive sites: Seas and oceans - these consist of salt water and a huge variety of flora and fauna .

Lakes - small lakes are often used for diver training . Large lakes have many features of seas including wrecks and a variety of aquatic life. Some lakes are high in altitude, and they require special considerations for diving. See altitude diving Caves - these are more adventurous and dangerous than normal diving. See cave diving .

Rivers - are often shallow, murky and may have strong currents.

Man-made lakes, such as dams and flooded clay pits , gravel pits and quarries .

Swimming pools are popular as training venues, and for some underwater sports.

Flooded excavations often have low visibility. Disused and flooded quarries are popular in inland areas for diver training as well as recreational diving. Rock quarries may have reasonable underwater visibility - there is often little mud or silt to create mid-water particles that cause low visibility, and the lack of flow allows silt to settle on the bottom, where it may later be kicked up by unskilled divers to temporarily reduce visibility locally. As they are not natural environments, and usually privately owned, quarries may contain objects intentionally placed for divers to explore, such as sunken boats, automobiles, aircraft, or structures like grain silos and gravel chutes. The popularity of a dive site will usually depend on accessibility, known hazards, desirable features, and the variety of alternative options nearby. Sites known for exceptionally desirable features may attract expeditions in spite of major accessibility problems and significant hazards.

Dive site features [ edit ] Many types of underwater features make an interesting dive site, for example: NASA image [1] showing locations of significant coral reefs , which are often sought out by divers for their abundant, diverse life forms.

Wildlife at the site. Popular examples are coral , sponges , fish , sting rays , molluscs , cetaceans , seals , sharks and crustaceans .

The topography of the site.

Coral reefs , drop offs (underwater cliffs ), rock reefs , gullies and caves can be spectacular. Deep dive sites mean divers must reduce the time they spend because more gas is breathed at depth and decompression sickness risks increase. Shallow regions can be investigated by snorkeling .

Wall diving allows a range of depths in a small area.

Historical or cultural items at the site.

Shipwrecks and sunken aircraft , apart from their historical value, form artificial habitats for marine fauna making them attractive dive sites.

Underwater visibility varies widely. Poor visibility is caused by particles suspended in the water, such as silt , plankton and sewage . Dive sites that are close to sources of these particles, such as human settlements and river estuaries, are more prone to poor visibility. Currents and turbulence can stir up particles which had settled, and may keep them in suspension. Diving close to sediments on the bottom can result in the particles being kicked up by wash from the divers fins. Good visibility is a highly desirable characteristic for a dive site, and can significantly influence risk.

Temperature. Warm water diving is comfortable and convenient. Although cold water is uncomfortable and can cause hypothermia it can be interesting because different species of underwater life thrive in cold conditions. For cold water divers tend to prefer dry suits with inner thermal clothing which offer greater thermal protection, although they require additional knowledge and skill to use safely.

Currents.

Currents can transport nutrients to underwater wildlife increasing the variety and density of that life at the site. Currents can also be dangerous to divers as they can carry them away from their surface support or suitable exit points. Currents that meet large underwater obstructions can cause strong up or down flow that can be dangerous because it may cause the diver to rapidly change depth, with possible loss of buoyancy control and increased risk of barotrauma and decompression sickness.

Marine citizen science [ edit ] Marine citizen science , the scientific research and monitoring projects for which members of the public collect, categorize, transcribe or analyze scientific data,
is an increasingly popular but underutilised collaboration between society and institutionalised scientific research, [ 59 ] in which members of the recreational scuba diving community actively participate in marine data acquisition and recording, largely by way of geolocated photographic observations collected during recreational dives, but also in more structured and long term experimental work. Some barriers exist between divers and projects that are beyond the control of either the divers or the project organisers, but other aspects such as access to projects and feedback after participation are amenable to improvement. Recreational scuba divers are generally well disposed towards marine science, and participation could be improved by better management. Stakeholders to be considered are the scuba diving industry and professional intermediaries.

[ 60 ] Citizen science can be an effective approach to marine and coastal conservation, and methods of making better use of citizen input for projects relating to policy, education, community capacity building, site management, species management, and research. have been investigated and developed. Marine citizen science projects face different challenges to terrestrial systems. The main challenges are logistical, as people spend very little time in the water. Access often requires expensive boats, diving gear, or transportation to the coast, and safety and liability issues can be complicated. Using citizen scientists can economically increase the temporal and spatial scale of a project. Early involvement of divers in the planning of a project can increase buy-in and avoid errors due to inaccurate assessment of capabilities and interest of volunteers. Training and some field oversight by professionals will usually be necessary to ensure reliable data collection. Retention of volunteers is affected by their perception of the recognition of the value of their work.

[ 59 ] The availability of affordable and compact high definition video and easy to operate underwater cameras allows citizen scientists to provide reliable observations that can be archived and reviewed by experts when desirable.

[ 61 ] Accuracy of geolocation is generally lower than for terrestrial observations as the GPS features available on many digital cameras do not work underwater, and most cameras do not record depth.

See also [ edit ] Freediving – Underwater diving without breathing apparatus Scuba diving – Swimming underwater, breathing gas carried by the diver Scuba diving tourism – Industry based on recreational diver travel Snorkeling – Swimming while inhaling through a snorkel Snuba – Limited depth airline breathing apparatus towed by the diver Technical diving – Diving beyond the scope of recreational diving Recreational dive sites – Places that divers go to enjoy the underwater environment Recreational diver training – Training process for people who do not dive at work Diving Equipment and Marketing Association – International trade association for the recreational diving equipment industry Footnotes [ edit ] ^ The distinction between "recreational diving" and "technical diving" is not clearly and universally defined, but most major diving training agencies recognise a range of activities which they class as recreational diving and others which they class as technical diving. (see for example, PADI and DSAT , and SDI and TDI ).

References [ edit ] ^ Gorman DF, Richardson D, Hamilton Jr RW, Elliott D (1996).

"SPUMS Policy on technical recreational diving" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

26 (3).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 . Archived from the original on April 15, 2013 . Retrieved June 19, 2008 .

^ a b "Subpart: T - Commercial Diving Operations. Standard Number: 1910.424 - SCUBA diving" .

Regulations (Standards - 29 CFR), Part Number: 1910, Occupational Safety and Health Standards . Washington, DC: US Department of Labour, Occupational Safety and Health Administration . Retrieved November 16, 2016 .

^ a b c Staff (1977).

"The Diving at Work Regulations 1997" .

Statutory Instruments 1997 No. 2776 Health and Safety . Kew, Richmond, Surrey: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO) . Retrieved November 6, 2016 .

^ a b c d "Diving Regulations 2009" .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41 . Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016 . Retrieved November 3, 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ a b Dupre, William (March 30, 2023).

"How Deep Can Scuba Divers Go? 5 Risks Of Exceeding Your Safe Depth Limit | Diver's Abode" . Retrieved May 13, 2023 .

^ a b c Kler, Balvinder Kaur; Tribe, John (2012).

"Flourishing Through Scuba: Understanding the Pursuit of Dive Experiences" .

Tourism in Marine Environments .

8 (1/2): 19– 32.

doi : 10.3727/154427312X13262430524027 .

^ Beneton, Frédéric; Michoud, Guillaume; Coulange, Mathieu; Laine, Nicolas; Ramdani, Céline; Borgnetta, Marc; Breton, Patricia; Guieu, Regis; Rostain, J. C.; Trousselard, Marion (December 18, 2017).

"Recreational Diving Practice for Stress Management: An Exploratory Trial" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

8 : 2193.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02193 .

PMC 5741699 .

PMID 29326628 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k "CMAS International Diver Training Standards and Procedures Manual" . Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022 . Retrieved March 27, 2016 .

^ "Deep Diver Course" . Professional Association of Diving Instructors.

^ "GLSPS Low Impact Shipwreck Diving Course" .

Great Lakes Shipwreck Preservation Society . Retrieved September 8, 2019 .

^ Hammerton, Zan (2014).

SCUBA-diver impacts and management strategies for subtropical marine protected areas (Thesis). Southern Cross University.

^ Johansen, Kelsey (2013). "Education and training". In Musa, Ghazali; Dimmock, Kay (eds.).

Scuba Diving Tourism: Contemporary Geographies of Leisure, Tourism and Mobility . Routledge.

ISBN 9781136324949 .

^ "Night diver course" . Professional Association of Diving Instructors.

^ "PADI puts full weight behind sidemount diving" . Diver Magazine. June 6, 2010. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012.

^ a b Richardson, D (1999).

"A brief history of recreational diving in the United States" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (3).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 . Archived from the original on May 15, 2009 . Retrieved June 19, 2008 .

^ Taylor, Michael (May 11, 2008).

"Hugh Bradner, UC's inventor of wetsuit, dies" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ Rechnitzer, Andreas B.

"The First U.S. Scuba Training" (PDF) . University of California at Los Angeles . Retrieved February 19, 2022 .

^ "Los Angeles County Department of Parks & Recreation – Underwater Unit" . Los Angeles County Department of Parks & Recreation . Retrieved July 19, 2013 .

^ YMCA Scuba.

"Welcome to YMCA SCUBA!" . YMCA. Archived from the original on December 4, 2000 . Retrieved January 7, 2013 .

^ NAUI.

"NAUI Official Homepage" . NAUI . Retrieved June 19, 2008 .

^ divinghistory.com.

"History of PADI" . Archived from the original on April 15, 2001 . Retrieved June 19, 2008 .

^ PADI.

"PADI Official Homepage" . PADI . Retrieved June 19, 2008 .

^ Scuba Schools International.

"Scuba Schools International: 35 Years of Experience" . Scuba Schools International . Retrieved May 8, 2008 .

^ PDIC.

"PDIC Official Homepage" . PDIC . Retrieved June 19, 2008 .

^ PADI.

"PADI certification statistics" . PADI. Archived from the original on April 1, 2009 . Retrieved March 26, 2009 .

^ a b "Minimum course standard for Open Water Diver training" (PDF) .

World Recreational Scuba Training Council . Retrieved May 5, 2011 .

^ British Sub-Aqua Club (1987).

Safety and Rescue for Divers . London: Stanley Paul.

ISBN 0-09-171520-2 .

^ Recreational Scuba Training Council (2005).

"Common Hand Signals for Recreational Scuba Diving" (PDF) . Jacksonville, FL.: Recreational Scuba Training Council, Inc.

^ Jablonski, Jarrod (2006). "Details of DIR Equipment Configuration".

Doing it Right: The Fundamentals of Better Diving . High Springs, Florida: Global Underwater Explorers. p. 113.

ISBN 0-9713267-0-3 .

^ Mitchell, Simon J.

; Bennett, Michael H.; Bird, Nick; Doolette, David J.; Hobbs, Gene W.

; Kay, Edward; Moon, Richard E.; Neuman, Tom S.; Vann, Richard D.; Walker, Richard; Wyatt, H.A. (2012).

"Recommendations for rescue of a submerged unresponsive compressed-gas diver" .

Undersea & Hyperbaric Medicine .

39 (6): 1099– 108.

PMID 23342767 . Archived from the original on April 15, 2013.

^ a b Lewis, Steve .

SDI Solo Diver Manual . Scuba Diving International.

^ von Maier, R (2002).

Solo Diving, 2nd Edition: The Art of Underwater Self-Sufficiency . Aqua Quest Publications. p. 128.

ISBN 1-881652-28-9 .

^ "8 Tips for Being a Better Dive Buddy" .

scuba.about.com . Archived from the original on August 8, 2014 . Retrieved July 30, 2014 .

^ Diving Advisory Board (October 2007).

Class IV Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour. p. 5.

^ a b c d Staff (2014).

"Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers — Part 2: Level 2 — Autonomous diver" .

ISO 24801-2:2014 . International Standards Organisation . Retrieved July 3, 2016 .

^ Staff (2014).

"Recreational diving services – Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers – Part 3: Level 3 – Dive leader" .

ISO 24801-3:2014 . International Standards Organisation . Retrieved July 3, 2016 .

^ Staff, WRSTC (2013) ISO approves 6 Diving Standards "WRSTC News" . Archived from the original on October 3, 2013 . Retrieved September 28, 2013 .

retrieved July 3, 2016.

^ "General Training Standards, Policies, and Procedures. Version 7. 4" (PDF) .

www.gue.com Files: Standards and Procedures . High Springs, Florida: Global Underwater Explorers. 2015. Section 1.4.4 Team diving. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 3, 2016 . Retrieved November 20, 2016 .

^ Staff (October 29, 2009).

"International Diver Training Certification: Diver Training Standards, Revision 4" (PDF) .

Diver Training Standards . Malestroit, Brittany: International Diving Schools Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved November 6, 2016 .

^ a b Coetzee, N (December 2010).

"Personality profiles of recreational scuba divers" (PDF) .

African Journal for Physical Health Education, Recreation and Dance .

16 (4): 568– 579.

^ a b c d Vann, R.D.; Lang, M.A., eds. (2011).

Recreational Diving Fatalities (PDF) . Durham, N.C.: Divers Alert Network.

ISBN 978-0-615-54812-8 . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 8, 2016 . Retrieved May 24, 2016 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ a b "Recreational diving Act, 1979" (in Hebrew). Knesset. 1979 . Retrieved November 16, 2016 – via WikiSource.

^ Coleman, Phyllis G. (September 10, 2008). "Scuba diving buddies: rights, obligations, and liabilities".

University of San Francisco Maritime Law Journal .

20 (1). Nova Southeastern University Shepard Broad Law Center: 75.

SSRN 1266346 .

^ Halstead, B. (2000).

"Line dancing and the buddy system" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

30 (1). Melbourne, Victoria: SPUMS.

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 . Archived from the original on April 16, 2013 . Retrieved October 6, 2016 .

Reprinted with permission from Dive Log 1999; 132(July): 52–54 ^ Powell, Mark (October 2011).

"Solo Diving—Coming out of the Closet" .

Seminar: Dive 2011 Birmingham . Dive-Tech . Retrieved October 6, 2016 .

^ H. Pendleton, Linwood; Rooke, J. (March 1, 2006). "Understanding the Potential Economic Impact of SCUBA Diving and Snorkeling: California".

Paper for the Environmental Science and Engineering Program, University of California, Los Angeles : 3, 6 – via academia.edu.

^ H. Pendleton, Linwood; Rooke, J. (March 1, 2006). "Understanding the Potential Economic Impact of SCUBA Diving and Snorkeling: California".

Paper for the Environmental Science and Engineering Program, University of California, Los Angeles : 3– 4.

^ "Fast Facts: Recreational Scuba Diving and Snorkeling" . Diving Equipment and Marketing Association . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ a b Dimmock, Kay; Cummins, Terry; Musa, Ghazali (2013).

"Chapter 10: The business of Scuba diving" . In Musa, Ghazali; Dimmock, Kay (eds.).

Scuba Diving Tourism . Routledge. pp.

161– 173.

^ Dimmock, Kay; Musa, Ghazali, eds. (2015).

Scuba diving tourism system: a framework for collaborative management and sustainability . Southern Cross University School of Business and Tourism.

^ a b "Participation in recreational scuba diving: Sports & Fitness Industry Association Report 2015" .

thedivelab.dan.org . January 14, 2016 . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ "Youth Scuba Diving Programs" . Professional Association of Diving Instructors . Retrieved September 12, 2016 .

^ "Scuba Diving Lessons for Kids" . Professional Association of Diving Instructors. September 16, 2014 . Retrieved September 12, 2016 .

^ "95 year old SCUBA diver sets a new Guinness World Records title" .

www.youtube.com . December 3, 2018 . Retrieved January 24, 2020 .

^ Kambas, Michele (September 1, 2019). Ros Russell (ed.).

"At 95, WW2 vet breaks own record as oldest scuba diver" .

www.reuters.com . Retrieved January 24, 2020 .

^ "Scuba Diving Participation in 2014" .

thedivelab.dan.org . December 17, 2014 . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ Hanson, E.; Fleisher, J.; Jackman, R.; Dovenbarger, J.; Uguccioni, D.; Thalmann, E.; Cudahy, E.

"Demographics And Illness Prevalence in Recreational Scuba Divers" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org . Groton, CT: Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ "2019 Worldwide Corporate Statistics: Data for 2013-2018" (PDF) . PADI . Retrieved January 9, 2020 .

^ a b Ciglianoa, John A.; Meyer, Ryan; Ballard, Heidi L.; Freitag, Amy; Phillips, Tina B.; Wasserf, Ann (October 2015).

"Making marine and coastal citizen science matter" .

Ocean & Coastal Management .

115 . Elsevier Science Direct: 77– 87.

doi : 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2015.06.012 .

^ Lucrezi, Serena; Milanese, Martina; Palma, Marco; Cerrano, Carlo (August 16, 2018).

"Stirring the strategic direction of scuba diving marine Citizen Science: A survey of active and potential participants" .

PLOS ONE .

13 (8): e0202484.

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1302484L .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0202484 .

PMC 6095588 .

PMID 30114250 .

^ Bear, Michael (March 1, 2016).

"Perspectives in Marine Citizen Science" .

Journal of Microbiology & Biology Education .

17 (1): 56– 59.

doi : 10.1128/jmbe.v17i1.1037 .

PMC 4798816 .

PMID 27047591 .

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Scuba diving .

Scuba Earth - An interactive scuba diving map of dive sites from all around the world.

diveglobal.com - Global dive site and services reviews v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐fqdv5
Cached time: 20250818035419
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.257 seconds
Real time usage: 1.505 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8891/1000000
Revision size: 74436/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 629275/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8773/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 247696/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.673/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21825720/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1055.975      1 -total
 41.86%  442.084      2 Template:Reflist
 16.54%  174.674     37 Template:Cite_web
 15.56%  164.355      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 15.18%  160.344      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.20%  139.339      9 Template:Annotated_link
 13.11%  138.465     13 Template:Cite_journal
  9.43%   99.573     35 Template:Navbox
  6.33%   66.828      8 Template:Citation_needed
  5.85%   61.744      9 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:494840:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818035419 and revision id 1306511903. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Recreational_diving&oldid=1306511903 " Category : Recreational diving Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2016 Articles to be expanded from October 2017 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 03:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Recreational diving 13 languages Add topic

