Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Facilities 3 Organization 4 Participatory Science 5 Education 6 Merlin Bird ID 7 Research 8 Bioacoustics 9 Media 10 Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Cited 11.2 Other 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornell Lab of Ornithology 15 languages Català Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°28′48″N 76°27′04″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.4800°N 76.4511°W ﻿ / 42.4800; -76.4511 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia U.S. biological research institute Cornell Lab of Ornithology Type Research and conservation institute Established 1915 Parent institution Cornell University Location Ithaca, New York , U.S.

Website birds.cornell.edu The Cornell Lab of Ornithology is a member-supported [ 1 ] unit of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York , which studies birds and other wildlife. It is housed in the Imogene Powers Johnson Center for Birds and Biodiversity in Sapsucker Woods Sanctuary. Approximately 250 scientists, professors, staff, and students work in a variety of programs devoted to the Lab's mission: interpreting and conserving the Earth's biological diversity through research, education, and citizen science focused on birds.

[ 2 ] Work at the Lab is supported primarily by its 100,000 members and supporters.

The Cornell Lab produces a quarterly publication, Living Bird magazine, and an electronic newsletter delivered twice per month. It manages numerous participatory science projects and websites, including the Webby Award -winning All About Birds .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The Cornell Lab of Ornithology was founded by Arthur A. Allen , who had lobbied for the creation of the country's first graduate program in ornithology; the Lab was established at Cornell University in 1915. Initially, the Lab of Ornithology was housed in the university’s entomology and limnology department.

[ 4 ] Birder/businessman Lyman Stuart, donors, and landowners purchased or donated farmland in 1954, which was to be set aside for the sanctuary. Stuart helped finance the construction of the first Lab building in 1957. Lab founder Arthur Allen (along with colleagues Louis Agassiz Fuertes , James Gutsell, and Francis Harper ) had dubbed the area “Sapsucker Woods” after discovering the first breeding pair of yellow-bellied sapsuckers ever reported in the Cayuga Lake Basin; this species of woodpecker is now common in the area and is part of the Cornell Lab's logo.

Today, the Cornell Lab of Ornithology is housed in the Imogene Powers Johnson Center for Birds and Biodiversity, which opened in the summer of 2003.

Facilities [ edit ] The Visitor Center entrance hall with the observatory on the left The 300-acre Sapsucker Woods Sanctuary contains more than 5 miles of trails winding around Sapsucker Pond, on boardwalks, through wetlands and forest. More than 230 species of birds have been recorded in the sanctuary.

[ 5 ] Approximately 55,000 people visit the sanctuary and public areas of the Cornell Lab each year.

[ 6 ] In fall 2023, the Visitor Center underwent a multimillion-dollar redesign. It reopened in June 2024 with all new interactive exhibits. The Visitor Center is free to visit and accessible to all.

[ 7 ] The Visitor Center is open Tuesday through Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. and closed on Mondays.

Organization [ edit ] The Lab is an administrative unit within Cornell University. It has a separate 30-member Administrative Board that is appointed by the Cornell Board of Trustees.

[ 8 ] As of fiscal year 2023, the Lab has an annual budget of $45.4 million and income of $45.8 million.

[ 9 ] It has 18 senior staff, which includes eight holding Cornell faculty appointments.

[ 8 ] Participatory Science [ edit ] Collecting the observations of everyday birders for scientific use is a hallmark of the Lab. Birdwatchers of all ages and skill levels help gather the data needed to capture the big picture about the distribution and abundance of birds. Hundreds of thousands of people worldwide participate in the Lab's projects in the Center for Engagement in Science and Nature . The eBird project allows birders to report any of the Earth's more than 10,585 bird species to a single scientific database. As of July 2024, 127.5 million checklists have been recorded, reporting 10,826 species, from more than a million eBirders.

[ 10 ] eBird data and ground-breaking tools have formed the foundation for hundreds of scientific studies of birds.

[ 11 ] The Cornell Lab's other participatory-science projects take place in all seasons and include Project FeederWatch, [ 12 ] NestWatch, [ 13 ] and Celebrate Urban Birds.

[ 14 ] Every February, the Lab, the Audubon Society, and Birds Canada host the 4-day Great Backyard Bird Count . which takes place all over the world. The Cornell Lab also operates many Bird Cams [ 15 ] which stream live video of nesting birds in the spring.

Education [ edit ] The Lab's Bird Academy and K–12 curricula take education about birds and nature to students of all ages. Bird Academy is home to a series of self-paced online courses about woodpeckers, hummingbirds, how to paint birds, photograph birds, improve bird ID skills, and much more. K–12 materials are aimed at both students and teachers, assisting them in teaching and learning how to think like a scientist.

Merlin Bird ID [ edit ] The Cornell Lab publishes the free Merlin Bird ID app for iOS and Android devices. This field guide and identification app guides helps users to put a name to the birds they see, and covers 3,000 species of across the Americas, Western Europe, and India. In addition to browsing customized lists of birds for any location in the world, users can answer simple questions to get a list of most likely species, along with images and sound. In 2017, Merlin Bird ID was updated to include AI-powered automatic photo recognition, which allows quick identification help with photographs. Bird ID and Photo ID require separate file downloads. The app also offers Sound ID, which can identify some 450 North American species, in real time or from an in-app recording, even if multiple species are communicating at once.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The app also displays a basic black-and-white spectrogram —a visual representation of sound.

[ 18 ] Research [ edit ] Cornell Lab scientists, postdoctoral associates, students, and visiting scholars are carrying on much original research in behavioral ecology, conservation, education, evolutionary biology, information systems, and population genetics. The scientists even harness weather radar data to study the movements of birds during migration. Cornell Lab engineers also develop hardware and software tools used in researching bird and animal communication and patterns of movement.

In the Center for Biodiversity Studies & Higher Education , laboratory researchers are extracting DNA from living birds or specimens to uncover the relationships among species.

In addition to many studies and published papers, the Cornell Lab's Center for Avian Population Studies has produced land managers' guides aimed at conserving dwindling populations of scarlet tanagers, wood thrushes, and other forest birds.

[ 19 ] The Lab worked with Partners in Flight to identify rapidly declining species and produce the first North American Landbird Conservation Plan.

[ 20 ] Lab staff also worked with multiple partners to create the first-ever State of the Birds report in March 2009, [ 21 ] and subsequent years.

Lab scientists are currently involved with partners from industry, government agencies, and non-governmental organizations in setting research priorities to better understand the impact of wind power facilities on birds and bats on land, and on whales and marine creatures offshore.

[ 22 ] Bioacoustics [ edit ] The Lab's K. Lisa Yang Center for Conservation Bioacoustics creates remote recording devices used by researchers in projects around the world.

[ 23 ] These mobile autonomous vehicles consist of a hard drive, housing, and microphone array [ 24 ] that can be mounted in a forest or anchored to the ocean floor.

[ 25 ] These recording units have been used in the Yang Center's Elephant Listening Project in Africa, [ 26 ] studies of whales, [ 27 ] and in many studies of birds such as northern spotted owls.

The Yang Center has also developed sound-analysis software programs called Raven and Raven Lite.

[ 28 ] Engineers are working on programmable radio tags to track birds and other animals for longer periods of time and to follow bird migrations.

Media [ edit ] From its earliest days, the Cornell Lab has had a special interest in bird and animal sounds. Founder Arthur Allen and his students were pioneers in the field, recording the first bird songs on a film soundtrack.

[ 29 ] The Macaulay Library has since expanded and is now the world's premier scientific archive of natural history audio, video, and photographs. The library hosts over 64 million audio, video and photographs.

[ 30 ] Macaulay Library archivists continue to mount expeditions to collect wildlife sounds, images, and video from around the world and collect media from contributors to expand the archive.

[ 31 ] The Lab's Center for Conservation Media presents stories from around the world, working with many partners to highlight conservation concerns ranging from the preservation of important habitats to individual species in trouble such as the Great Philippine Eagle and the African Grey Parrot.

Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates [ edit ] The Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates is also housed in the Johnson Center and holds 1,230,000 specimens of fish, 44,300 amphibians and reptiles, 45,000 birds, 3,200 eggs, and 15,000 mammals, some now extinct. Students and scientists use the collections in their studies.

[ 32 ] References [ edit ] Cited [ edit ] ^ "Become a member, renew membership" . Cornell Lab of Ornithology . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "About Us, Annual Report, Staff Directory, Visit, Cornell Lab of Ornithology" . Birds.cornell.edu . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "Home" .

allaboutbirds.org .

^ For the Birds Archived July 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , by Randolph Scott Little, 2003 ^ "Sapsucker Woods - eBird Hotspots" . ebird.org . Retrieved March 2, 2019 .

^ "Visit the Lab, Hours, Directions, Sapsucker Woods, Cornell Lab of Ornithology" . Birds.cornell.edu. September 29, 2011 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Cornell Lab of Ornithology Visitor Center reopens | Cornell Chronicle" .

news.cornell.edu . Retrieved July 11, 2024 .

^ a b "2023 Annual Report" . Cornell University . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "2023 Annual Report" . Cornell University. p. 23 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "World - eBird" .

ebird.org . July 16, 2024 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "eBird Science" .

science.ebird.org . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Project FeederWatch" . Feederwatch.org . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "NestWatch" . NestWatch . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "Celebrate – Celebrate Urban Birds" . Celebrateurbanbirds.org. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012 . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "All Cams" .

Cornell Lab Bird Cams . Retrieved March 22, 2025 .

^ Devokaitis, Marc (June 23, 2021).

"What bird is singing? Merlin Bird ID app offers instant answers" .

Cornell Chronicle . Retrieved February 10, 2023 .

^ Leonard, Pat (April 12, 2022).

"Merlin Bird ID app identifies more than 450 bird species by sound" .

Cornell Chronicle . Retrieved February 10, 2023 .

^ Byington, Cara (March 7, 2022).

"The Sound of Merlin: Like Shazam, but for Birds" .

Cool Green Science . Retrieved February 10, 2023 .

^ "Mission: Research — What we do" . Cornell Lab of Ornithology . Retrieved August 1, 2014 .

^ "Partners in Flight – U.S.- North American Landbird Conservation Plan" . Pwrc.usgs.gov. June 24, 2011 . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "2011 Report – Public Lands and Waters" . Stateofthebirds.org . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "Birds – Cornell Lab of Ornithology" . Birds.cornell.edu . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "K. Lisa Yang Center for Conservation Bioacoustics" . Birds.cornell.edu. August 9, 2011 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "K. Lisa Yang Center for Conservation Bioacoustics" . Birds.cornell.edu. July 17, 2024 . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "K. Lisa Yang Center for Conservation Bioacoustics" . Birds.cornell.edu. July 17, 2024 . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "The Elephant Listening Project" . Birds.cornell.edu . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Bioacoustics Research" . Listenforwhales.org. July 17, 2024 . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "Raven: Interactive Sound Analysis Software" . Birds.cornell.edu. July 17, 2024 . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

^ "History" . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Home" .

macaulaylibrary.org .

^ "Macaulay Library - Scientific Archive" . Macaulaylibrary.org. Archived from the original on October 7, 2011 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Welcome to the CUMV – Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates" . Cumv.cornell.edu. October 4, 2011 . Retrieved October 18, 2011 .

Other [ edit ] Living Bird Magazine , Autumn 2003, ISSN 1059-521X External links [ edit ] Cornell Lab of Ornithology v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category v t e Ithaca, New York Arts and entertainment Ithaca Discovery Trail Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art Performing arts Cayuga Chamber Orchestra Hangar Theatre Kitchen Theatre Company State Theatre Business and economy Cornell Business & Technology Park Kionix Gimme! Coffee Ithaca Commons Ithaca Gun Company Ithaca Hours Moosewood Restaurant Tompkins Trust Company United States Post Office Education Ithaca Discovery Trail Tompkins County Public Library Higher Cornell University Ithaca College TC3 Ithaca Extension Center K–12 Cascadilla School Ithaca City School District Beverly J. Martin Elementary School Ithaca High School Lehman Alternative Community School South Hill Elementary School Health Cayuga Medical Center News and media Newspapers The Cornell Daily Sun Ithaca Journal Ithaca Times Radio WFIZ WHCU WICB WINO WITH WNYY WQNY WSQG WVBR-FM WYXL Television ICTV WNYI People List of people from Ithaca, New York Cornellians Ithaca College people Mayors Recreation and sports Allan H. Treman State Marine Park Ithaca Dog Park De Witt Park Stewart Park Athletics Cornell Big Red Glazer Arena Ithaca Bombers Ithaca Little Red TC3 Panthers Science and environment Ithaca Discovery Trail Cayuga Nature Center Cornell Lab of Ornithology Cornell Botanic Gardens Museum of the Earth Sciencenter Sagan Planet Walk Society and culture Clinton House Namgyal Monastery Institute of Buddhist Studies Transportation Ithaca Bus Station Ithaca Tompkins International Airport OurBus New York State Routes NY 13 NY 13A NY 34 NY 79 NY 89 NY 96 NY 96B NY 366 Tompkins Consolidated Area Transit Travel and tourism Buttermilk Falls State Park Ithaca Falls Robert H. Treman State Park Taughannock Falls State Park Trails Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Czech Republic Norway Israel Catalonia Other Yale LUX 42°28′48″N 76°27′04″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.4800°N 76.4511°W ﻿ / 42.4800; -76.4511 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornell_Lab_of_Ornithology&oldid=1298682546 " Categories : Cornell University Cornell University buildings Zoological research institutes Ornithological organizations in the United States Research institutes in New York (state) Nature centers in New York (state) Tourist attractions in Ithaca, New York 1915 establishments in New York (state) Bird conservation organizations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2024 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 00:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornell Lab of Ornithology 15 languages Add topic

