Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Symbolism 3 Related maps 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Europa regina 16 languages العربية Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano עברית Lietuvių Македонски 日本語 Português Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 16th-century map-like depiction of the European continent as a queen Europa regina in Sebastian Münster 's " Cosmographia ".

Europa regina , Latin for 'Queen Europe', is the map -like depiction of the European continent as a queen.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Made popular in the 16th century, the map shows Europe as a young and graceful woman wearing imperial regalia . The Iberian Peninsula (Hispania) is the head, wearing a hoop crown . The Pyrenees , forming the neck, separate the Iberian peninsula from France ( Gallia ), which makes up the upper chest. The Holy Roman Empire ( Germania and other territories) is the centre of the torso, with Bohemia (sometimes Austria in early depictions) being the heart of the woman (alternatively described as a medallion at her waist). Her long gown stretches to Hungary , Poland , Lithuania , Livonia , Bulgaria , Muscovy , Macedonia and Greece . In her arms, formed by Italy and Denmark , she holds a sceptre and an orb ( Sicily ).

[ 3 ] The map erroneously depicts Europe as mostly separated from Asia by sea. In most depictions, Africa , Asia and the Scandinavian peninsula are partially shown, [ 3 ] as are the British Isles , in schematic form.

[ 3 ] Origins [ edit ] During the European Middle Ages , maps typically adhered to the Jerusalem -centered T-O scheme , depicting Europe, Asia and Africa .

[ 4 ] Separate maps of Europe were extremely rare; the only known examples are a map from Lambert of Saint-Omer 's Liber Floridus , published in 1112, and a 14th-century Byzantine map.

[ 4 ] The next Europe-focused map was published by cartographer Johannes Putsch from Innsbruck in 1537, at the beginning of the Early Modern Age .

[ 4 ] The Putsch-map was the first to depict Europe as an Europa regina , [ 5 ] [ 4 ] [ 6 ] with the European regions forming a female human shape with crown , sceptre and globus cruciger .

[ 4 ] The map was first printed by Calvinist Christian Wechel.

[ 7 ] Though much about the origination and initial perception of this map is uncertain, [ 6 ] it is known that Putsch (whose name was Latinized as Johannes Bucius Aenicola, 1516–1542) [ 7 ] maintained close relations with Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand I of Habsburg , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] and that the map's popularity increased significantly during the second half of the 16th century.

[ 6 ] The modern term Europa regina was not yet used by Putsch's contemporaries, who instead used the Latin phrase Europa in forma virginis ("Europe in the shape of a maiden"), [ 7 ] and spread in combination with Putsch's poem Europa lamentans , addressed to the emperors, about them alleviating Europe from its wars.

[ 8 ] In 1587, Jan Bußemaker published a copper engraving by Matthias Quad , showing an adaptation of Putsch's Europa regina , as " Europae descriptio ".

[ 6 ] Since 1588, [ 6 ] another adaption was included in all subsequent editions of Sebastian Münster 's " Cosmographia ", [ 4 ] [ 6 ] earlier editions had it only sometimes included.

[ 7 ] Heinrich Bünting 's " Itenerarium sacrae scripturae ", which had a map of Europe with female features included in its 1582 edition, switched to Europa regina in its 1589 edition.

[ 6 ] Based on these and other examples, the year 1587 marks the point when many publications began adopting the imagery of Europa regina .

[ 6 ] Symbolism [ edit ] Europa regina and the House of Habsburg A rotated Europa regina compared to the Habsburg realms (green) under Charles V , who in addition was emperor of the Holy Roman Empire (comprising Central Europe , not shown) Europa Regina was introduced in the 1530s by the Austrian cartographer Johannes Putsch, possibly with the intent of depicting Europe as the spouse of Charles V of Habsburg , who aspired to become the universal monarch of Christendom and reigned over numerous realms including the Holy Roman Empire and the kingdom of Spain .

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] Arguments in favour of this hypothesis are: the westward orientation of the map to have Hispania as the crowned head, said to resemble the face of Charles V's wife, Isabella of Portugal ; the use of the Holy Roman Empire's insignia – its crown, sceptre and orb – and the portrayal of Habsburg realms (Austria, Bohemia, Hungary, Germany) as the heart and centre of the body; and the design of the gown, which resembles the contemporary dress code at the Habsburg court.

[ 9 ] [ 7 ] [ 3 ] [ 10 ] As in contemporary portraits of couples, Europa regina has her head turned to her right and also holds the orb with her right hand, which has been interpreted as facing and offering power to her imaginary husband, the emperor.

[ 10 ] Outside this and in more general terms, Europe is shown as the res publica christiana , [ 7 ] the united Christendom in medieval tradition, [ 3 ] and great [ 1 ] or even as the dominant power in the world.

[ 10 ] A third allegory is one of Europe as Paradise through the special placement given to the bodies of water on the map.

[ 7 ] As contemporary iconography depicted paradise in enclosed form, Europa regina is enclosed by seas and rivers.

[ 7 ] The Danube river is depicted in a way that it resembles the course of the biblical river flowing through paradise, with its estuary formed by four arms.

[ 7 ] That Europa regina is surrounded by water is also an allusion to the antique mythological Europe , who was abducted by Zeus and carried over the water.

[ 10 ] Europa regina belongs to the Early Modern allegory of Europa triumphans , as opposed to Europa deplorans .

[ 11 ] Related maps [ edit ] The art of shaping a map in a human form can also be found in a map drawn by Opicinus de Canistris , showing the Mediterranean Sea .

[ 4 ] This map, published in 1340 and thus predating the Putsch map, showed Europe as a man and Northern Africa as a woman.

[ 5 ] The Leo Belgicus map showed the Low Countries as a lion; this was closer to the modern map orientation, with north at the top.

While in Europa regina maps, actual geography is subordinate to the female shape, the opposite approach is seen in a map drawn by Hendrik Kloekhoff and published by Francois Bohn in 1709. In this map, titled Europa. Volgens de nieuwste Verdeeling ("Europe, according to the newest classification"), a female is superimposed on a map showing a fairly accurate geography of Europe, and although the map is oriented westward with the Iberian Peninsula forming the head as in the Europa regina imagery, this results in a crouching female shape, corresponding more with the Europa deplorans than the Europa triumphans allegory.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Europa (consort of Zeus) Woman of the Apocalypse History of Spain National personification Personification of the Americas References [ edit ] ^ a b Landwehr & Stockhorst (2004), p. 279 ^ Werner (2009), p. 243 ^ a b c d e f Werner (2009), p. 244 ^ a b c d e f g Borgolte (2001), p. 16 ^ a b Bennholdt-Thomsen (1999), p. 22 ^ a b c d e f g h i Schmale (2004), p. 244 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Wendehorst & Westphal (2006), p. 63 ^ Meurer, Peter (2008-12-31).

"Europa Regina. 16th century maps of Europe in the form of a queen" .

Belgeo. Revue belge de géographie (in German) ( 3– 4). National Committee of Geography of Belgium / Société Royale Belge de Géographie: 355– 370.

doi : 10.4000/belgeo.7711 .

ISSN 1377-2368 . Retrieved 2024-03-21 .

^ Europeanness in Early Modern Latin Literature , Isabella Walser-Bürgler, p.60 ^ a b c d Werner (2009), p. 245 ^ Werner (2009), pp. 243ff ^ Bennholdt-Thomsen (1999), pp. 22-24 Bibliography [ edit ] Baridon, Laurent (2011).

Un atlas imaginaire, cartes allégoriques et satiriques (in French). Paris: Citadelles & Mazenod.

ISBN 978-2-85088-515-0 .

Bennholdt-Thomsen, Anke (1999). Bennholdt-Thomsen, Anke; Guzzoni, Alfredo (eds.).

Zur Hermetik des Spätwerks . Analecta Hölderlianas (in German). Vol. 1. Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.

ISBN 3-8260-1629-7 .

Borgolte, Michael (2001). "Perspektiven europäischer Mittelalterhistorie an der Schwelle zum 21. Jahrhundert". In Lusiardi, Ralf; Borgolte (eds.).

Das europäische Mittelalter im Spannungsbogen des Vergleichs . Europa im Mittelalter. Abhandlungen und Beiträge zur historischen Komparatistik (in German). Vol. 1. Berlin: Akademie Verlag. pp.

13– 28.

ISBN 3-05-003663-X .

Werner, Elke Anna (2009). "Triumphierende Europa - Klagende Europa. Zur visuellen Konstruktion europäischer Selbstbilder in der Frühen Neuzeit". In Ißler, Roland Alexander; Renger, Almut-Barbara (eds.).

Europa- Stier und Sternenkranz. Von der Union mit Zeus zum Staatenverbund . Gründungsmythen Europas in Literatur, Musik und Kunst (in German). Vol. 1. Bonn University Press, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp.

241– 260.

ISBN 978-3-89971-566-8 .

Landwehr, Achim; Stockhorst, Stefanie (2004).

Einführung in die europäische Kulturgeschichte . UTB M (in German). Vol. 2562. Paderborn: Schöningh.

ISBN 3-8252-2562-3 .

Schmale, Wolfgang (2004). "Europa, Braut der Fürsten. Politische Relevanz des Europamythos im 17. Jahrhundert". In Bussmann, Klaus; Werner, Elke Anna (eds.).

Europa im 17. Jahrhundert. Ein politischer Mythos und seine Bilder . Kunstgeschichte (in German). Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.

ISBN 3-515-08274-3 .

Wendehorst, Stephan; Westphal, Siegrid (2006).

Lesebuch altes Reich . Bibliothek Altes Reich (in German). Vol. 1. Munich: Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag.

ISBN 3-486-57909-6 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Europa regina at Wikimedia Commons Opicino de Canistris' map showing Europe as a man and Africa as a woman, hosted at mittelalter-server.de v t e National personifications Africa Kenya Wanjiku America Personification of the Americas Argentina Effigies of Argentina Gaucho Brazil Efígie da República Canada Johnny Canuck Chile Huaso Roto Colombia Juan Valdez Dominican Republic Conchoprimo Haiti Ezili Dantor Catherine Flon Mexico es:Alegoría de la Patria Mexicana Peru Madre Patria United States Billy Yank Northern states Brother Jonathan Columbia Johnny Reb Southern states Lady Justice Lady Liberty Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam Uruguay es:Representaciones alegóricas del Uruguay Venezuela Juan Bimba obsolete Asia Afghanistan Rostam Armenia Mother Armenia Bangladesh Bangamata Cambodia Preah Thong and Neang Neak China Chinese dragon Jade Emperor Panda Snow Lion Tibet Georgia Kartvlis Deda India Bharat Mata Indian elephant The Common Man Indonesia Ibu Pertiwi Iran Rostam Israel Srulik Japan Yamato-hime samurai Korea Korean tiger Kyrgyzstan Manas Lebanon Abu Abed Malaysia Hang Tuah Pakistan Shaheen Māder-e Millat Palestine Handala Philippines Juan dela Cruz Maria Clara Singapore Merlion Thailand Siam Devadhiraj Tajikistan Rostam Turkmenistan Oghuz Khagan Europe Europa Europa regina Albania Mother Albania Belgium Manneken Pis es:La Belgique (alegoría) Leo Belgicus Croatia Mother Croatia Czech Republic Čechie Czech Vašek Švejk Denmark Holger Danske Mother Denmark Finland Finnish Maiden France Gallic rooster Marianne Germany Deutscher Michel Germania Greece Hellas Hungary Lady of Hungaria Prince Csaba Székely Land Turul Iceland Lady of the Mountain Ireland Ériu Hibernia Kathleen Ni Houlihan Italy Italia turrita Roma Malta Melita Netherlands Dutch Maiden Leo Belgicus Norway no:Mor Norge Nór Ola Nordmann Poland Polonia Portugal Efígie da República Angel of Portugal Zé Povinho Serbia Kosovo Maiden Mother Serbia Spain Hispania es:León hispano Sweden Mother Svea Switzerland Helvetia Russia Mother Russia Russian Bear Russian Winter Ukraine Cossack Mamay Mother Ukraine United Kingdom Britannia John Bull Dame Wales Scota Welsh Dragon Oceania Australia Boxing kangaroo Digger Little Boy from Manly New Zealand Southern man (South Island) Zealandia Countryballs Symbols of Liberty Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Europa_regina&oldid=1303858937 " Categories : Christendom History of Europe Mannerism 16th century in art National personifications 16th-century maps and globes Personifications of continents Symbols of Europe Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata CS1 French-language sources (fr) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Europa regina 16 languages Add topic

