Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Cast Toggle Cast subsection 2.1 Germany 2.2 Britain 3 Production 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Einstein and Eddington 5 languages فارسی Français Italiano עברית Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2008 television film directed by Philip Martin Einstein and Eddington BBC DVD cover, featuring Andy Serkis as Einstein (top) and David Tennant as Eddington (bottom) Written by Peter Moffat Directed by Philip Martin Starring Andy Serkis David Tennant Lucy Cohu Jim Broadbent Rebecca Hall Theme music composer Nicholas Hooper Country of origin United Kingdom Original language English Production Producer Mark Pybus Running time 89 minutes Production company Company Pictures Original release Network BBC Two Release 22 November 2008 ( 2008-11-22 ) Einstein and Eddington is a British single drama produced by Company Pictures and the BBC , in association with HBO . It featured David Tennant as British scientist Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington , and Andy Serkis as Albert Einstein . This is the story of Einstein's general theory of relativity , his relationship with Eddington and the introduction of this theory to the world, against the backdrop of the Great War and Eddington's eclipse observations .

It was first broadcast on BBC Two on 22 November 2008.

[ 1 ] Plot [ edit ] The prelude is set in 1919 on Eddington's expedition in Príncipe to observe the solar eclipse that year , before moving back in time to 1914. At the outbreak of the First World War , Eddington is appointed chief astronomer at Cambridge by Sir Oliver Lodge and instructed to research Einstein's work and defend the Newtonian status quo . Meanwhile, Einstein is lured back from Zürich to the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin in an attempt to aid the war effort by embarrassing Britain by disproving the work of its great scientist Isaac Newton . In Berlin, with his marriage already under tension, Einstein falls in love with his cousin Elsa .

A Quaker and therefore unable to go to war, Eddington sets out to bid farewell to his love interest William Marston, as the latter goes off to war as an officer, but just misses Marston's train. He then presents his lecture to his fellow astronomers at the university—defending Newton, but still thinking Einstein might be right—and takes the German Müller family into his home after saving them from a violent anti-German mob. When Einstein's wife arrives in Berlin, she discovers Einstein's affair and leaves him, whilst Eddington faces down protesters who despise his status as a conscientious objector . Einstein arrives late at a demonstration of Fritz Haber's poison gas and is so disgusted by this application of science to murder that he rejects an offer to convert his citizenship back from Swiss to German and refuses to sign the "Manifesto to the Civilized World" , a list of prominent German scientists, artists and academics supporting the war.

Eddington finds his research into Einstein's work obstructed by a British ban on the circulation of German scientific literature. Realising that Mercury's orbit is precessing slightly more than it should be according to Newton's laws , he writes to Einstein despite the ban to inquire into his view on the problem. Einstein's relationship with Elsa deepens, and on receiving Eddington's letter he starts work on this new avenue with Max Planck , whilst consoling colleague Planck on the loss of his son in the war despite Einstein's lack of belief in a human-like God or an afterlife. They find that Einstein's work agrees with Mercury 's orbit where Newton's does not, and send this reply back to Eddington.

At the same time, Eddington grieves over Marston, among the 15,000 killed by German use of chlorine gas at the Second Battle of Ypres , causing doubts in his faith, but leading him to fight all the more loudly against an expulsion of German scientists from the Royal Society . The expulsion has been initiated by Lodge, whose son was also among the killed and who clings to Newton as a consolation of "order in the universe", but Eddington is unable to admit to Lodge that he too is grieving for a loved one.

News of the gas attack also leads Einstein to an outburst against his fellow scientists, which leads to his being cut off from the university, and—overworking—he falls sick and Elsa leaves him. Even so, he manages to complete his work on general relativity and on how starlight bends and gets this result through to Eddington via Planck. Eddington realises he can prove that space and light are being bent by observing the solar eclipse of 29 May 1919 on the west African island of Príncipe , and with Dyson as an ally, manages to gain funding for his expedition, despite Lodge's initial opposition. As the war ends, Eddington's sister and housekeeper, Winifred, sets off to help the Quaker relief effort in war-shattered Germany despite her fears as to Eddington's waning faith.

The action returns to the Príncipe expedition, delayed by bad weather until the last moment, while Einstein briefly returns to his ex-wife and children. Bringing back two photographs from the eclipse to compare to photographs of the night sky in normal conditions, Eddington compares them in public, with Lodge and Winifred in attendance, and not only proves Einstein right but also finds this confirmation reaffirming his faith—as he states, "I can hear God, thinking". News of his vindication reaches Einstein, and crowds of press arrive at his door just as Elsa returns to him.  A year later, in the closing scene, Einstein visits Cambridge and meets Eddington. The closing credits remark on both scientists' later work, Einstein's celebrity and Eddington's obscurity.

Cast [ edit ] Germany [ edit ] Andy Serkis as Albert Einstein Lucy Cohu as Mileva Einstein Jodhi May as Elsa Einstein Donald Sumpter as Max Planck Callum Williams as Hans Einstein Jacob Théato as Eduard Einstein Anton Lesser as Fritz Haber John Bowe as Leopold Koppel Kika Markham as Aunt Fanny Philip Whitchurch as Uncle Rudolf Britain [ edit ] David Tennant as Arthur Eddington Jim Broadbent as Sir Oliver Lodge Rebecca Hall as Winnifred Eddington, Arthur's Sister Richard McCabe as Frank Watson Dyson Lucy Briers as The Librarian Paul Brooke as H.H. Turner Oliver Hall as Boy Throwing Stones Patrick Kennedy as William Marston Christopher Campbell as Herr Muller Caroline Gruber as Frau Muller Eleanor Tomlinson as Agnes Muller Ben Uttley as First Tennis Player Richard Graham as Man With White Feather Albert Einstein (1879–1955) Arthur Stanley Eddington (1882–1944) Production [ edit ] Einstein And Eddington is written by Peter Moffat and directed by Philip Martin , who both collaborated for the production of Hawking , a BBC biopic about the physicist. It is produced by Company Pictures and the BBC , with HBO and Pioneer Pictures , Hungary.

[ 2 ] Location filming occurred at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences , St John's College, Cambridge , and on the Adriatic Coast of Croatia .

Walter Isaacson acted as consultant (with Francisco Diego as eclipse advisor).

References [ edit ] ^ BBC website for Einstein and Eddington ^ "David Tennant and Andy Serkis to star in BBC drama Einstein And Eddington" (Press release).

BBC . 21 May 2008.

External links [ edit ] Einstein and Eddington at IMDb Einstein and Eddington – BBC Two Einstein and Eddington – HBO v t e Albert Einstein Physics Theory of relativity Special relativity General relativity Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Brownian motion Photoelectric effect Einstein coefficients Einstein solid Equivalence principle Einstein field equations Einstein radius Einstein relation (kinetic theory) Einstein ring Cosmological constant Bose–Einstein condensate Bose–Einstein statistics Bose–Einstein correlations Einstein–Cartan theory Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations Einstein–de Haas effect EPR paradox Bohr–Einstein debates Teleparallelism Thought experiments Unsuccessful investigations Wave–particle duality Gravitational wave Tea leaf paradox Works Annus mirabilis papers (1905) " Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement " (1905) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916) The Meaning of Relativity (1922) The World as I See It (1934) The Evolution of Physics (1938) " Why Socialism?

" (1949) Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955) In popular culture Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary) The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary) Relics: Einstein's Brain (1994 documentary) Insignificance (1985 film) Young Einstein (1988 film) Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play) I.Q.

(1994 film) Einstein's Gift (2003 play) Einstein and Eddington (2008 TV film) Genius (2017 series) Oppenheimer (2023 film) Prizes Albert Einstein Award Albert Einstein Medal Kalinga Prize Albert Einstein Peace Prize Albert Einstein World Award of Science Einstein Prize for Laser Science Einstein Prize (APS) Books about Einstein Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel Einstein and Religion Einstein for Beginners Einstein: His Life and Universe Einstein in Oxford Einstein on the Run Einstein's Cosmos I Am Albert Einstein Introducing Relativity Subtle is the Lord Family Mileva Marić (first wife) Elsa Einstein (second wife; cousin) Lieserl Einstein (daughter) Hans Albert Einstein (son) Pauline Koch (mother) Hermann Einstein (father) Maja Einstein (sister) Eduard Einstein (son) Robert Einstein (cousin) Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson) Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter) Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson) Siegbert Einstein (distant cousin) Related Awards and honors Brain House Memorial Political views Religious views Things named after Einstein–Oppenheimer relationship Albert Einstein Archives Einstein's Blackboard Einstein Papers Project Einstein refrigerator Einsteinhaus Einsteinium Max Talmey Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists Category v t e Works directed by Philip Martin Hawking (2004) Bloodlines (2005) Einstein and Eddington (2008) Mo (2010) Birdsong (2012) The Forger (2014) Scoop (2024) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Einstein_and_Eddington&oldid=1303739983 " Categories : 2008 television films 2008 films British television films Television series by All3Media Films scored by Nicholas Hooper Works about Albert Einstein Cultural depictions of Albert Einstein Films about Quakers World War I films based on actual events World War I television films Films set on the United Kingdom home front during World War I Films shot in Cambridgeshire Films directed by Philip Martin (director) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2016 Use British English from June 2016 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 20:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Einstein and Eddington 5 languages Add topic

