Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 African Toggle African subsection 1.1 Central African 1.2 East African 1.3 North African 1.4 Southern African 1.5 West African 2 Asian Toggle Asian subsection 2.1 Central Asian 2.1.1 Turkic and Mongolic 2.1.2 Hindu 2.2 Eastern Asian 2.2.1 Chinese 2.2.2 Japanese 2.2.3 Korean 2.2.4 Thai 2.2.5 Vietnamese 2.3 Western Asian 2.3.1 Iranian 3 The Americas Toggle The Americas subsection 3.1 Haitian 3.2 Incan 3.3 Inuit 3.4 Iroquoian 3.5 Lakota 3.6 Lencans 3.7 Mayan 3.8 Puebloans 3.9 Taíno mythology 3.10 Uto-Aztecan 4 Australian 5 Burmese 6 Etruscan 7 European Toggle European subsection 7.1 Albanian 7.2 Baltic 7.3 Celtic 7.4 English 7.5 Germanic 7.6 Greek 7.7 Messapian 7.8 Proto-Indo-European 7.9 Roman 7.10 Slavic 7.11 Thracian and Phrygian 8 Filipino 9 Hurrian 10 Meitei/Sanamahism 11 Malagasy 12 Māori 13 Other Pacific Islanders 14 Sumerian 15 Uralic Toggle Uralic subsection 15.1 Finnic 15.2 Mari 15.3 Mordvin 15.4 Permic 15.5 Sami 15.6 Samoyedic 15.7 Ugric 16 See also 17 References Toggle the table of contents Sky deity 11 languages العربية Català Español فارسی 한국어 Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Deity associated with the sky "Air spirit" redirects here; not to be confused with Spirit Airlines .

"Spirits of the air" redirects here. For the 1989 science fiction film, see Spirits of the Air, Gremlins of the Clouds .

"Spirit of the sky" redirects here; not to be confused with Spirit in the Sky .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sky deity" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may contain unverified or indiscriminate information in embedded lists .

Please help clean up the lists by removing items or incorporating them into the text of the article.

( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Jupiter , the sky father of Roman religion and mythology.

The sky often has important religious significance. Many polytheistic religions have deities associated with the sky.

The daytime sky deities are typically distinct from the nighttime ones.

Stith Thompson 's Motif-Index of Folk-Literature reflects this by separating the category of "Sky-god" (A210) from that of "Star-god" (A250). In mythology, nighttime gods are usually known as night deities and gods of stars simply as star gods. Both of these categories are included here since they relate to the sky. Luminary deities are included as well since the sun and moon are located in the sky. Some religions may also have a deity or personification of the day, distinct from the god of the day lit sky, to complement the deity or personification of the night.

Daytime gods and nighttime gods are frequently deities of an " upper world" or "celestial world" opposed to the earth and a " netherworld " (gods of the underworld are sometimes called "chthonic" deities).

[ 1 ] Within Greek mythology, Uranus was the primordial sky god, who was ultimately succeeded by Zeus , who ruled the celestial realm atop Mount Olympus . In contrast to the celestial Olympians was the chthonic deity Hades , who ruled the underworld, and Poseidon , who ruled the sea.

[ 2 ] Any masculine sky god is often also king of the gods , taking the position of patriarch within a pantheon . Such king gods are collectively categorized as " sky father " deities, with a polarity between sky and earth often being expressed by pairing a "sky father" god with an " earth mother " goddess (pairings of a sky mother with an earth father are less frequent). A main sky goddess is often the queen of the gods and may be an air/sky goddess in her own right, though she usually has other functions as well with "sky" not being her main. In antiquity, several sky goddesses in ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, and the Near East were called Queen of Heaven .

Gods may rule the sky as a pair (for example, ancient Semitic supreme god El and the fertility goddess Asherah whom he was most likely paired with).

[ 3 ] The following is a list of sky deities in various polytheistic traditions arranged mostly by language family, which is typically a better indicator of relatedness than geography.

African [ edit ] Central African [ edit ] Khonvoum , Mbuti supreme creator god and sky father Nzambi Ampungu , Bakongo creator, sky and sun god Nzambici , Bakongo sky, moon and earth goddess East African [ edit ] Mulungu , Nyamwezi creator and sky god Waaq creator and sky god.

North African [ edit ] Amun , Ancient Egyptian god of creation and the wind Anhur , Ancient Egyptian originally a foreign war god Hathor , Ancient Egyptian originally a sky goddess Horus , Ancient Egyptian god of the sun, sky, kings, and war Khonsu , Ancient Egyptian moon god Mehet-Weret , Ancient Egyptian goddess of the sky Nut , Ancient Egyptian goddess of the sky Ra , Ancient Egyptian god of the sun that ruled the sky, earth and underworld Shu , Ancient Egyptian god of the air Thoth , Ancient Egyptian original moon god Southern African [ edit ] Umvelinqangi , Zulu sky god Utixo , Khoikhoi sky god Xamaba , Heikum creator and sky god West African [ edit ] Denka , Dinka god of sky, rain and fertility Nyame , Akan supreme deity, god of the sky Olorun , Yoruba supreme deity, god of the sky and heaven Shango , Yoruba sky father and thunder god Amadioha , Igbo thunder and lightning god Osalobua , Benin supreme creator god and sky father Wulbari , Guang sky god Abasi (is for ever) Ibom enyon , Ibibio People God, or the one who is forever; compound word, Kingdom of High Achamán , Guanche creator and sky god Asian [ edit ] Central Asian [ edit ] Turkic and Mongolic [ edit ] Tengri , god of the sky Ülgen Kayra Hindu [ edit ] Aditi , celestial mother of the gods Chandra , god of the moon Dyaus Pita , sky father Indra , king of the gods, associated with weather Ratri , goddess of night Saranyu , goddess of clouds Surya , god of the sun Ushas , goddess of dawn Varuna , a sky god Eastern Asian [ edit ] Chinese [ edit ] Yu Huang Dadi- Jade Emperor (center) Ziwei Dadi- polestar emperor (north) Changsheng Dadi-longevity emperor (south) Qinghua Dadi-azure-illustrious emperor (east) Taiji Tianhuang Dadi-ultimate heaven emperor (west) Chang'e , moon goddess who lives with the moon rabbit Shang Di , the celestial emperor Tian or Heaven Xihe (deity) , sun goddess Zhinü , weaver of the clouds Xian , Taoist spirits associated with the sky and tian Japanese [ edit ] Amaterasu , goddess of the sun and the universe, ancestor of the emperors of Japan, and the most important deity in Shintoism .

Amenominakanushi , heavenly ancestral god.

Izanagi , creator of Japan and sky father .

Izanami , creator goddess of Japan with her husband; starts off as a sky goddess, but after she dies becomes a death/underworld/chthonic goddess.

Marici , Buddhist goddess of the heavens.

Tsukuyomi , god of the moon and brother of Amaterasu.

Korean [ edit ] Hwanin , sky god.

Hwanung , son of Hwanin.

Thai [ edit ] Phaya Thaen ( Thai : พญาแถน ), the king of heaven, the protagonist in a Rocket Festival Vietnamese [ edit ] Ông Trời , sky god in Vietnamese indigenous religion Ông Tử Vi , king of the stars Mẫu Cửu Trùng Thiên , she is the daughter of Ông Trời, the sister of the Mẫu Thượng Thiên, Mặt Trời, Mặt Trăng and also a goddess who rules the sky Mẫu Thượng Thiên , she is the daughter of Ông Trời and also one of the rulers of the sky Pháp Vân , cloud goddess Thần Mặt Trời , goddess of the sun, daughter of Ông Trời Thần Mặt Trăng , goddess of the moon, daughter of Ông Trời Hằng Nga , the goddess who lives on the moon with uncle Cuội and Moon Rabbit Western Asian [ edit ] Further information: Ancient Semitic religion Asherah , sky goddess and consort of El; after the rise of Yahweh, she may have become Yahweh's consort before she was demonized and the Israelite religion became monotheistic Baalshamin , "Lord of the Heavens" (cf. Armenian Barsamin ) El (god) , original sky god and sky father of the Semitic speakers (replaced by Yahweh among Israelites) Iranian [ edit ] Asmān , god of sky Māh , god of the moon Ohrmazd , sky father, the Great God Tīštar , god of Sirius star and Rainfall.

Xwarxšēd , god of the sun The Americas [ edit ] Haitian [ edit ] Badessy , Vodou loa associated with the sky.

Incan [ edit ] Chaska Coyllur , goddess of beauty, flowers and young maidens. Personification of planet Venus .

Chuqui Chinchay , incarnation of various stars and meteorological phenomena.

Coyllur , goddess of all the stars.

Illapa , god of the sky, atmospheric phenomena and war.

Inti , god of the Sun.

Kon , god of the wind and rain.

Kuychi , god of rainbows.

Pachakamaq , creator and sustainer god of all the universe.

Mama Killa , goddess of the Moon.

Viracocha , heavenly father and god creator of all that exists.

Inuit [ edit ] Anguta , sky father and psychopomp.

Ataksak , goddess of the sky.

Negafook , god of weather systems.

Torngarsuk , god of the sky.

Iroquoian [ edit ] Atahensic , Iroquois sky goddess who fell to Earth at the time of creation.

Lakota [ edit ] Anpao wichapi, the Morning Star spirit, bringer of knowledge and new beginnings Han, the spirit of night, representative of ignorance Wanbli Gleska, the Spotted Eagle spirit, usually regarded as Wakan Thanka Hanwi, the moon spirit of knowledge, feminine power, sometimes considered to be the wife of Wi Mahpiya Oyate, the Cloud People, also known as the Wichapi Oyate (Star People) Wohpe , the spirit of meteors or falling stars (often confused with Fallen Star), also the spirit of beauty, love, wishes, dreams, and prophecy Wakinyan , thunder spirit usually taking the form of a bird Wi , the sun spirit responsible for bringing light and wisdom to the Lakota oyate Wichapi oyate, the Star People, each having respective powers however they usually represent knowledge to some degree Wichapi Hinhpaya, the Fallen Star, the son of Wichapi owáŋžila and Tapun Sa Win Wichapi owáŋžila, the Resting Star or Polaris , the widower of Tapun Sa Win (Red Cheeked Woman) Lencans [ edit ] Itanipuca, sky father and god of celestial bodies Icelca, god of time and seasons Mayan [ edit ] Cabaguil , god of the sky.

Hunab Ku , sky father.

Tzacol , sky god and creator deity.

Puebloans [ edit ] Ápoyan Ta'chu, sky father in Zuni mythology Taíno mythology [ edit ] Yaya, supreme god in Taíno mythology Uto-Aztecan [ edit ] Citlalincue , goddess of the Milky Way Cipactonal , god of the daytime Oxomoco , goddess of nighttime Centzonmimixcoa , 400 gods of the northern stars Centzonhuitznahua , 400 gods of the southern stars Coyolxauhqui , goddess of the Moon Meztli , goddess of the Moon Tonatiuh , god of the Sun Tianquiztli , star goddesses (see the Pleiades ) Citlaltonac , god of male stars Citlalmina , goddess of female stars Citlaxonecuilli , goddess of Ursa Major Eototo , Hopi head kachina and sky father Australian [ edit ] Altjira , Arrernte creator and sky god.

Baiame , southeast Australian creator and sky god.

Bila (sun) , cannibalistic sun goddess.

Binbeal , god of rainbows.

Bunjil , Kulin creator and sky god.

Daramulum , one-legged emu sky god.

Numakulla , a pair of creator and sky gods.

Rainbow Serpent , creator god in many Aboriginal cultures associated with water, rain, and rainbows, though it also has a chthonic connection.

Burmese [ edit ] Akathaso , the spirits of the sky Etruscan [ edit ] Ani , primordial god of the sky identified with the Greek Uranus and Roman Caelus Tinia , god of the sky European [ edit ] Albanian [ edit ] Zojz , the sky-god Dielli , the Sun Hëna , the Moon Prende, Afër-dita , the dawn, Venus Baltic [ edit ] Auštaras , the god of the northeast wind Dievs , the god of the day-lit sky and the chief god in Latvian mythology Vejopatis , the god of the wind who guards the divine realm of Dausos Celtic [ edit ] Latobius , sky and mountain god equated with the Greek gods Zeus and Ares Nuada , god of the sky, wind, and war Sulis , goddess of the hot springs at Bath; probably originally the pan-Celtic sun goddess Ambisagrus , Cisalpine god of rain, sky and hail equated to the Roman god Jupiter Tuireann , Irish god of thunder and the sky, Gaulish name Taranis .

English [ edit ] Nuit , goddess of "Infinite Space and Infinite Stars" in Thelema Germanic [ edit ] Dagr , personification of day Eostre , spring and fertility goddess; originally the Germanic dawn goddess Mēnô , the moon Nótt , personification of night Sōwilō , the sun Teiwaz , early Germanic sky god, also the god of law, justice, and the thing (assembly) Thor , God of Sky, Strength and thunder, champion of the deities. Equated with Jupiter Greek [ edit ] Aether , primeval god of the upper air Apollo , god of the sun, archery, prophecy, medicine, plagues...

Artemis , goddess of the moon, hunt, virginity, childbirth...

Astraeus , dusk god Eos , dawn goddess Helios , personification/titan of the sun Hemera , primordial goddess of day Hera , goddess of the air, marriage, women, women's fertility, childbirth, heirs, kings, and empires Iris , goddess of the rainbow and messenger of Hera Nephele , cloud nymph in Hera's likeness Nyx , primordial goddess of night Selene , personification/titan of the moon Uranus , primeval god of the sky Zeus , king of the gods, ruler of Mount Olympus , god of the sky, weather, law, order, and civilization Messapian [ edit ] Zis , god of the sky Proto-Indo-European [ edit ] Dyeus , the chief sky father of the Proto-Indo-European religion Hausos , dawn goddess and daughter of Dyeus Menot, moon deity Sehul, sun deity Roman [ edit ] Aurora , dawn goddess Caelus , personification of the sky, equivalent to the Greek Uranus Juno , goddess of the sky, queen of the gods, and Jupiter's wife, equivalent to the Greek Hera Jupiter , king of heaven and god of the sky and weather, equivalent to the Greek Zeus Luna , moon goddess Nox, Roman version of Nyx, night goddess and mother of Discordia Sol , sun god Summanus , god of nocturnal thunder/lightning Slavic [ edit ] Dazhbog (or Svarog ), god of the Sun Khors , god of the Moon Stribog , god of the winds, sky, and air Perun , god of the thunderstorms, lightning and sky.

Triglav , a triple god whose three heads represent sky, earth, and underworld Zorya , goddess of dawn Thracian and Phrygian [ edit ] Sabazios , sky father Filipino [ edit ] Main article: List of Philippine mythological figures llanit: a group of Isnag sky dwellers who are helpful harvest spirits [ 4 ] Hurrian [ edit ] Hepit , goddess of the sky Teshub , god of the sky and storms Meitei/Sanamahism [ edit ] Further information: Meitei mythology and Sanamahism Apaknga (Lunar mansions) Chingcharoibi (G Geminorum) Chungshennubi (Cancer) Khongjom Nubi (Pleiades) Konthoujam Tampha Lairembi , queen of heaven Korouhanba , sky and sun god Likla Saphaba (Orion) Nongshaba , celestial dragon lion Nongthang Leima , thunder and lightning goddess Pakhangba , celestial dragon god Sachung Telheiba (A Orionis) Sajik (Arietis) Salailen (Soraren), father sky who help humans to build a civilisation Sidaba Mapu , the sky god and the Supreme Deity Taoroinai , heavenly dragon god Thaba (Musca) Thangching , ancestral God descended from the heaven Malagasy [ edit ] Zanahary , sky deity of Madagascar Māori [ edit ] Ao , god of light and the sky Ranginui , sky father Tāwhaki Being of thunder and lightning Tāwhirimātea God of weather, storms, thunder and lightning Tane-rore , personification of shimmering air Te Uira Personification of lightning Whaitiri Female Personification of Thunder Uenuku , god of rainbows Other Pacific Islanders [ edit ] Abeguwo , Melanesian sky goddess Amai-te-rangi , sky demon of Mangaia Atua I Kafika , supreme sky god of Polynesia Ira , Polynesian sky goddess Laufakana'a , Tongan creator god and sky father Tangaloa , Tongan sky god Sumerian [ edit ] Anshar , god of the sky Anu , king of the gods, associated with the sky, heaven, and constellations Enlil , god of breath, air, and wind Utu , god of the sun Uralic [ edit ] Finnic [ edit ] Ilmari , godlike smith-hero and creator of the sky.

Ilmatar , virgin spirit of the air [ 5 ] Ukko , supreme god of sky, weather, thunder, crops (harvest) and other natural things.

[ 6 ] Perkele , associated with Ukko by some researchers. A name for Devil in Finnish.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Taara , Oeselian chief god of thunder and the sky Mari [ edit ] Main article: Mari mythology Kugu Jumo, chief god of the sky, creator of the world, associated with a duck Tõlze, god of the moon Piambar, daughter of the sky Shudyr-Shamich, god of the stars Uzhara, god of the dawn Mordvin [ edit ] Värde-Škaj, Mokshan supreme god of the sky Niškepaz, Erzyan supreme god of the sky Kovava, Mokshan goddess of the moon Permic [ edit ] Inmar , Udmurt god of the heavens Jenmar, Komi sky and chief god, creator of the world, associated with the moose Sami [ edit ] Horagalles , Sami god of the sky, thunder and lightning, the rainbow, weather, oceans, lakes, human life, health and well-being.

[ 9 ] Mano, god of the moon Samoyedic [ edit ] Num, god of the sky Ugric [ edit ] Num-Toorum-Aś , Ob-Ugric supreme god and ruler of the kingdom of the sky in the north See also [ edit ] List of light deities List of lunar deities List of night deities List of solar deities Nature worship Sky father Water deity Wind deity References [ edit ] ^ Kearns, Emily (2011-12-15), "Chthonic Deities", The Homer Encyclopedia , Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd, doi : 10.1002/9781444350302.wbhe0296 , ISBN 978-1-4051-7768-9 , But the word "chthonic" is usually taken to refer principally to what is under the earth.

^ Buckler, John (2015-12-22), "Helicon", Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Classics , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.2979 , ISBN 978-0-19-938113-5 ^ El was identified with the obscure deity Yahweh in early Hebrew religion, ultimately giving rise to Hebrew monotheism by the 7th century BCE; according to the Hebrew Bible it was 7th-century Judean king Josiah who removed the statue of Asherah from the temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem. See also The Hebrew Goddess .

^ Vanoverbergh, M. (1941). The Isneg Farmer. Catholic Anthropologist Conference. Vol. III, No. 4.

^ The Kalevala: Epic of the Finnish People. Compiled by Elias Lönnrot. Translated by Eino Friberg (4th ed.). Otava Publishing Company. 1998.

ISBN 951-1-10137-4 .

^ Salo, Unto (1990).

Agricola's Ukko in the light of archeology. A chronological and interpretative study of ancient Finnish religion: Old Norse and Finnish religions and cultic place-names . Turku.

ISBN 951-649-695-4 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Miten suomalaiset kiroilivat ennen kristinuskoa?" . Retrieved 2015-12-27 .

^ Siikala, Anna-Leena (2012).

Itämerensuomalaisten mytologia . SKS.

^ Krohn, Kaarle (1906).

Lappische Beiträge zur germanischen Mythologie . Finnisch-Ugrische Forschungen 6.

v t e Lists of mythological figures By geography African Albanian Arabian Armenian Australian Aboriginal Aztec Balkan Basque Batak Canaanite Catalan Celtic List Chahta Chinese Efik Egyptian Index List Elamite Estonian Etruscan Finnish Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Greek Deities Mortals Mycenaean deities Guanche Haudenosaunee Hawaiian Hebridean Indian-origin religions Hindu List Rigvedic Buddhist China Japan Jain List Meitei List Sylhet Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Indonesian Inuit Irish Japanese Kassite Komi Korean Lakota Lithuanian Māori Māʻohi Maya Mesopotamian Micronesian Muskogee Myanmar Native American Zapotec Ossetian Persian Philippine Purépecha Roman Sami Samoan Slavic Turkic Tuvaluan Ugaritic Vainakh Yoruba By association Agriculture Art Beauty Chaos Dawn Creator Death Earth Fate and Time Fertility Fire Fortune Health Household Hunting King of the gods Knowledge Light Liminal Love and Lust Moon List Nations Nature Night Psychopomp Rain Resurrection Sky Smithing Sun List Thunder Tree Trickery List Tutelary Vegetation Volcano War Water Weather Wind Portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐4sd66
Cached time: 20250814215217
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.519 seconds
Real time usage: 0.670 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1382/1000000
Revision size: 20789/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 63862/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8395/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42108/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.337/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22416505/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  533.020      1 -total
 22.67%  120.815      1 Template:Reflist
 18.76%   99.996      1 Template:Langx
 17.71%   94.398      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 15.18%   80.919      1 Template:List_of_mythological_figures_by_region
 14.79%   78.853      1 Template:Navbox
 14.73%   78.501      2 Template:Citation
 13.86%   73.864      1 Template:Short_description
 12.34%   65.757      1 Template:Refimprove
 12.14%   64.703      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6007897:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215217 and revision id 1305626314. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sky_deity&oldid=1305626314 " Categories : Sky and weather deities Mythological archetypes Lists of deities Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from April 2015 All pages needing cleanup Wikipedia list cleanup from April 2015 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Thai-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 04:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sky deity 11 languages Add topic

