Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Film 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents New Rose Hotel 4 languages Español Italiano 日本語 Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Short story by William Gibson first published in 1984 This article is about the short story. For the 1998 film adaptation, see New Rose Hotel (film) .

"New Rose Hotel" Short story by William Gibson Omni , July 1984 Country Canada Language English Genre(s) Cyberpunk Publication Published in Omni Publication type Periodical Media type Print ( magazine , hardback and paperback ) Publication date 1984 Chronology Series Sprawl trilogy [ citation needed ] Hinterlands The Belonging Kind " New Rose Hotel " is a short story by William Gibson , first published in Omni in July 1984 and later included in his 1986 collection Burning Chrome .

"New Rose Hotel" presents a bleak future as extrapolated from contemporary economic and social trends. Set in the same period and universe as Gibson 's Sprawl trilogy , [ 1 ] it is solidly cyberpunk in its style and vision.

Plot [ edit ] The story is set in a future time when huge megacorporations have gained enough influence to control the economies of entire countries. Their wealth and competitive advantage stem from the human capital of their employees and the intellectual property they produce. Corporations jealously guard their most valuable employees and go to great expense to keep them safe and happily productive. There is little point in traditional corporate espionage , as new technologies are developed so quickly that stolen secrets soon become obsolete. Instead, the field has now evolved to the point of enticing valuable employees to switch their loyalty from one company to another and arranging for their escape ― a highly dangerous endeavor, given the tight security in place around such individuals.

Two male free-lance agents, Fox and the unnamed narrator, have been hired by the Japanese firm Hosaka to bring genetic researcher Hiroshi Yomiuri over from Maas Biolabs GmbH, a German rival. They bring in a third associate, a woman named Sandii, to seduce Hiroshi and persuade him to defect. The narrator begins a relationship with Sandii as the three arrange for Hiroshi's move to a secret laboratory in Marrakech , purchased by the narrator with Hosaka funds. On the night before the transfer is to take place, the narrator spends time with Sandii and finds an unlabeled computer disk in her purse, but disregards it.

Fox, Sandii, and the narrator orchestrate Hiroshi's disappearance from a street in Vienna and spirit him away to the Marrakech lab. Hosaka pays the three and erases all evidence of having done business with them; the two men fly to Japan and part ways with Sandii. The company sends its top researchers to the lab to meet with Hiroshi, only for everyone there to die or suffer permanent brain damage in a sudden outbreak of disease. Hosaka wipes out the bank accounts of Fox and the narrator, cuts off their business connections, and sends assassins to kill them, blaming them for the deaths. The two men flee, realizing that Sandii had secretly defected to Maas and reprogrammed Hiroshi's equipment to release the virus. Fox falls to his death after being pushed off a mezzanine railing, while the narrator goes into hiding at the titular New Rose Hotel, a run-down capsule hotel .

One week later, the narrator is still there, contemplating suicide, pining for Sandii while berating himself for overlooking the disk and her treachery, and waiting for Hosaka forces to arrive.

Film [ edit ] Director Abel Ferrara adapted the short story as a feature film, New Rose Hotel , released in 1998; the film scrupulously followed the plot of the short story.

[ 2 ] Fox is portrayed by Christopher Walken , Hiroshi is portrayed by Yoshitaka Amano , Sandii is portrayed by Asia Argento , and X is portrayed by Willem Dafoe .

References [ edit ] ^ Sterling, Bruce (1986). Preface.

Burning Chrome . By Gibson, William.

ISBN 978-1-473-21744-7 . p. 2: Gibson hit his stride with the Sprawl series: Johnny Mnemonic, New Rose Hotel, and the incredible Burning Chrome.

^ Shaviro, Steven (2003).

Connected, or, What It Means to Live in the Network Society . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. p.

153 .

ISBN 0-8166-4363-6 .

External links [ edit ] "New Rose Hotel" at the William Gibson Aleph v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series This article about a short story (or stories) published in the 1980s is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Rose_Hotel&oldid=1271123079 " Categories : 1981 short stories Cyberpunk short stories Short stories by William Gibson Sprawl trilogy Works originally published in Omni (magazine) 1980s short story stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 All stub articles This page was last edited on 22 January 2025, at 17:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New Rose Hotel 4 languages Add topic

