Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 1.1 Helitack 1.2 Helibase 1.3 Helispot 1.4 Drop point 2 Methodology 3 History 4 Crews 5 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 5.1 US classification system 5.2 Canadian classification system 5.2.1 Medium-lift helicopter 5.2.2 Light-lift helicopter 6 Incidents 7 Images 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Helitack Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Helicopter used to transport firefighters to fire zones a Bell 205A-1 and its helitack crew Helitack crews are teams of wildland firefighters who are transported by helicopter to wildfires . Helicopters provide rapid transport, enabling helitack crews to quickly respond and assess a wildfire situation. Helitack crews may land near a wildfire or, if equipped and trained, rappel from a hovering helicopter. Once on the ground, crews build firelines using hand tools, chainsaws, and other firefighting tools. They often remain overnight in remote locations. After they have completed their assignment, crew members may pack up to 120 pounds of equipment over difficult terrain to reach a pick-up point. Rappellers often prepare helispots (helicopter landing zones) that provide better access to a fire. Helicopter crew members may also perform other duties such as tree falling, firing operations, and managing helibases.

Terminology [ edit ] Helitack [ edit ] The term helitack first appeared in a 1956 Los Angeles Times article, which described the "first of a series of tests—tabbed the Helitack Program—on the use of helicopters in firefighting will start next week in the San Bernardino National Forest". The word itself is a portmanteau of "helicopter" and "attack".

[ 1 ] Helibase [ edit ] The incident helibase is the location from which incident helicopter support missions are flown, and where the helicopters assigned to that base are parked, serviced, and refueled.  Usually a helibase is in a field location that is close enough to the Incident Base Camp so that supplies and personnel can be ferried by ground to the helibase from the camp in a timely manner. More remote helibases (i.e., nearer the fire) can be established to maximize efficiency and reduce flight costs. Occasionally, helibases are located at a nearby airport or backcountry airstrip.  The name of the base is designated by the name of the incident, though on large fires there can be multiple helibases.  Helibases are staffed with a Helibase Manager, Deck Coordinator, Landing and Takeoff Coordinator, Aircraft Base Radio Operator, and numerous subsidiary positions operating in a Helibase Operations trailer or out on the landing pads. Crash rescue capability is usually assigned to the larger helibases. An "H" in a circle designates a helibase on an incident map.

[ 2 ] A Carson Helicopters S-61N Fire King being fueled during firefighting operations in Southern River, Western Australia Helispot [ edit ] "Helispot" is an American term for a location near a fire where it is safe for helicopters to land and take off. At this designated location, a helispot manager and usually a few helitack crewmembers will be onsite to coordinate landings and take-offs as well as the manifesting, loading and unloading of equipment and personnel. Helispots are temporarily located as the incident grows and can be found on ridges, meadows, parking lots – in short, any clearing suitable and meeting rotor clearance and hazard (wires, trees, etc.) avoidance requirements. Helispots are found on the incident map by filled in circles with the letters H-# next to it, the # designating what number it is.

[ 2 ] Helispots are approved by a pilot and a qualified helicopter manager before being used.

[ 3 ] Drop point [ edit ] A helicopter drop point, or drop point is similar to a helispot, but used for depositing, often via longline, and caching supplies. Helicopters and supply vehicles use the drop point to off-load supplies at the edge of an incident for the ground teams to come by and pick up. Drop points may be located all around the fire.

Wildland firefighters will usually pick up sharpened tools, pumps and hoses, water, food, radio batteries, etc. at the drop points.  On an incident map, the symbol for a drop point is a filled dot with the letters D-# next to them with the # designating which number is it.

[ 2 ] Methodology [ edit ] A helitack helicopter will launch with a crew on board, drop them in the vicinity of the fire (or "incident") where they will begin clearing a firebreak with standard hand tools, while the helicopter can then support the team with water drops, either with a Bambi bucket or airframe-mounted water tanks, or ferry in additional personnel (e.g., hotshot crews). If the fire continues to grow beyond the initial attack phase, the mission of the helitack crew shifts to a support role, locating and operating at helispots and helibases, where the coordination of the support required for other firefighting helicopters.

[ 4 ] In a situation where terrain or vegetation height make it impossible for a helicopter to land, helitack methodology can also employ rappellers, rappelling from a helicopter as high as 250 feet above the ground [ 4 ] or deplaning crews from a hovering helicopter (heli-jumping).

When backfires or "prescribed burns" are needed in remote areas, helitack helicopters can be used to start them, using a "helitorch", a driptorch suspended on a cable under the helicopter, or by dropping plastic sphere dispenser (PSD) ignition devices.

[ 5 ] In the event that a firefighter on the ground is injured, the helitack helicopter is used to evacuate the victim to a medical facility.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Helicopters were used in combating wildfires in California as early as 1947 and their usefulness at moving personnel rapidly around a fire was quickly recognized. Initially, helicopters were just used for tactical and logistical support for ground crews.

[ 5 ] In 1957 the Los Angeles County Fire Department experimentally used a Bell 47 to lay hoses using belly mounted trays.

[ 6 ] The first water bucket was probably developed by Jim Grady of Okanagan Helicopters working with Henry Stevenson, who owned a machine shop in Nelson, British Columbia . Development began in the mid-1950s and the "Monsoon Bucket" was operational in 1962. The bucket was a converted 45- imperial-gallon (205 L) drum with a trap door in the bottom that was actuated by the pilot in flight.

[ 7 ] In the early 1960s the California Division of Forestry (now known as CALFIRE) began water bucketing trials. Testing was also done on a 105-U.S.-gallon (400 L) water tank mounted on a Bell 47 .

US federal agencies, such as the BLM and the USFS also began contracting commercial helicopter services to assist in fighting wildfires on lands they were responsible for in the early 1960s.

[ 6 ] The California Department of Forestry began experimenting with helitack as a doctrinal concept in 1960, when a crew of three firefighters was deployed on an Alouette III helicopter.

Crews [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( July 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Crew sizes vary from base to base and agency to agency.

Helitack crews are often considered to be elite members of the firefighting community, partly because of the experience levels required to qualify as a crew member. CDF Captain Jim Barthol, in an interview with the San Diego Union-Tribune , used the analogy of runners in a race to compare helitack with other handcrews . He said that "ground-based hand crews are marathon runners, while helitack crews work more like sprinters. Other hand crews might spend three days or more fighting a fire, we might work three different incidents in one day. It doesn't necessarily make us better than those other guys. It just makes us different." [ 4 ] Much of the helitack crews' training centers on helicopter safety, as the crews typically load and unload with the rotors turning, and sometimes in very rough terrain, where only the skid on one side can be touched down.

[ 4 ] The minimum recommended physical fitness standards for helitack-rappelers set by the National Wildfire Coordinating Group are: packout 85 pounds for 3 miles within 90 minutes, run 1 1 ⁄ 2 -miles in 10:30 or less, 25 push-ups in 60 seconds, 45 sit-ups in 60 seconds, and 4 or more pull-ups.

[ 8 ] Equipment [ edit ] State Emergency Service of Ukraine (MChS) Mil Mi-8MTV picking up water near Nezhin A Bell 212 with a helicopter bucket S-64 Skycrane Helicopters used for helitack missions are usually utility helicopters , selected for both their lifting capability as well as their large cabin size to accommodate the helitack crew.

Some of the most common helicopter types are variants of the venerable UH-1 Huey , known in the civilian world as the Bell 205 , especially upgraded variants such as the 205A++ and the 210. The twin-engine Bell 212 is also popular. Other helicopters such as the Sikorsky S-58 are also used, and the S-70 Firehawk , a civilian version of the military's UH-60 Blackhawk , is now being operated by two agencies in the U.S.

Smaller helicopters, such as the Bell 206 JetRanger and AS350 Astar are sometimes used for precision water drops to protect specific structures, such as cabins or homes.

Larger water dropping helicopters such as the S-64 Skycrane , which can hold as much as 3,000 gallons [ vague ] , rivaling fixed-wing airtankers , are increasingly being used.  Only some of these larger rotorcraft have provisions for carrying ground crews, therefore may not always considered "helitack" aircraft in the true sense of the word.  Some Type I rotorcraft, such as the Boeing 234 , can carry up to 44 passengers in proper configuration.

[ 9 ] Water tanks are often permanently or semi-permanently mounted under the helicopter's belly, which can either be filled at a helispot via a hose from a fire engine, or with a "snorkel", a long hose with a water pump in its end that can suck water out of a lake or small tank set up by fire crews.

[ 4 ] The helitack crews use the same tools on the fire lines as other ground crews do, including chain saws, axes, shovels and a specialized, two-headed cutting tool known as a Pulaski .

US classification system [ edit ] In the U.S., helitack helicopters are designated by "type", as defined by the Interagency Helicopter Operations Guide , based on their capacities: [ 10 ] Type I II III Allowable payload, standard conditions 5,000 lb 2,500 lb 1,200 lb Passenger seats 15+ 9–14 4–8 Water/retardant 700 U.S. gallons 300 U.S. gallons 100 U.S. gallons Max takeoff/landing weights 12,501+ lb 6,000–12,500 lb less than 6,000 lb Canadian classification system [ edit ] Since forest protection is a provincial responsibility in Canada each province has its own system for classifying helicopters for contract use, setting equipment standards and for employing them.

A typical system is the one that was in use by Manitoba in 1996. The then-named Manitoba Department of Natural Resources established a stand-by system for all aircraft contracted for forest fire protection missions. This consisted of five levels of readiness, depending on the fire forecast and the time of day: Red Alert : Crews are at the base with the aircraft serviced, fueled and ready for immediate dispatch.

Yellow Alert : Crews can be contacted and be at the base within fifteen minutes. The aircraft is fuelled. Minor aircraft servicing is permitted. The aircraft must be airborne within 30 minutes of receiving the dispatch call.

Blue 1 : The crews can be contacted and the aircraft can be airborne within one hour of receiving a dispatch call. Routine servicing and maintenance of the aircraft are permitted.

Blue 2 : The crews can be contacted and the aircraft airborne within two hours of receiving a dispatch call. Routine servicing and maintenance of the aircraft are permitted.

Green :	Stand-down.

[ 11 ] At that time the Manitoba Department of Natural Resources classified contract helicopters in two classifications: Medium Lift Helicopter Light Lift Helicopter The province also sets equipment standards for these contract helicopters, which are similar to others used across Canada: Medium-lift helicopter [ edit ] VHF -AM Radio Communication Transceiver (118–136 MHz ).

VHF-FM "hi band" radio able to operate on the Department of Natural Resources' assigned frequencies (160–165 MHz) with dual tone multi-frequency encoding capability.

Crew intercom with four headsets and air to ground communications capability on VHF-AM and FM from at least both front seat locations.

Cargo hook Two 12-foot × 12-foot nets Two lanyards One barrel net.

320- imperial-gallon (1,450 L) capacity collapsible water bucket with foam injection capability.

Skid landing gear with bear paws.

Portable refuelling pump.

Global Positioning System [ 12 ] Light-lift helicopter [ edit ] VHF-AM Radio Communication Transceiver (118–136 MHz).

VHF-FM "hi band" radio able to operate on the Department of Natural Resources' assigned frequencies (160–165 MHz) with dual tone multi-frequency encoding capability.

Two head sets, intercom and air to ground communication.

Cargo hook Two slings or cargo nets.

Water bucket with instant deployment system.

High skid gear with bear paws.

Electrical plug with related 50- ampere circuit breaker suitable for use with Heli-Torch.

Model MS-3102A-16 Cannon plug with related 10 ampere circuit breaker conveniently located for use with provincial Aga 750 infrared scanning equipment.

Global Positioning System .

[ 12 ] Incidents [ edit ] July 6, 1994 - While fighting the South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, near Glenwood Springs , Colorado, two helitack firefighters and 12 other firefighters were killed as they tried to flee the fire after it "spotted" beyond the fireline and began to race up the steep, densely vegetated terrain towards them.

[ 13 ] September 13, 2004 – While fighting a fire in the Stanislaus National Forest in northern California , seven members of a CDF helitack crew were engulfed in the flames when the wind shifted in their direction. The gust lasted for no more than 30 seconds, but one firefighter was killed and several of the survivors were critically burned.

[ 4 ] Images [ edit ] Santa Barbara County hand crew and a Bell 212 on the Day Fire . USFS photo by Jim Akerman S-58T , callsign Helitack 169 , ready to head to a project fire, Dryden, Ontario 1995 Helitack 140 , a Bell 205A-1 and Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources firefighters working on Fire 141 in 1995 A Bell 204B , callsign Helitack 114 and Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources firefighters working on Fire 141 in 1995 Example of a helibase, this one at Weaverville, California , during the Bar Complex Fire. USFS Bell AH-1 Cobra nose is in the foreground LA County Fire S-70A Firehawk CDF Bell 205 from the Bieber Helitack crew Kern County Bell 205A++ Super Huey dropping water A Eurocopter Ecureuil dips its bucket into a swimming pool before returning to drop the water on a wildfire outside Naples, Italy Helitack 63 : A typical light helicopter used in fire fighting, this Bell 407 served with the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources during the 2007 fire season Plastic sphere dispenser on a Bell 206L LongRanger, on the Bar Complex Fire A video of a Bell 407 helicopter working with ground firefighters by dropping water from a bucket.

See also [ edit ] Helicopter bucket Glossary of wildland fire terms Wildland fire suppression References [ edit ] ^ "Fire-Fighting Copter Tests Start in Forest", Los Angeles Times , June 10, 1956, page A23, cited at the Double-Tongued Dictionary, accessed October 15, 2007 ^ a b c NIMS 3.04 ^ PMS 510.

"IHOG" (PDF) .

NWCG Standards for Helicopter Operations . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 22, 2019 . Retrieved September 22, 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d e f Gross, Gregory A. "Elite, mobile fire crew might soon be permanent here", San Diego Union-Tribune , November 16, 2004, accessed October 15, 2007 Archived October 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c "Helicopters: Multitasking aircraft", U.S. Department of Forestry ^ a b Smith, Barry D.: Fire Bombers in Action , pages 51–71. Motorbooks International Publishers, 1995.

ISBN 0-7603-0043-7 ^ Corley-Smith, Peter and David N. Parker: Helicopters in the High Country – 40 Years of Mountain Flying , page 50. Sono Nis Press, Victoria BC, 1995.

ISBN 1-55039-061-9 ^ Brian J. Sharkey, Ph.D.; Steven E. Gaskill, Ph.D. "Ch. 6".

Fitness and Work Capacity (PDF) (2009 ed.). National Interagency Fire Center, Boise, I D.: National Wildfire Coordinating Group. p. 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 19, 2018.

Helitack/Rappellers:: Pack Test: Req.; 3-Mile Packout Weight: Rec-85; 1.5-Mile Run time: Rec-10:30; 10 RM Leg Press: 2.5xBW; 10 RM Bench Press: 1.0xBW; Pullups: 4; Pushups: 25; Situps 45 ^ Aircraft Search Results Archived 2004-10-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ Interagency Helicopter Operations Guide , March 2006, Chapter 6 Archived 2007-10-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ Manitoba Department of Natural Resources, Operations Division, Fire Program: Pilot Briefing Handbook MG-2261 (rev 3.96) , page 23. Government of Manitoba, 1996 ^ a b Manitoba Department of Natural Resources, Operations Division, Fire Program: Pilot Briefing Handbook MG-2261 (rev 3.96) , page 33. Government of Manitoba, 1996 ^ "Fire Behavior Associated with the 1994 South Canyon Fire on Storm King Mountain, Colorado", U.S. Department of Agriculture External links [ edit ] Interagency Helicopter Operations Guide Archived 2015-07-20 at the Wayback Machine USFS aviation assets guides Officer.com article on helicopter firefighting v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Forestry tools and equipment Tree planting , afforestation Caulk boots Hoedad (hoedag) Groasis Waterboxx Mattock Pottiputki Root trainer Seed trap Tree planting bar (dibble bar) Tree shelter (Tuley tube) Tree spade Mensuration 3D scanner Angle gauge Biltmore stick Chain Cruising rod Diameter tape Hemispherical photography Inclinometer Increment borer Rangefinder laser Microtome Relascope Tree caliper Wedge prism Fire suppression Aerial firefighting DC-10 UAVs Driptorch Fire flapper Fire rake Fire retardant Helitack McLeod (rakehoe) Pulaski Axes Billhook Broadaxe Brush hook Froe (shake axe) Hatchet Labrys Log splitter Marking axe Splitting maul Tomahawk Saws Bow saw Bucksaw Chainsaw safety clothing safety features Crosscut saw Dragsaw Hacksaw Head saw Lumber edger Polesaw Portable sawmill Resaw Two-man saw Whipsaw Logging Cant hook Feller buncher Forwarder Go-devil Harvester Helicopter Log truck Lombard Steam Log Hauler Peavey Pickaroon Pike pole Skid cone Skidder Washington Winch Steam donkey Yarder swing Other Denailer Firewood processor Forest railway Forestry mulcher Hand compass Hand hook Hydraulic debarker Log house moulder Log pond Log flume Machete Stump grinder Chainsaw mill Tree tyer Tsakat Whoopie sling Wood-drying kiln Woodchipper Categories tools equipment Commons tools equipment WikiProject Forestry Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking v t e Helicopters and other rotorcraft Helicopters Articles Amphibious Attack Autorotation Backpack Disk loading Dynamics Flight controls Number of helicopters and heliports Manufacturers Military Rotor Rotor solidity Utility Wire strike protection system Lists Accidents and incidents Active Russian military Airlines Russian helicopter airlines NATO reporting names Prison escapes Ultralights U.S. Air Force squadrons U.S. military Other rotorcraft Articles Autogyro CarterCopter Juan de la Cierva Skyworks Global Piasecki Aircraft Fairey Rotodyne Gyrodyne Monocopter Rotor kite Lists Rotorcraft Manufacturers by country Most-produced Used in World War II Hazards Mast bumping and other hazards Dynamic rollover Ground resonance Loss of tail-rotor effectiveness Low-g condition Retreating blade stall Dynamic stall Vortex ring state Servo transparency Tailstrike Related Bamboo-copter Cyclogyro Helicopter height–velocity diagram Helitack Human-powered helicopter Ingenuity Mars helicopter Mars Sample Retrieval Helicopters Jesus nut List of aircraft Radio-controlled helicopter Search and rescue Transverse flow effect Aviation portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Helitack&oldid=1299621401 " Categories : Aerial firefighting Helicopters Incident management Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2022 Use American English from August 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2010 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 13:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Helitack Add languages Add topic

