Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Formation 1.3 Activities 2 Satellite missions 3 Director-Generals 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Swedish National Space Agency 15 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский کوردی Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swedish  Government organisation Swedish National Space Agency Formation 1972 Legal status Government Organisation Purpose Manage Swedish state-financed space activities Location Solna , Sweden Region served Sweden Director-General Ella Carlsson Budget 1.3 billion SEK [ 1 ] (2023) Staff 30 staff Website www.rymdstyrelsen.se The Swedish National Space Agency ( SNSA , Swedish : Rymdstyrelsen ) is a Government agency in Sweden operating under the Swedish Ministry of Education and Science . SNSA operates as a key component of the Swedish space programme, which is mostly carried out through international cooperation, and has included a sequence of satellite missions, both national ones and in cooperation with other nations. Furthermore, the agency distributes government grants to research and development, initiates research and development in space and remote sensing , and acts as the Swedish contact in international cooperative efforts.

By the 2010s, it had a yearly budget of approximately 900 Mkr (100 M€), about 70% of which being used to support various programmes performed by the European Space Agency (ESA) that had been deemed to be of importance to Sweden.

[ citation needed ] As of 2018, SNSA comprised a total of 30 permanent employees, the majority operating from its office in the Solna Municipality of Stockholm , Sweden.

[ 2 ] Rymdstyrelsen changed its English name from the Swedish National Space Board to the Swedish National Space Agency in 2018.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Background [ edit ] The nation of Sweden's space activities predate the establishment of SNSA by several decades; a key early milestone was the founding of the Kiruna Geophysical Observatory (KGO) during July 1957, which had been preceded by over a decade of appeals and negotiations by members of the Swedish scientific community.

[ 4 ] Even prior to the KGO's establishment, it had been recognised that Sweden was geographically well-positioned for numerous space-related activities, including the observation of atmospheric phenomenon such at the aurora borealis , due to its relatively mild climate in relation to its proximity to the Arctic Circle . The KGO attracted numerous international scientists, and acted as a gateway to further collaborative efforts, including space-based activities.

[ 4 ] In 1959, the Swedish Space Research Committee (SSRC) was founded to pursue three primary objectives: the development of a national space programme, to ensure Swedish engagement with international projects, and to handle a prospective launch site for sounding rockets .

[ 4 ] Almost immediately upon its creation, the committee begun negotiations to participate in the newly created European Space Research Organisation (ESRO), in line with its second objective. However, this ambition was somewhat complicated due to the committee's lack of executive authority, and the Swedish government's wider policy ambitions of stringent non-alignment , although the concept of some level of European cooperation was politically palatable.

[ 4 ] Accordingly, while Sweden did sign the ESRO Convention during June 1962, membership of the European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO) was spurned; these decisions were as much motivated by political and industrial factors as they were by scientific ones.

[ 4 ] During August 1961, the launching of sounding rockets commenced at the Vidsel Test Range . The endeavor has taken advantage of an offer from the United States to launch European research satellites at no cost, although the project did ultimately require financing by both the Swedish Space Research Committee and the Swedish National Defence Research Institute (FOA).

[ 4 ] Numerous such launches proceeded from Vidsel over the following years and decades.

[ 4 ] The ESRO also established Esrange as one of its scientific sites and launched its first rocket during November 1966; this move was met with expressions of concern by the Soviet Union of the location's potential militarisation. This pressure contributed to Sweden's push for complete transparency of its space-based operations.

[ 4 ] Formation [ edit ] By the mid-1960s, Sweden's space activities were being conducted by a series of different institutions and entities, leading to increasing confusion and calls for its reorganisation.

[ 4 ] Such reorganisation did occur, but not with any urgency. During the early 1970s, Sweden restarted its national sounding-rocket programme, benefiting from a considerable drop in price over the previous decade and funding for the endeavour from the FOA. There was also considerations of Sweden's potential take over of operations at Estrange from the ESRO, although sufficient funding for such ambitions was lacking.

[ 4 ] The committee recognised that there was a clear need for a centralised agency for Sweden's space activities, although there was some dispute as to its programme's contents.

[ 4 ] While the pursuit of independence was viewed positively, there was also a great deal of support for the ELDO's activities. As a consequence of the ESRO's reorganisation into the European Space Agency (ESA), it was decided that a central Swedish authority, the Swedish National Space Board, would be created with full authority for the policy and planning of space-based activities, which were divided into two categories: space research and space applications.

[ 4 ] This was enacted, along with the takeover of the Estrange location, during July 1972.

[ 4 ] While the Swedish National Space Board acted as the administrative authority, operations were conducted by the Swedish Space Corporation , a state-owned entity that was responsible at a system level and subcontracted out activities to industry.

[ 4 ] In its early years of operation, the efforts of the board were on three distinct areas: research, application, and remote sensing. In practice, the research and application focuses largely mirrored on another. After only a few years, the board's activities were subsequently regrouped along national boundaries.

[ 4 ] It largely focused upon negotiating with international organisations, primarily the ESA, over prospective Swedish participation in various projects, and the application of funding to suitable endeavours.

[ 4 ] Activities [ edit ] A key milestone of Sweden's space activities was its first satellite , named Viking .

[ 5 ] Work on Viking commenced in January 1978 and benefitted greatly from substantial increases to Sweden's space budget during the early 1980s. While initially intended as a collaborative effort with the Soviet Union, plans to use a Soviet launcher was abandoned in favour of the ESA's Ariane 1 in September 1979.

[ 5 ] The satellite platform, which was constructed by Boeing , was delivered to Saab during December 1982 for further manufacturing. On 22 February 1986, Viking was successfully launched from the ESA's Guiana Space Centre , it spent numerous years exploring plasma processes in the Earth's magnetosphere and the ionosphere prior to being decommissioned.

[ 5 ] Another particularly high-profile event was the launch of the first Swedish astronaut , Christer Fuglesang , into space during December 2006.

[ 4 ] This feat was accomplished through cooperation with multiple international entities, Fuglesang having been selected by the ESA in 1992 for a flight assignment and undergone training in Russia and the United States prior to his flight on the Space Shuttle . Fuglesang's activities on the International Space Station was met with heavy coverage by Sweden's media, and led to a spike in attention to other Swedish space activities.

[ 4 ] In February 2013, a government audit was released by the Swedish National Audit Office ; amongst its conclusions, it observed that "Swedish space investment is distributed among multiple organizations that operate as stovepipes with no real communication between them and no common ambition." [ 6 ] While approximately 1 billion Swedish krona (US$158 million) was being spent each year on Swedish space initiatives by this time, the audit report calls for additional oversight by the Swedish government of the European Space Agency (ESA), along with a review of the Swedish Space Corporation 's operations and purpose.

[ 6 ] Satellite missions [ edit ] Viking (1986−1987), to explore plasma processes in the magnetosphere and the ionosphere Freja (1992−1996), a second space physics mission Astrid 1 (1995), microsatellite for space physics Astrid 2 (1998–1999), microsatellite for space physics Odin (2001−present), Swedish-Canadian-Finnish-French satellite for astronomy and atmospheric chemistry Prisma (2010−present), technology test of constellation flight Mats (2019), investigating atmospheric waves [ 7 ] Director-Generals [ edit ] Years Name 1972−1979 Hans Håkansson 1979−1989 Jan Stiernstedt 1989−1998 Kerstin Fredga 1998−2009 Per Tegnér 2009−2018 Olle Norberg 2018–2024 Anna Rathsman 2024–present Ella Carlsson See also [ edit ] List of government space agencies Swedish Space Corporation Esrange Swedish Institute of Space Physics European Space Agency Government agencies in Sweden References [ edit ] ^ "Swedish National Space Agency" .

^ "Contact us - Rymdstyrelsen" .

www.rymdstyrelsen.se . Retrieved 12 June 2018 .

^ "Home - Rymdstyrelsen" .

www.rymdstyrelsen.se . Retrieved 12 June 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Wormbs, Nina and Gustav Källstrand (December 2017).

"A Short History of Swedish Space Activities" (PDF) .

European Space Agency .

^ a b c Matignon, Louis de Gouyon (9 June 2019).

"Viking, the first Swedish satellite" . spacelegalissues.com.

^ a b "Report Calls for Sweeping Rethink of Swedish Space Spending" .

Space News . 14 February 2013 . Retrieved 22 March 2013 .

^ "MATS Satellite - Rymdstyrelsen" .

www.rymdstyrelsen.se . Retrieved 12 June 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation Authority control databases International ISNI Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swedish_National_Space_Agency&oldid=1279626799 " Categories : Government agencies of Sweden Science and technology in Sweden Space programme of Sweden Military of Sweden Space agencies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Swedish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 17:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Swedish National Space Agency 15 languages Add topic

