Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Quantifying absorption 2 Measuring absorption 3 Applications 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Absorption (electromagnetic radiation) 35 languages العربية বাংলা བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Light absorption ) Physical process by which matter takes up a photon's energy and stores it This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An overview of absorption of electromagnetic radiation . This example shows the general principle using visible light as a specific example. A white light source —emitting light of multiple wavelengths —is focused on a sample (the pairs of complementary colors are indicated by the yellow dotted lines). Upon striking the sample, photons that match the energy gap of the molecules present (green light in this example) are absorbed , exciting the molecules. Other photons are scattered (not shown here) or transmitted unaffected; if the radiation is in the visible region (400–700 nm), the transmitted light appears as the complementary color (here red). By recording the attenuation of light for various wavelengths, an absorption spectrum can be obtained.

In physics , absorption of electromagnetic radiation is how matter (typically electrons bound in atoms ) takes up a photon 's energy —and so transforms electromagnetic energy into internal energy of the absorber (for example, thermal energy ).

[ 1 ] A notable effect of the absorption of electromagnetic radiation is attenuation of the radiation; attenuation is the gradual reduction of the intensity of light waves as they propagate through a medium.

Although the absorption of waves does not usually depend on their intensity (linear absorption), in certain conditions ( optics ) the medium's transparency changes by a factor that varies as a function of wave intensity, and saturable absorption (or nonlinear absorption) occurs.

Quantifying absorption [ edit ] Main article: Mathematical descriptions of opacity Many approaches can potentially quantify radiation absorption, with key examples following.

The absorption coefficient along with some closely related derived quantities The attenuation coefficient (NB used infrequently with meaning synonymous with "absorption coefficient") [ citation needed ] The Molar attenuation coefficient (also called "molar absorptivity"), which is the absorption coefficient divided by molarity (see also Beer–Lambert law ) The mass attenuation coefficient (also called "mass extinction coefficient"), which is the absorption coefficient divided by density The absorption cross section and scattering cross-section , related closely to the absorption and attenuation coefficients, respectively "Extinction" in astronomy , which is equivalent to the attenuation coefficient Other measures of radiation absorption, including penetration depth and skin effect , propagation constant , attenuation constant , phase constant , and complex wavenumber , complex refractive index and extinction coefficient , complex dielectric constant , electrical resistivity and conductivity .

Related measures, including absorbance (also called "optical density") and optical depth (also called "optical thickness") All these quantities measure, at least to some extent, how well a medium absorbs radiation. Which among them practitioners use varies by field and technique, often due simply to the convention.

Measuring absorption [ edit ] The absorbance of an object quantifies how much of the incident light is absorbed by it (instead of being reflected or refracted ). This may be related to other properties of the object through the Beer–Lambert law .

Precise measurements of the absorbance at many wavelengths allow the identification of a substance via absorption spectroscopy , where a sample is illuminated from one side, and the intensity of the light that exits from the sample in every direction is measured. A few examples of absorption are ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy , infrared spectroscopy , and X-ray absorption spectroscopy .

Applications [ edit ] Rough plot of Earth's atmospheric transmittance (or opacity) to various wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, including visible light Understanding and measuring the absorption of electromagnetic radiation has a variety of applications.

In radio propagation , it is represented in non-line-of-sight propagation . For example, see computation of radio wave attenuation in the atmosphere used in satellite link design.

In meteorology and climatology , global and local temperatures depend in part on the absorption of radiation by atmospheric gases (such as in the greenhouse effect ) and land and ocean surfaces (see albedo ).

In medicine , X-rays are absorbed to different extents by different tissues ( bone in particular), which is the basis for X-ray imaging .

In chemistry and materials science , different materials and molecules absorb radiation to different extents at different frequencies, which allows for material identification.

In optics , sunglasses, colored filters, dyes, and other such materials are designed specifically with respect to which visible wavelengths they absorb, and in what proportions they are in.

In biology , photosynthetic organisms require that light of the appropriate wavelengths be absorbed within the active area of chloroplasts , so that the light energy can be converted into chemical energy within sugars and other molecules.

In physics , the D-region of Earth's ionosphere is known to significantly absorb radio signals that fall within the high-frequency electromagnetic spectrum.

In nuclear physics, absorption of nuclear radiations can be used for measuring the fluid levels, densitometry or thickness measurements.

[ 2 ] In scientific literature is known a system of mirrors and lenses that with a laser "can enable any material to absorb all light from a wide range of angles." [ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Absorption spectroscopy Albedo Attenuation Electromagnetic absorption by water Hydroxyl ion absorption Optoelectronics Photoelectric effect Photosynthesis Physical crystallography before X-rays Solar cell Spectral line Total absorption spectroscopy Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy References [ edit ] ^ Baird, Christopher S. (September 2019).

"Absorption of electromagnetic radiation" .

AccessScience . McGraw-Hill.

doi : 10.1036/1097-8542.001600 . Retrieved 17 June 2023 .

^ M. Falahati; et al. (2018). "Design, modelling and construction of a continuous nuclear gauge for measuring the fluid levels".

Journal of Instrumentation .

13 (2): 02028.

Bibcode : 2018JInst..13P2028F .

doi : 10.1088/1748-0221/13/02/P02028 .

S2CID 125779702 .

^ "Anti-laser enables near-perfect light absorption" .

Physics World . August 31, 2022.

Thomas, Michael E. (January 2006).

Optical Propagation in Linear Media: Atmospheric Gases and Particles, Solid-State Components, and Water . Oxford University Press, USA. pp. 3... (Chapter 1, 2, 7).

Bibcode : 2006oplm.book.....T .

ISBN 978-0-19-509161-8 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ProfHoff, Ken Mellendorf; Vince Calder (November 2010).

"Reflection and Absorption" .

Physics Archive - Ask a scientist .

Argonne National Laboratory . Archived from the original on 2010-11-21 . Retrieved 2010-11-14 .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Absorption_(electromagnetic_radiation)&oldid=1286520271 " Categories : Scattering, absorption and radiative transfer (optics) Electromagnetic radiation Glass physics Radiation Spectroscopy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 CS1 errors: periodical ignored This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 11:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Absorption (electromagnetic radiation) 35 languages Add topic

