Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable exponents 2 Contemporary thought 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Historism 20 languages العربية Български Dansk Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Саха тыла Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 19th-century philosophy originating in Germany This article is about historism as a philosophical and historiographical theory on historicity and awareness of the past. For the similarly used term historicism, see Historicism . For the method of interpreting the biblical apocalypse, see Historicism (Christian eschatology) . For a school of art and architecture, see Historicism (art) .

For the belief that events in history are entirely determined by prior forces, see Historical determinism .

Part of a series on Conservatism in Europe Ideologies Christian democracy Christian right Counter-revolution Counter-enlightenment Integralism Liberal conservatism Economic Ordo Monarchism New Right Nouvelle Droite One-nation conservatism Perennialism Postliberalism Radical conservatism Toryism Principles Chivalry Christian values Civilizational impact Protestant work ethic Cultural heritage Culture of life Pro-Life Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnofuturism Ethnic pluralism Europe of 100 Flags Familialism Gender roles Complementarianism Law and order Medievalism Monarchism Royalism Opposition to immigration Ordered liberty Organicism Paideia Pan-European identity Euroscepticism Nationalist Federalist Patriotism Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty State religion Subsidiarity Tradition Metamodern Western values Occidentalism Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Haller Chateaubriand Coleridge Savigny Carlyle Newman Tocqueville Cortés Taine Le Bon Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Gini Schmitt Jünger Evola Röpke Oakeshott Voegelin Lefebvre Eliade Kuehnelt-Leddihn Fouéré Koselleck Ye'or Scruton Hitchens Dugin Peterson Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Christianity or Europe (1799) Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1798) The Genius of Christianity (1802) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) The Concept of the Political (1932) " The Peace " (1943) The Death of the West (2001) While Europe Slept (2006) Reflections on the Revolution in Europe (2009) We Are Doomed (2009) How to Be a Conservative (2014) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Politicians Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Salazar De Gaulle Franco von Coudenhove-Kalergi Powell von Habsburg Thatcher Kohl Fortuyn Putin Orbán Wilders Meloni Organizations Center for European Renewal Centrist Democrat International Edmund Burke Stichting European Conservatives Group and Democratic Alliance European Democrats Europe of Sovereign Nations Group Europe of Sovereign Nations (party) European Conservatives and Reformists Group European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party European People's Party Group International Monarchist League Libertas.eu The Movement Movement for European Reform NatCon Patriots for Europe Pegida Stop Islamisation of Europe Media The European Conservative EU Le Figaro (Fr) ' Nouvelle École (FR) ' NZZ (CH) Personal variants Berlusconism Bonapartism Cameronism Fortuynism Francoism Gaullism Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Putinism Sarkozysm Thatcherism National variants Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Russia Serbia Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Historical background Ancien Régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment Counter-revolution German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related topics Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Demographic futures Eurabia Great Replacement Population decline Sub-replacement fertility Educational inflation Elite overproduction Historism Intelligence and public policy Managerial state Metapolitics Movements Counter-jihad Men's movement Men's rights Multiculturalism and Islam Muslim immigration ban Remigration Conservatism portal Politics portal Europe portal v t e Historism ( Italian : storicismo ) is a philosophical and historiographical theory, founded in 19th-century [ 1 ] Germany (as Historismus ) and especially influential in 19th- and 20th-century Europe . In those times there was not a single natural, humanistic or philosophical science that would not reflect, in one way or another, the historical type of thought (cf.

comparative historical linguistics etc.).

[ 1 ] It pronounces the historicity of humanity and its binding to tradition.

Historist historiography rejects historical teleology and bases its explanations of historical phenomena on sympathy and understanding for the events, acting persons, and historical periods . The historist approach takes to its extreme limits the common observation that human institutions (language, Art, religion, law, State) are subject to perpetual change.

[ 2 ] Historism is not to be confused with historicism , [ 3 ] nevertheless the English habits of using both words are very similar. (The term historism is sometimes reserved to identify the specific current called Historismus in the tradition of German philosophy and historiography.) [ 2 ] Notable exponents [ edit ] Notable exponents of historism were primarily the German 19th-century historians Leopold von Ranke [ 4 ] and Johann Gustav Droysen , [ 5 ] 20th-century historian Friedrich Meinecke , [ 6 ] and the philosopher Wilhelm Dilthey .

[ 7 ] Dilthey was influenced by Ranke.

[ 8 ] The jurists Friedrich Carl von Savigny and Karl Friedrich Eichhorn were strongly influenced by the ideas of historism and founded the German Historical School of Law . The Italian philosopher, anti-fascist [ 9 ] and historian Benedetto Croce [ 10 ] and his British colleague Robin George Collingwood [ 11 ] were important European exponents of historism in the late 19th and early 20th century. Collingwood was influenced by Dilthey.

[ 8 ] [ 12 ] Ranke's arguments can be viewed as an antidote to the lawlike and quantitative approaches common in sociology and most other social sciences .

[ 13 ] The principle of historism has a universal methodological significance in Marxism .

[ 1 ] : 127 The essence of this principle, in brief, is: not to forget the underlying historical connection, to examine every question from the standpoint of how the given phenomenon arose in history and what principal stages this phenomenon passed through in its development, and, from the standpoint of its development, to examine what the given thing has become today.

— Vladimir Lenin, The State: A Lecture Delivered at the Sverdlov University [ 14 ] Contemporary thought [ edit ] 20th-century German historians promoting some aspects of historism are Ulrich Muhlack , Thomas Nipperdey and Jörn Rüsen .

[ citation needed ] The Spanish philosopher José Ortega y Gasset was influenced by historism.

[ citation needed ] Criticism [ edit ] Because of the power held on the social sciences by logical positivism , historism or historicism is deemed unpopular.

[ 15 ] Georg G. Iggers is one of the most important critical authors on historism. His book The German Conception of History: The National Tradition of Historical Thought from Herder to the Present , first published in 1968 (by Wesleyan University Press , Middletown, Ct.) is a "classic” [ 16 ] among critiques of historism.

Another critique is presented by the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche , whose essay Vom Nutzen und Nachteil der Historie für das Leben ( On the Use and Abuse of History for Life , 1874 ) denounces “a malignant historical fever”. Nietzsche contends that the historians of his times, the historists, damaged the powers of human life by relegating it to the past instead of opening it to the future. For this reason, he calls for a return, beyond historism, to humanism.

[ 17 ] Karl Popper was one of the most distinguished critics of historicism. He differentiated between both phenomena as follows: The term historicism is used in his influential books The Poverty of Historicism and The Open Society and Its Enemies to describe “an approach to the social sciences which assumes that historical prediction is their primary aim, and which assumes that this aim is attainable by discovering the 'rhythms' or the 'patterns', the 'laws' or the 'trends' that underlie the evolution of history”.

[ 18 ] Popper wrote with reference to Hegel 's theory of history , which he criticized extensively. By historism on the contrary, he means the tendency to regard every argument or idea as completely accounted for by its historical context, as opposed to assessing it by its merits.

Historism does not aim for the 'laws' of history, but premises the individuality of each historical situation.

On the basis of Popper's definitions, the historian Stefan Berger proposes as a proper word usage: I deliberately use the term ‘historism’ (and ‘historist’) rather than ‘historicism’ (and ‘historicist’). Whereas ‘historism’ (in German : Historismus ), as represented by Leopold von Ranke , can be seen as an evolutionary, reformist concept which understands all political order as historically developed and grown, ‘historicism’ ( Historizismus ), as defined and rejected by Karl Popper, is based on the notion that history develops according to predetermined laws towards a particular end. The English language, by using only one term for those different concepts, tends to conflate the two. Hence I suggest using two separate terms in analogy to the German language.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Heinrich Rickert Historical school of economics Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Spirkin, Alexander (1990), Fundamentals of Philosophy.

, translated by Syrovatkin, Sergei, Moscow : Progress Publishers , ISBN 978-5-01-002582-3 , retrieved 15 January 2011 First published in 1988, as “Основы философии” {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) ^ a b Boudon, Raymond ; Bourricaud (1989).

"Historicism" .

A Critical Dictionary of Sociology .

Routledge . p. 198.

ISBN 9780415017459 .

^ Historicism in the sense given to it by Karl Popper, namely the search for historical laws.

^ Beiser 2011, p. 366.

^ Colin Cheyne, John Worrall (eds.), Rationality and Reality: Conversations with Alan Musgrave , Springer 2006, p. 266.

^ Beiser 2014, p. 133.

^ Koslowski 2006, p. 4.

^ a b Wallace and Gach 2008, p. 27 .

^ Chiarini, Roberto (2008).

L'intellettuale antisemita (in Italian). Marsilio. p. 94.

ISBN 978-88-317-9635-4 .

BENEDETTO CROCE. Il filosofo napoletano fu l'unico grande intellettuale a prendere pubblicamente posizione in Italia contro le concezioni razziste e contro le persecuzioni antiebraiche attuate dal nazismo e dal fascismo, in scritti e interventi pubblicati sulla sua rivista « La Critica » e su organi di stampa stranieri.

[Translated: BENEDICT CROSS.  The Neapolitan philosopher was the only great intellectual to publicly take a position in Italy against racist conceptions and against the anti-Jewish persecutions implemented by Nazism and Fascism, in writings and interventions published in his review "La Critica" and in foreign press organs.

] ^ Robin Headlam Wells, Glenn Burgess, Rowland Wymer (eds.), Neo-historicism: Studies in Renaissance Literature, History, and Politics , Boydell & Brewer Ltd, 2000, p. 3.

^ Collingwood himself used the term "historicism"—a term he apparently coined—to describe his approach—for example in his 'Ruskin's Philosophy', lecture delivered to the Ruskin Centenary Conference Exhibition, Coniston, Cumbria (see Jan van der Dussen, History as a Science: The Philosophy of R.G. Collingwood , Springer, 2012, p. 49)—, but some later historiographers describe him as a proponent of "historism," in accordance with the current meaning of the term in English (see F. R. Ankersmit, Sublime Historical Experience , Stanford University Press , 2005, p. 404).

^ David Naugle, "R. G. Collingwood and the Hermeneutic Tradition" , 1993.

^ Wallace and Gach 2008, p. 14 .

^ Lenin, V. I.

(1972).

Collected Works . Vol. 29. Moscow: Progress Publishers . p. 473.

^ Morera, Esteve (1990).

Gramsci's Historicism: A Realist Interpretation .

Routledge . p. 11.

ISBN 9780415035408 .

^ Berger 2001, p. 24.

^ Friedrich Nietzsche: On the Use and Abuse of History for Life , first published 1874, translated 1909.

^ Karl Popper, The Poverty of Historicism , Routledge, 1993, p. 3 (italics in original).

^ Stefan Berger, " Stefan Berger responds to Ulrich Muhlack ". In: Bulletin of the German Historical Institute London, Volume XXIII, No. 1, May 2001, pp. 21–33, here p. 28f. (italics in original).

References [ edit ] Georg G. Iggers, The German Conception of History: The National Tradition of Historical Thought from Herder to the Present , 2nd rev. edn., Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, Ct., 1983, ISBN 0-8195-6080-4 .

Stefan Berger , Stefan Berger responds to Ulrich Muhlack . In: Bulletin of the German Historical Institute London, Volume XXIII, No. 1, May 2001, pp. 21–33 (contemporary debate between a historism-critic and a historism-supporting historian).

Frederick C. Beiser , The German Historicist Tradition , Oxford University Press, 2011.

Frederick C. Beiser , After Hegel: German Philosophy, 1840-1900 , Princeton University Press, 2014.

Wallace, Edwin R. and Gach, John (eds.), History of Psychiatry and Medical Psychology: With an Epilogue on Psychiatry and the Mind-Body Relation , Springer, 2008.

Peter Koslowski (ed.), The Discovery of Historicity in German Idealism and Historism , Springer, 2006.

v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historism&oldid=1303247764 " Categories : Historiography Philosophy of history Hidden categories: CS1 maint: postscript CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 22:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historism 20 languages Add topic

