Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and influences 2 Victorian fairy painting 3 Modern revival 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fairy painting 3 languages Français Русский 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Victorian painting genre and movement Fairy painting is a genre of painting and illustration featuring fairies and fairy tale settings, often with extreme attention to detail, seen as escapism for Victorians. The genre is most closely associated with Victorian painting in the United Kingdom and has experienced a contemporary revival, led with noted examples by Brian Froud and Alan Lee .

Origins and influences [ edit ] Titania and Bottom . Oil on canvas by Henry Fuseli, c . 1790 Despite its whimsical appearance, fairy painting is strongly rooted in the literary and theatrical influences of Romanticism and the cultural issues facing the Victorian era. Among the most significant of these influences were the fantasy themes of Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night's Dream and The Tempest . Other literary works, such as Edmund Spenser 's The Faerie Queene and Alexander Pope 's mock-heroic The Rape of the Lock , have been cited as contributing influences as well.

[ 1 ] Innovations in stage production helped bring these works to the public eye, as the development of gaslight and improvements in wire-work led to increasingly elaborate special effects. Once described by Douglas Jerrold as "a fairy creation that could only be acted by fairies", [ 2 ] productions of A Midsummer Night's Dream became more common, eventually leading to an 1863 spectacle featuring Ellen Terry as Titania astride a mechanical mushroom.

[ 3 ] A portrait of a fairy, by Sophie Gengembre Anderson (1869). The title of the painting is Take the Fair Face of Woman, and Gently Suspending, With Butterflies, Flowers, and Jewels Attending, Thus Your Fairy is Made of Most Beautiful Things – from a verse by Charles Ede.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Cultural changes were also an important factor during this period. Continuing industrialization was uprooting longstanding traditions, and rapid advances in science and technology, especially the invention of photography , left some people discomforted and confused. According to Jeremy Maas , the turn to mythological and fantasy elements, and in particular to the fairy's world, allowed an escape from these demands. "No other type of painting concentrates so many of the opposing elements of the Victorian psyche: the desire to escape the drear hardships of daily existence; the stirrings of new attitudes toward sex, stifled by religious dogma; a passion for the unseen; the birth of psychoanalysis; the latent revulsion against the exactitude of the new invention of photography." [ 6 ] The significance of fairy paintings as a reaction to cultural change is not universally accepted, however. "Ultimately," Andrew Stuttaford wrote, "these paintings were just about fun." [ 7 ] Victorian fairy painting [ edit ] The Fairy Feller's Master-Stroke . Oil on canvas by Richard Dadd 1855–1864.

The Captive Robin by John Anster Fitzgerald , c.1864 The earliest artists considered to have contributed to the genre predate much of Romanticism and the Victorian era.

Henry Fuseli and William Blake produced works that would be indicative of the later genre even before 1800.

[ 8 ] The artist most closely associated with fairy painting was outsider artist Richard Dadd , who was suspected to have schizophrenia and produced most of his work while incarcerated in the Bethlem psychiatric hospital for the murder of his father.

[ 9 ] Despite his status and condition, his fantastic subjects and extraordinarily detailed style were generally well-received, with one period reviewer describing his work as "exquisitely ideal".

[ 10 ] He accompanied his masterpiece, The Fairy Feller's Master-Stroke , which he painted from 1855 to 1864, with an elaborate poem which provides historical, literary, or mythological context to each of the depicted characters.

[ 11 ] Fairy painting was not exclusively the domain of outside art. The work of John Anster Fitzgerald debuted at London's Royal Academy . His work, a series of Christmas-themed fairy illustrations, received wider public visibility in the Illustrated London News . The Scottish artist Joseph Noel Paton exhibited two immensely detailed paintings, The Quarrel of Oberon and Titania and The Reconciliation of Titania and Oberon , based on the popular fairy scenes of A Midsummer Night's Dream . Even Edwin Landseer , sometimes named " Victoria 's favourite artist", produced a painting of Titania and Bottom in the genre's style, his Scene from A Midsummer Night's Dream .

[ 7 ] The genre also influenced the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood and the movement it began. Co-founder John Everett Millais produced a series of fairy paintings based on The Tempest , ending with his 1849 work Ferdinand Lured by Ariel .

[ 12 ] Dante Gabriel Rossetti , another of the Brotherhood's initial members, took a more sensual approach to the subject, in both painting and poetry.

[ 13 ] Others involved with the movement, such as Arthur Hughes and William Bell Scott , also contributed to the genre.

The Cottingley Fairies briefly revived interest in fae subjects, before the waning of Romanticism and the advent of World War I reduced interest in the styles and topics popular during the Victorian era. The illustrated fairy-tale books of Arthur Rackham are considered its "final flowering".

[ 8 ] Modern revival [ edit ] The interest in fantasy art and literature since the 1970s has seen a revival in the topics and styles of Victorian fairy painting, often in novel contexts. While artists such as Stephanie Pui-Mun Law have produced genre illustrations for book covers and role-playing games , the works of Brian Froud , also known for a series of illustrated fairy books, have been adapted into several successful motion pictures including The Dark Crystal (1982) and Labyrinth (1986). The concept design work of Alan Lee and John Howe for The Lord of the Rings (film series) (2001–03), for which the former won an Oscar, would change popular perceptions of the depiction of fairy cultures. The 2003 book, The Art of Faery , written by David Riche and mentored by Froud, contributed to the careers of twenty fairy artists of this revival movement, including Amy Brown, Myrea Pettit, Jasmine Becket-Griffith , Philippe Fernandez, James Browne, and Jessica Galbreth, many of whom went on to author individual art books. Depictions of fae have made their way into popular culture in other ways, including clothing designs, ceramics, figurines, needlecraft, figurative art, and quilting, many marketed through Hot Topic to an international market online. Part of the growth in popularity over the past three decades is due to the New Age Movement .

Renaissance fairs and science fiction conventions have also developed modern fairy art as a genre of collectibles .

References [ edit ] ^ "Victorian Fairy Painting from the Frick Collection" . Antiques and the Arts Online. Archived from the original on 4 February 2007 . Retrieved 10 January 2007 .

^ Phelps, W. May; John Forbes-Robertson (1886).

The Life and Life-Work of Samuel Phelps . Sampson Low, Marston, Searle & Rivington.

^ Wells, Stanley (2000).

Shakespeare in the Theatre: An Anthology of Criticism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-871176-6 .

^ Zaczek, Iain (2005).

Angels & fairies . Internet Archive. London : Flame Tree. p. 52.

ISBN 978-1-84451-264-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Royal Society of British Artists (1869).

"Annual exhibition. No. 46" . p. 17.

^ Maas, Jeremy (1997).

Victorian Fairy Painting . Merrell Holberton.

ISBN 978-0-900946-58-5 .

^ a b Stuttaford, Andrew (31 December 1998). "Feywatch".

National Review .

^ a b "Fairy Painting" .

Tate Glossary . Tate Collection . Retrieved 10 January 2008 .

^ Allderidge, Patricia (1974).

The Late Richard Dadd, 1817–1886 . Tate Gallery.

ISBN 978-0-900874-79-6 .

^ "Etched Thoughts by the Etching Club".

Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine (346). August 1844.

^ MacGregor, John (1989).

The Discovery of the Art of the Insane . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-04071-0 .

^ Bennett, Mary (August 1984). "An Early Drawing for 'The Tempest' by Everett Millais".

Burlington Magazine (126).

^ Treuherz, Jan, Liz Prettejohn and Edwin Becker (24 November 2003).

Dante Gabriel Rossetti . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-09316-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] Media related to Paintings of fairies at Wikimedia Commons v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Álfheimr Changeling Elfshot Elves in fiction Middle-earth Fairy godmother Fairy-lock Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale List Fairy Tale (color) Familiar Genius loci Household deity Hungry grass Nature spirit Sacred trees and groves Celtic Germanic Tutelary deity Water spirit Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Attested fairies A–E Adhene Aibell Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clíodhna Clurichaun Coblynau Colt pixie Cyhyraeth Drude Duende Duergar Dullahan Dunnie Each-uisge Elf Alp Dökkálfar and Ljósálfar Elegast Erlking Half-elf Huldufólk Queen of Elphame Svartálfar F–L Fachan Fairy Queen Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Finvarra Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Hag Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hinzelmann Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joan the Wad Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Klabautermann Korrigan Lady of the Lake Lazy Laurence Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Lutin Ly Erg M–Z Mare Margot the fairy Meg Mullach Melusine Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Moss people Nain Rouge Nelly Longarms Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Nisse Nixie Nuckelavee Nuggle Oberon Peg Powler Pillywiggin Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Rå Bergsrå Hulder Radande Sjörå Skogsrå Redcap Schrat Sebile Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sleih beggey Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Titania Tomte Tooth fairy Trow Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wicked fairy Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Xana Yallery Brown Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Bogeyman Crone Demon Humanoid Little people Merfolk Mermaid Merman UFO Vampire Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Simbi Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Anchimayen Caipora Canotila Chaneque Christmas elf Chullachaqui Curupira Encantado Fastachee Fearsome critters Grey alien Hopkinsville Goblins Ishigaq Jogah Little green men Muki Nimerigar Nordic alien Nûñnë'hï Pombero Pukwudgie Saci Trauco Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Dokkaebi Fallen angel Fox spirit Hồ ly tinh Huli jing Huxian Inari Ōkami Kitsune Kumiho Hyang Irshi Jinn Ifrit Kijimuna Korpokkur Mazzikin Mogwai Mrenh kongveal Orang bunian Peri Preta Hungry ghost Tennin Yaksha / Yakshini Yōkai Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Menehune Mimis Muldjewangk Nawao Patupaiarehe Ponaturi Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Eastern Bannik Căpcăun Domovoy Iele Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Lidérc Likho Ovinnik Polevik Rübezahl Rusalka Samodiva Sânziană Siren Spiriduș Ursitory Vadleany Vâlvă Vântoase Vodyanoy Zână Northern Aitvaras Ajatar Badb Black dog Ent Gabija Gremlin Haltija Headless Horseman Hiisi Hobbit Jack Frost Jimmy Squarefoot Lauma Menninkäinen Morgan Le Fay Pictish Beast Troll Tuatha Dé Danann Southern Basajaun Centaur Cercopes Circe Dionysus Doñas de fuera Farfadet Faun Hecate Hippocampus Kallikantzaros Kobalos Lamina Mairu Mouro Enchanted Moura Nymph List Pan Satyr Silenus Siren Squasc Thiasus Trenti Vila Western Dames blanches Dusios Dwarf Imp Lorelei Perchta Venus in German legend Vittra Witte Wieven / Weiße Frauen Cross-regional Christmas gift-bringer Santa Claus Companions of Elemental Fates Goblin Gnome Ogre Salamander Sandman Wild man See also List of hybrid creatures in folklore List of beings referred to as fairies Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fairy_painting&oldid=1289973389 " Categories : Victorian culture Illustration Fantasy art Art based on fairy tales Fairies in art Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fairy painting 3 languages Add topic

