Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Logic 2.2 Natural history 2.3 History 2.4 Literature 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Phaenias of Eresus 16 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 4th-century BC Greek philosopher Phaenias of Eresus ( Ancient Greek : Φαινίας ὁ Ἐρέσιος , Phainias ; also Phanias (Φανίας)) was a Greek philosopher from Lesbos , important as an immediate follower of and commentator on Aristotle . He came to Athens about 332 BCE, and joined his compatriot, Theophrastus , in the Peripatetic school . His writings on logic and science appear to have been commentaries or supplements to the works of Aristotle and Theophrastus. He also wrote extensively on history. His works have only survived in fragments quoted by other authors.

Life [ edit ] Phaenias was born in Eresos in Lesbos . He was the friend and fellow-citizen of Theophrastus , a letter of whose to Phaenias is mentioned by Diogenes Laërtius .

[ 1 ] He came to Athens around 332 BCE, [ 2 ] and joined Theophrastus in the Peripatetic school . He was the most distinguished disciple of Aristotle , after Theophrastus. He wrote upon every department of philosophy, as it was studied by the Peripatetics, especially logic , botany , history, and literature.

Philosophy [ edit ] Logic [ edit ] We have little information concerning his works on logic . He seems to have written commentaries and supplements to the works of Aristotle , which eventually became eclipsed by the writings of the master himself. In a passage of Ammonius [ 3 ] we are told that Eudemus , Phaenias, and Theophrastus wrote, in emulation of their master, Categories and De Interpretatione and Analytics . There is also an important passage respecting ideas , preserved by Alexander of Aphrodisias , from a work of Phaenias, Against Diodorus , [ 4 ] which may possibly be the same as the work Against the Sophists , from which Athenaeus cites a criticism on certain musicians.

[ 5 ] Natural history [ edit ] A work On Plants is repeatedly quoted by Athenaeus, and frequently in connection with the work of Theophrastus on the same subject, to which, therefore, it may have been a supplement.

[ 6 ] The fragments quoted by Athenaeus are sufficient to give us some notion of the contents of the work and the style of the writer. He seems to have paid special attention to plants used in gardens and otherwise closely connected with humans ; and, in his style, we trace the exactness and the care about definitions which characterize the Peripatetic school .

History [ edit ] Phaenias is spoken of by Plutarch , who quotes him as an authority, [ 7 ] as "a philosopher well read in history." He wrote a sort of chronicle called Prytaneis Eresioi , the second book of which is quoted by Athenaeus.

[ 8 ] It was either a history of his native place or a general history of Greece arranged according to the period of the Eresian magistracy. He also concerned himself with the history of the tyrants , upon which he wrote several works. One of these was called On the Tyrants in Sicily .

[ 9 ] Another was entitled On Killing Tyrants for Revenge , in which he appears to have discussed further the question touched upon by Aristotle in his Politics .

[ 10 ] We have several quotations from this work, and among them the story of Antileon and Hipparinus who killed the tyrant of Herakleia .

[ 11 ] Literature [ edit ] Concerning literary history two works of Phaenias are mentioned. In On Poets , which is quoted by Athenaeus, [ 12 ] he seems to have paid particular attention to the Athenian musicians and comedians.

On the Socratic philosophers , is twice referred to by Diogenes Laërtius .

[ 13 ] Phaenias of Eresus was also among the first to make systematic collections towards a Greek musical history. His treatise and others, now lost, were key sources for compilers in Imperial times, such as Athenaeus and pseudo-Plutarch, and ultimately supplied much material for the late lexicons . "Such compilations reflect the Greek cosmopolitanism, with its more generalized forms of language, literature, art and music, which was the hallmark of the Hellenistic age ." [ 14 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Diogenes Laërtius, v. 37; Schol. in Apollon. i. 972; Strabo, xiii.

^ Suda s.v.

Phanias , comp. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata , i.

^ Ammonius Hermiae, ad Categ. p. 13; Schol. Arist. p. 28, a. 40, ed. Brandis ^ Schol. Arist. p. 566, a. ed. Brandis ^ Athenaeus, xiv.

^ Athenaeus, ii., ix.

^ Plutarch, Themistocles, 13 ^ Athenaeus, viii.; comp. Eustathius, p. 35, 18; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata , i.; Plutarch, Solon , 14, 32, Themistocles , 1, 7, 73; Suda, Phaenias ; Athenaeus, ii.

^ Athenaeus, i., vi.

^ Aristotle, Politics , v. 8, 9, etc.

^ Athenaeus, iii., x.; Parthenius, Erotica Pathemata , 7.

^ Athenaeus, viii.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, ii. 65, vi. 8 ^ Franklin 2001 References [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Phanias ".

Hellmann, Oliver & Mirhady, David (eds.).

Phaenias of Eresus. Text, Translation and Discussion , New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 2015. (RUSCH XIX).

John Curtis Franklin, Dictionaries of music 2001 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phaenias_of_Eresus&oldid=1293357408 " Categories : 4th-century BC births 4th-century BC Greek philosophers Metic philosophers in Classical Athens Ancient Eresians Hellenistic-era philosophers in Athens Peripatetic philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2014 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM with no wstitle or title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 07:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phaenias of Eresus 16 languages Add topic

