Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Term and controversy 2 Development 3 The Franco-Flemish motet 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Franco-Flemish School 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Galego Հայերեն Igbo Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Franco-Flemish ) Style of vocal music This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Franco-Flemish School" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Renaissance music Overview Composers / Transition to Baroque Movements and schools Burgundian Franco-Flemish English Votive Colorist Florentine Camerata Roman Venetian English Virginalist English Madrigal Major figures Du Fay Binchois Ockeghem Busnois Tinctoris Josquin Tallis Zarlino Palestrina Lasso Byrd Victoria Monteverdi Major forms Anthem Chanson Madrigal Mass Motet ← Medieval music Baroque music → v t e The designation Franco-Flemish School , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] also called Netherlandish School , Burgundian School , Low Countries School , Flemish School , Dutch School , or Northern School , refers to the style of polyphonic vocal music composition originating from France and from the Burgundian Netherlands in the 15th and 16th centuries as well as to the composers who wrote it. The spread of their technique, especially after the revolutionary development of printing , produced the first true international style since the unification of Gregorian chant in the 9th century. Franco-Flemish composers mainly wrote sacred music , primarily masses , motets , and hymns .

Term and controversy [ edit ] Several generations of Renaissance composers from the region loosely known as the Low Countries (Imperial and French fiefs ruled in personal union by the House of Valois-Burgundy in the period from 1384 to 1482)—i.e. present-day Northern France , Belgium and the Southern Netherlands —are grouped under "Franco-Flemish School", though a teacher-student-relationship between them rarely existed. Most of these musicians were born in the thriving Burgundian provinces of Artois , Flanders , Brabant , Hainaut , or Limburg . Others were born in Northern and Southern France, like Guillaume Faugues , Simone de Bonefont and Antoine Brumel who was one of the most influential composers of his generation. During periods of political and economic stability, the courts of the Burgundian dukes were a centre of cultural activity in Europe.

Franco-Flemish composers had their origins in ecclesiastical choir schools such as at the cathedrals and collegiate churches of Saint-Quentin , Arras , Valenciennes , Douai , Bourges , Liège , Tournai , Cambrai , Mons , Antwerp , Bruges , and Ghent , although they were famous for working elsewhere. Numerous musicians established themselves in French court or moved to the European courts in Italy where they were called "I fiamminghi" or Oltremontani ("those from over the Alps") and Spain —notably in the Flemish chapel (capilla flamenca) of the Habsburgs , or to towns in Germany , and other parts of Europe—Poland, the Czech lands, Austria, Hungary, England, Sweden, Denmark, Saxony—carrying their styles with them. The exact centres shifted during this time, and by the end of the sixteenth century the focal point of the Western musical world had moved from the Low Countries to Italy.

To conclude, let us recall that the expression "Franco-Flemish" and the more biased one of "Dutch school" are still controversial among musicologists. They were not in use at that time and seem to cover only part of the linguistic, political, territorial and historical reality.

Development [ edit ] Following are five groups, or generations, that are sometimes distinguished in the Franco-Flemish/Netherlandish school.  Development of this musical style was continuous, and these generations only provide useful reference points.

The First generation (1420–1450), dominated by Jean Tapissier , Guillaume Du Fay , Gilles Binchois and Antoine Busnois ; this group of composers is most often known as the Burgundian School . The origins of the style of the first generation embraces both earlier Burgundian traditions and also Italian and English styles. For example, in 1442, the poet Martin le Franc praised Binchois and Dufay for following Dunstaple in adopting the contenance angloise ("English character").

The Second generation (1450–1485), with Ockeghem as its main exponent, others including Orto , Compère , Prioris , Agricola , Caron , Faugues , Regis and Tinctoris .

The Third generation (1480–1520): Jean Mouton , Obrecht , de la Rue , Isaac , Brumel , Févin , Pipelare , Richafort , Divitis , and most significantly Josquin des Prez .

The Fourth generation (1520–1560): Gombert , Phinot , Crecquillon , Manchicourt , Arcadelt , Rore , Willaert , Courtois , Clemens non Papa and Bonefont.

The Fifth generation (1560–1615/20): Lasso , de Monte , Vaet , Regnart , Luython , Wert , de Macque , Claude Goudimel and Rogier .  By this time, many of the composers of polyphonic music were native to Italy and other countries:  the Netherlandish style had naturalized on foreign soil, and become a true European style.

The Franco-Flemish motet [ edit ] Composed between 1450 and 1520, these motets were typically written for four voices, with all voices being equal. They often exhibit thick, dark textures, with an extended low range. The most notable composers of this style include Ockeghem and Josquin , whose De profundis clamavi ad te , composed between 1500 and 1521, provides a good example.

See also [ edit ] Classical music portal Category:Franco-Flemish composers References [ edit ] ^ Ammer 2004 .

^ Broekema 1978 , 273.

^ Chase 2003 , 13.

^ D'Epiro and Pinkowish 2001 , 253–254.

^ Gillespie 1965 , 27.

^ Gleeson and Becker 1988 , 106–111.

^ Karp 2007 .

^ Lundberg 2012 , 59.

^ Porter 1986 , 190.

^ Wright and Fallows 2001 .

Sources Ammer, Christine. "Flemish School".

The Facts on File Dictionary of Music , fourth edition. New York: Facts on File, Inc.

ISBN 9780816052660 .

Broekema, Andrew J. 1978.

The Music Listener . Dubuque: W. C. Brown Company.

ISBN 9780697034007 .

Chase, Robert. 2003.

Dies Irae: A Guide to Requiem Music . Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-4664-7 .

D'Epiro, Peter, and Mary Desmond Pinkowish. 2001.

Sprezzatura: Fifty Ways Italian Genius Shaped the World . New York: Anchor Books.

ISBN 0-385-72019-X .

Gillespie, John. 1965.

Five Centuries of Keyboard Music . Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc.

Gleeson, Harold, and Warren Becker. 1988.

Music in the Middle Ages and Renaissance , third edition. Music Literature Outline Series 1. [S.l.]: Frangipani Press.

ISBN 0-88284-379-6 .

Karp, Theodore. 2007. " Franco-Netherlandish School ".

Encyclopaedia Britannica , online edition (accessed 12 January 2018).

Lundberg, Mattias. 2012.

Tonus Peregrinus: The History of a Psalm-Tone and Its Use in Polyphonic Music . Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing Limited; Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-1-4094-0786-7 .

Porter, Steven. 1986.

Music: A Comprehensive Introduction: A Complete Music Appreciation Course . New York: Excelsior Music Publishing Co.

ISBN 0-935016-81-3 .

Wright, Craig, and David Fallows. 2001. "Burgundy".

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell . London: Macmillan Publishers.

Further reading [ edit ] Gut, Serge. 1968. "A propos des polyphonistes de la Renaissance : franco-flamand ou néerlandais".

Revue du nord .

A History of Music and Musical Style , by Homer Ulrich & Paul Pisk (1963). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

ISBN 0-15-537720-5 .

Volledige namenlijst van alle polyfonisten uit de Nederlanden (1400–1600) [Complete List of Names of Polyphonists from the Netherlands born between 1400 and 1600].

v t e Composition schools American Five Ars antiqua Ars nova Ars subtilior Bologna Boston Boston Six Burgundian Cologne Colorist Darmstadt English Madrigal English Pastoral English Virginalist English Votive Franco-Flemish Frankfurt Group Ears Open Society Generación del 51 Giovane scuola Grupo de los ocho Grupo de los cuatro Grupo de renovación musical Grupo renovación Khrennikov's Seven Manchester Mannheim The Mighty Five Neapolitan New German New Jewish Neue Einfachheit Ny Enkelhed New York Notre Dame Oeldorf Group Roman Saint Martial Les Six Sonic Arts Union The Turkish Five Venetian Viennese Viennese preclassicism [ de ] First Second Vox Saeculorum Wandelweiser West Coast v t e Franco-Flemish School 1st generation Guillaume Du Fay Gilles Binchois Antoine Busnois Johannes Pullois 2nd generation Alexander Agricola Loyset Compère Firminus Caron Guillaume Faugues Johannes Ockeghem Marbrianus de Orto Johannes Prioris Johannes Regis Johannes Tinctoris 3rd generation Antoine Brumel Antonius Divitis Antoine de Févin Heinrich Isaac Jean Mouton Jacob Obrecht Matthaeus Pipelare Josquin des Prez Jean Richafort Pierre de la Rue 4th generation Jacques Arcadelt Jacobus Clemens non Papa Thomas Crecquillon Nicolas Gombert Pierre de Manchicourt Cipriano de Rore Adrian Willaert 5th generation Orlando di Lasso Carolus Luython Giovanni de Macque Philippe de Monte Jacob Regnart Philippe Rogier Jacobus Vaet Giaches de Wert v t e Renaissance music List of Renaissance composers Early (1400–1470) Alexander Agricola Gilles Binchois Antoine Busnois Loyset Compère Guillaume Du Fay John Dunstaple Walter Frye Heinrich Isaac Jean Japart Johannes Martini Johannes Ockeghem Leonel Power Johannes Tinctoris Gaspar van Weerbeke Oswald von Wolkenstein Middle (1470–1530) Martin Agricola Antoine Brumel Thomas Crecquillon Antonius Divitis Costanzo Festa Antoine de Févin Clément Janequin Cristóbal de Morales Jean Mouton Jacob Obrecht Josquin des Prez Pierre de la Rue John Taverner Philippe Verdelot Adrian Willaert Late (1530) Jacques Arcadelt William Byrd Antonio de Cabezón Jacobus Clemens Andrea Gabrieli Nicolas Gombert Claude Goudimel Francisco Guerrero Claude Le Jeune Orlando di Lasso Vicente Lusitano Pierre de Manchicourt Hans Neusidler Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina Costanzo Porta Cipriano de Rore Thomas Tallis Christopher Tye Tomás Luis de Victoria Giaches de Wert Mannerism and Transition to Baroque c.1600 Gregorio Allegri Thomas Campion John Cooper John Dowland Girolamo Frescobaldi Alfonso Fontanelli Giovanni Gabrieli Carlo Gesualdo Orlando Gibbons Hans Leo Hassler Alonso Lobo Luzzasco Luzzaschi Giovanni de Macque Luca Marenzio Claudio Monteverdi Thomas Morley Jacopo Peri Michael Praetorius Philippe Rogier Heinrich Schütz Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck Composition schools Burgundian Colorists English Madrigal School English Virginalist School English Votive Style Florentine Camerata Franco-Flemish Roman Venetian Musical forms Carol Intermedio Madrigal Magnificat Mass Offertory Pavane Traditions British Cyprus Elizabethan France Germany Italy Netherlands Poland Portugal Spain Music publishing Hieronymus Andreae Andrea Antico Pierre Attaingnant Vittorio Baldini Jacob Bathen Valerio Dorico Antonio Gardano Ottaviano Petrucci Petrus Phalesius the Elder Girolamo Scotto Tielman Susato Thomas Vautrollier Background Early music Renaissance Art Architecture Dance Literature Philosophy ← Medieval music Baroque music → Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Franco-Flemish_School&oldid=1300527246 " Categories : Composition schools Renaissance music Renaissance in the Low Countries Culture of Wallonia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Interlanguage link template forcing interwiki links This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 21:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Franco-Flemish School 25 languages Add topic

