Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career Toggle Career subsection 1.1 United States 2 Medieval foresters 3 Notable foresters 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Forester 18 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bikol Central Deutsch Eesti Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person who practices forest management For other uses, see Forester (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Forester" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Foresters of Southern University of Chile in the Valdivian forests of San Pablo de Tregua, Chile .

A forester is a person who practises forest management and forestry , the science, art, and profession of managing forests . Foresters engage in a broad range of activities including ecological restoration and management of protected areas . Foresters manage forests to provide a variety of objectives including direct extraction of raw material , outdoor recreation , conservation, hunting and aesthetics. Emerging management practices include managing forestlands for biodiversity , carbon sequestration and air quality.

Foresters work for the timber industry , government agencies, conservation groups , local authorities, urban parks boards, citizens' associations, and private landowners . The forestry profession includes a wide diversity of jobs, with educational requirements ranging from college bachelor's degrees to PhDs for highly specialized work.

Industrial foresters plan forest regeneration starting with careful harvesting. Urban foresters manage trees in urban green spaces . Foresters work in tree nurseries growing seedlings for woodland creation or regeneration projects. Foresters improve tree genetics . Forest engineers develop new building systems. Professional foresters measure and model the growth of forests with tools like geographic information systems . Foresters may combat insect infestation, disease, forest and grassland wildfire , but increasingly allow these natural aspects of forest ecosystems to run their course when the likelihood of epidemics or risk of life or property are low. Increasingly, foresters participate in wildlife conservation planning and watershed protection. Foresters have been mainly concerned with timber management, especially reforestation ,  forests at prime conditions, and fire control.

Many people confuse the role of the forester with that of the logger , but most foresters are concerned not only with the harvest of timber, but also with the sustainable management of forests. The forester Jack C. Westoby remarked that "forestry is concerned not with trees, but with how trees can serve people".

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Forester Glenn Casamassa, U.S. Forest Service Regional Forester in the Pacific Northwest Region The median salary of foresters in the United States was $53,750, in 2008.

[ 2 ] Beginning foresters without bachelor's degrees make considerably less. Those with master's degrees are able to command salaries closer to the average. The Council for Higher Education Accreditation considers the Society of American Foresters as the principal accreditor for academic degree programs in professional forestry, both at a Bachelor's and Master's level.

[ 3 ] Usually a bachelor's degree is considered the minimum education required, but some individuals are able to secure a job without a college education based on their experience.  Some states have a licensing requirement for foresters, and most of those require at least a four-year degree.

Foresters are often employed by private industry, federal and state land management agencies, or private consulting firms.

[ 4 ] Medieval foresters [ edit ] Forester was a title used widely during Medieval times. The forester usually held a position equal to a sheriff or local law enforcer, and he could act as a barrister or arbiter. He was often based in a forester's lodge , and was responsible for patrolling the woodlands on a lord or noble's property, hence the synonymous term 'woodward'. His duties included negotiating sales of lumber and timber and stopping poachers from illegally hunting. Frequently outlaws would take refuge in heavily wooded regions. When this occurred it was the duty of the forester to organize armed posses to capture or disperse the criminals and during war time foresters were used as scouts to spy on enemy troop movement.
The pay and status of foresters was usually above average, [ 5 ] reflecting the responsibility of their role in a medieval environment and economy.

Notable foresters [ edit ] Margaret Stoughton Abell (1908–2004) - First American research forester in US Forest Service.

Dietrich Brandis (1824–1907) Ralph E. Brock (1881–1959), first Black forester in the United States John Ednie Brown (1848–1899) Aimo Cajander (1879–1943) - Professor of forestry and Director-General of Forest and Park Service in Finland.

Carl von Carlowitz (1645–1714) - Father of sustainable yield forestry Geoffrey Chaucer (1343–1400) Hugh Francis Cleghorn (1820–1895) Jean-Baptiste Colbert (1619–1683) John Evelyn (1620–1706) Bernhard Fernow (1851–1923) Douglas Hamilton (1820–1895) Georg Ludwig Hartig (1764–1837) Ralph Hosmer (1874–1963) Jens Hvass Norman Jolly (1882–1954) Charles Lane Poole (1885–1970) Aldo Leopold (1887–1948) Michel de Montaigne (1533–1592) ["Man of essays and wood"] John Muir (1838–1914) ["Father of  National Parks"] Herman von Nördlinger (1818–1897) Gifford Pinchot (1865–1946) Christian Ditlev Frederik Reventlow (1748–1827) Roy Robinson, 1st Baron Robinson (1883–1952) Viktor Schauberger (1885–1958) Carl A. Schenck (1868–1955) Sir William P.D. Schlich (1840–1925) F.X. Schumacher (1892–1967) Richard St. Barbe Baker (1889–1982) Global Forester/Environmentalist Israel af Ström (1778–1856) Michael Taylor (b. 1966) - American Forester who discovered Hyperion (tree) and many tall redwood trees.

T. B. Walker (1840–1928) Jack C. Westoby (1913–1988) [ 6 ] Peter Wohlleben - German forester.

Raphael Zon (1874–1956) Frank H. Wadsworth (1915–2022) See also [ edit ] Trees portal Arborist List of forest research institutes List of forestry universities and colleges Reeve (England) Society of American Foresters Institute of Chartered Foresters Verderer References [ edit ] ^ Westoby, Jack (1987).

The Purpose of Forests: Follies of Development . Oxford: Basil Blackwell. p. xii.

ISBN 0631171436 . Retrieved 27 December 2020 .

^ [1] Archived November 6, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ "COUNCIL FOR HIGHER EDUCATION ACCREDITATION" (PDF) .

www.chea.org . 2015.

^ "Choose forestry" (PDF) .

Society of American Foresters . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2022-11-11 .

^ "Medieval Occupations" . Retrieved 9 March 2015 .

^ Leslie, Alf. 1989. "Obituary: Jack C. Westoby, C.M.G., 1913-1988," New Zealand Forestry , August, p.28.

Archived 2014-09-29 at the Wayback Machine Accessed: May 7, 2012.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Foresters .

SAF Accredited Professional Forestry Degree Programs SAF Recognized Forest Technology Degree Programs Center for International Forestry Research International Union of Forest Research Organizations FAO Forestry Department Archived 2006-02-19 at the Wayback Machine The National Forest (England) Forestry Commission (Great Britain) v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Forestry tools and equipment Tree planting , afforestation Caulk boots Hoedad (hoedag) Groasis Waterboxx Mattock Pottiputki Root trainer Seed trap Tree planting bar (dibble bar) Tree shelter (Tuley tube) Tree spade Mensuration 3D scanner Angle gauge Biltmore stick Chain Cruising rod Diameter tape Hemispherical photography Inclinometer Increment borer Rangefinder laser Microtome Relascope Tree caliper Wedge prism Fire suppression Aerial firefighting DC-10 UAVs Driptorch Fire flapper Fire rake Fire retardant Helitack McLeod (rakehoe) Pulaski Axes Billhook Broadaxe Brush hook Froe (shake axe) Hatchet Labrys Log splitter Marking axe Splitting maul Tomahawk Saws Bow saw Bucksaw Chainsaw safety clothing safety features Crosscut saw Dragsaw Hacksaw Head saw Lumber edger Polesaw Portable sawmill Resaw Two-man saw Whipsaw Logging Cant hook Feller buncher Forwarder Go-devil Harvester Helicopter Log truck Lombard Steam Log Hauler Peavey Pickaroon Pike pole Skid cone Skidder Washington Winch Steam donkey Yarder swing Other Denailer Firewood processor Forest railway Forestry mulcher Hand compass Hand hook Hydraulic debarker Log house moulder Log pond Log flume Machete Stump grinder Chainsaw mill Tree tyer Tsakat Whoopie sling Wood-drying kiln Woodchipper Categories tools equipment Commons tools equipment WikiProject Forestry Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking Authority control databases National Germany 2 3 Czech Republic Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forester&oldid=1299326348 " Categories : Foresters History of forestry Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2011 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 19:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forester 18 languages Add topic

