Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geophysical models 2 Remote sensing 3 Programs of study 4 Laboratories 5 Software 6 References 7 See also Toggle the table of contents Computational geophysics 1 language Bosanski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series of Geophysics Computational Exploration History Outline Electricity Ionosphere Polar wind Thunderstorms Lightning Fluid dynamics Atmospheric science Magnetohydrodynamics Oceanography Turbulence Geodynamics Climate Earth's mantle Exoplanetology Geochemistry Glaciology Planetary science Plate tectonics Tectonics Volcanism Gravity Geodesy Geoid Physical geodesy Magnetism Earth's magnetic field Geomagnetic reversal Magnetosphere Paleomagnetism Solar wind Waves Seismology Spectroscopy Vibration Geophysicists Aki Alfven Anderson Benioff Bowie Dziewonski Forbes Eotvos Gilbert Gutenberg Heiskanen Hotine von Humboldt Jeffreys Kanamori Love Matthews McKenzie Mercalli Molodenskii Munk Press Richter Turcotte Van Allen Vanicek Vening Meinesz Wegener Wilson v t e Computational geophysics is the field of study that uses any type of numerical computations to generate and analyze models of complex geophysical systems. It can be considered an extension, or sub-field, of both computational physics and geophysics . In recent years, computational power, data availability, and modelling capabilities have all improved exponentially, making computational geophysics a more populated discipline.

[ 1 ] Due to the large computational size of many geophysical problems, high-performance computing can be required to handle analysis.

[ 2 ] Modeling applications of computational geophysics include atmospheric modelling , oceanic modelling , general circulation models , and geological modelling . In addition to modelling, some problems in remote sensing fall within the scope of computational geophysics such as tomography , inverse problems , and 3D reconstruction .

Geophysical models [ edit ] The generation of geophysical models are a key component of computational geophysics. Geophysical models are defined as "physical-mathematical descriptions of temporal and/or spatial changes in important geological variables, as derived from accepted laws, theories, and empirical relationships." [ 3 ] Geophysical models are frequently used by researchers in all disciplines of environmental science.

In climate science, atmospheric, oceanic, and general circulation models are a crucial standby for researchers. Although remote sensing has been steadily providing more and more in-situ measurements of geophysical variables, nothing comes close to the temporal and geospatial resolution of data provided by models. Although data can be subject to accuracy issues due to the extrapolation techniques used, the usage of modeled data is a commonly accepted practice in climate and meteorological sciences. Oftentimes, these models will be used in concert with in-situ measurements.

A few well-known models are NCEP/NCAR Reanalysis Project , an atmospheric model [ 4 ] Global Forecast System , a numerical weather prediction model [ 5 ] HYCOM, a general ocean circulation model [ 6 ] Geological system models are frequently used in research, but have less public data availability than climatic and meteorological models. There is a wide range of software available that allows for geomodelling.

Remote sensing [ edit ] The United States Geological Survey (USGS) defines remote sensing as the measurement of some property by transmitting some type of radiation at a distance, and measuring the emitted and reflected radiation. Remote sensing can involve satellites, cameras, and sound wave emission.

[ 7 ] Remote sensing is inherently a type of indirect measurement, meaning that some type of computation must be completed in order to obtain a measurement of the property of interest. For some applications, these computations can be highly complex. In addition, the analysis of these data products can be classified as computational geophysics.

Programs of study [ edit ] In Canada , computational geophysics is offered as a university major in the form of a BSc (Hon.) with co-op at Carleton University .

[ 8 ] Elsewhere, Rice University has a Center for Computational Geophysics, [ 9 ] while Princeton University , [ 10 ] the University of Texas , [ 1 ] and California Institute of Technology [ 11 ] have similar research centers. Experts, laboratories, projects, internships, undergraduate programs, graduate programs and/or facilities in the program exist at the University of Queensland , Wyoming University , Boston University , Stanford University , Uppsala University , Kansas State University , Kingston University , Australian National University , University of California, San Diego , University of Washington , Nanyang Technological University , ETH Zurich , University of Sydney , Appalachian State University , University of Minnesota , University of Tasmania , Bahria University , Boise State University , University of Michigan , University of Oulu , University of Utah , and others.

Laboratories [ edit ] Federal organizations that study or apply computational geophysics include Earth System Research Laboratories at NOAA [ 12 ] Earth Sciences Division at NASA [ 13 ] Computational Geophysics Lab at the Earth Observatory of Singapore [ 14 ] Software [ edit ] EIDORS GeoModeller Petrel (reservoir software) QuakeSim References [ edit ] ^ a b "Computational Geosciences | Jackson School of Geosciences | The University of Texas at Austin" .

www.jsg.utexas.edu . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "Advanced Research Computing (ARC)" .

www.usgs.gov . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ Slingerland, Rudy. (2011).

Mathematical modeling of Earth's dynamical systems : a primer . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691145136 .

OCLC 857968920 .

^ "ESRL : PSD : NCEP/NCAR Reanalysis 1" .

www.esrl.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "Global Forecast System (GFS) | National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) formerly known as National Climatic Data Center (NCDC)" .

www.ncdc.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "HYCOM" .

www.hycom.org . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "What is remote sensing and what is it used for?" .

www.usgs.gov . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "Carleton University Undergraduate Calendar 2005-2006 Web Edition" .

www3.carleton.ca . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "Rice Earth, Environmental & Planetary Sciences | Earth Science Center for Computing (ESCC)" . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "Home Page | Theoretical & Computational Seismology" .

tromp.princeton.edu . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "Computational Geophysics - Caltech Seismological Laboratory" .

seismolab.caltech.edu . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "NOAA Earth System Research Laboratories" .

www.esrl.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ Kovo, Yael (2016-08-09).

"Earth Sciences Division" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 2016-08-21 . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ "Computational Geophysics Lab" .

Earth Observatory of Singapore . Retrieved 2024-07-20 .

See also [ edit ] Computational fluid dynamics History of geophysics List of ocean circulation models Meteorological reanalysis Numerical weather prediction v t e Computational science Biology Anatomy Biological systems Cognition Genomics Neuroscience Phylogenetics Chemistry Electronic structure Molecular mechanics Quantum mechanics Physics Astrophysics Electromagnetics Fluid dynamics Geophysics Mechanics Particle physics Thermodynamics Linguistics Semantics Lexicology Social science Politics Sociology Economics Other Finance Materials science Mathematics Statistics Engineering Semiotics Transportation science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computational_geophysics&oldid=1297023304 " Categories : Computational science Geophysics Computational fields of study This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 18:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Computational geophysics 1 language Add topic

