Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Dérive 3 Contemporary psychogeography 4 Groups involved in psychogeography 5 Noted psychogeographers 6 Applications for mobile devices 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychogeography 16 languages العربية Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Creative view of the built environment that emphasizes playfulness and dérive This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject .

Please help improve the article by providing more context for the reader .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Psychogeography involves self published reports and maps, using the Situationist technique of detournement - using pre-found elements and subverting them. evoL PsychogeogrAphix 2003 Psychogeography is the exploration of urban environments that emphasizes interpersonal connections to places and arbitrary routes. It was developed by members of the Letterist International and Situationist International , which were revolutionary groups influenced by Marxist and anarchist theory as well as the attitudes and methods of Dadaists and Surrealists .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1955, Guy Debord defined psychogeography as "the study of the precise laws and specific effects of the geographical environment, consciously organized or not, on the emotions and behavior of individuals." [ 4 ] One of the key tactics for exploring psychogeography is the loosely defined urban walking practice known as the dérive . As a practice and theory, psychogeography has influenced a broad set of cultural actors, including artists, activists and academics.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 5 ] Development [ edit ] Part of the Politics series on the Situationist International " It is forbidden to forbid " Concepts Anti-art Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Dérive Détournement General strike Internationalism Psychogeography Recuperation Situation (Sartre) Situationist prank Spectacle Unitary urbanism Workers' council World revolution People Michèle Bernstein Ivan Chtcheglov Guy Debord Jacqueline de Jong Asger Jorn Attila Kotányi Jørgen Nash Constant Nieuwenhuys Charles Radcliffe Ralph Rumney Gianfranco Sanguinetti Alexander Trocchi Raoul Vaneigem René Viénet Works Can Dialectics Break Bricks?

Mémoires On the Poverty of Student Life Report on the Construction of Situations The Revolution of Everyday Life The Society of the Spectacle Organizations Letterist International Golden Fleet Gruppe SPUR International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus (IMIB) Situationist International Council for Maintaining the Occupations Second Situationist International Related articles Anarchist communism Autonomism Constructivism Council communism Left communism Libertarian Marxism Libertarian socialism Ultra-leftism Youth International Party Anarchism portal Socialism portal Communism portal Politics portal v t e Psychogeography was originally developed by the Letterist International 'around the summer of 1953'.

[ 4 ] Debord describes psychogeography as 'charmingly vague' and emphasises the importance of practice in psychogeographical explorations.

[ 4 ] The first published discussion of psychogeography was in the Lettrist journal Potlatch (1954), which included a 'Psychogeographical Game of the Week': Depending on what you are after, choose an area, a more or less populous city, a more or less lively street. Build a house. Furnish it. Make the most of its decoration and surroundings. Choose the season and the time. Gather together the right people, the best records and drinks. Lighting and conversation must, of course, be appropriate, along with the weather and your memories.
If your calculations are correct, you should find the outcome satisfying. (Please inform the editors of the results.) [ 6 ] The Lettrists' reimagining of the city has its precursors in aspects of Dadaism and Surrealism.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 7 ] The concept of the flâneur is also cited as an influence on the development of psychogeography.

[ 5 ] :3; [ 8 ] 18 Widely credited to Charles Baudelaire , who was influenced by Edgar Allan Poe's "The Man of the Crowd", it was further developed theoretically by Walter Benjamin .

[ 5 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Ivan Chtcheglov , in his highly influential [ citation needed ] 1953 essay "Formulaire pour un urbanisme nouveau" ("Formulary for a New Urbanism"), established many of the concepts that would inform the development of psychogeography.

[ 10 ] Forwarding a theory of unitary urbanism , Chtcheglov wrote "Architecture is the simplest means of articulating time and space, of modulating reality, of engendering dreams".

[ 10 ] Similarly, the Situationists found contemporary architecture both physically and ideologically restrictive, combining with outside cultural influence, effectively creating an undertow, and forcing oneself into a certain system of interaction with their environment: "[C]ities have a psychogeographical relief, with constant currents, fixed points and vortexes which strongly discourage entry into or exit from certain zones".

[ 11 ] Following Chtcheglov's exclusion from the Lettrists in 1954, [ citation needed ] Guy Debord and others worked to clarify the concept of unitary urbanism, in a bid to demand a revolutionary approach to architecture.

[ citation needed ] The Situationists' response was to create designs of new urbanized space, promising better opportunities for experimenting through mundane expression.  Their intentions remained completely as abstractions.  Guy Debord's truest intention was to unify two different factors of "ambiance" that, he felt, determined the values of the urban landscape: the soft ambiance — light, sound, time, the association of ideas — with the hard, the actual physical constructions.  Debord's vision was a combination of the two realms of opposing ambiance, where the play of the soft ambiance was actively considered in the rendering of the hard.  The new space creates a possibility for activity not formerly determined by one besides the individual.

[ citation needed ] At a conference in Cosio di Arroscia, Italy in 1956, the Lettrists joined the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus to set a proper definition for the idea announced by Gil J. Wolman : "Unitary Urbanism - the synthesis of art and technology that we call for — must be constructed according to certain new values of life, values which now need to be distinguished and disseminated." [ 12 ] It demanded the rejection of functional, Euclidean values in architecture , as well as the separation between art and its surroundings. The implication of combining these two negations is that by creating abstraction, one creates art, which, in turn, creates a point of distinction that unitary urbanism insists must be nullified.  This confusion is also fundamental to the execution of unitary urbanism as it corrupts one's ability to identify where "function" ends and "play" (the "ludic") begins, resulting in what the Lettrist International and Situationist International believed to be a utopia where one was constantly exploring, free of determining factors.

[ citation needed ] One of the first collaborations between Debord and Danish Asger Jorn is their screen printed Guide psychogéographique de Paris : discours sur les passions de l’armour (Psychogeographic Guide of
Paris: 1957). Later they created The Naked City (psychogeographic map of Paris:1958), for which they cut apart a typical map of Paris and repositioned the pieces. The resulting map corresponded with parts of Paris that were ‘stimulating’ and “worthy of study and preservation”; [ citation needed ] they then drew red arrows between these parts of the city to represent the fastest and most direct connections from one place to another, preferably made by taxi, [ citation needed ] as it was seen as the most independent and free way to travel through the city as opposed to buses.

[ citation needed ] Eventually, Debord and Asger Jorn resigned themselves to the fate of "urban relativity".  Debord readily admits in his 1961 film A Critique of Separation , "The sectors of a city…are decipherable, but the personal meaning they have for us is incommunicable, as is the secrecy of private life in general, regarding which we possess nothing but pitiful documents".  Despite the ambiguity of the theory, Debord committed himself firmly to its practical basis in reality, even as he later confesses, "none of this is very clear. It is a completely typical drunken monologue…with its vain phrases that do not await response and its overbearing explanations. And its silences." [ 13 ] "This apparently serious term 'psychogeography'", writes Debord biographer Vincent Kaufman, "comprises an art of conversation and drunkenness, and everything leads us to believe that Debord excelled at both." [ 14 ] :114 Before settling on the impossibility of true psychogeography, Debord made another film, On the Passage of a Few Persons Through a Rather Brief Unity of Time (1959). The film's narrated content concerns itself with the evolution of a generally passive group of unnamed people into a fully aware, anarchistic assemblage, and might be perceived as a biography of the situationists themselves.

[ original research?

] Among the rants which construct the film (regarding art, ignorance, consumerism, militarism) is a desperate call for psychogeographic action: When freedom is practised in a closed circle, it fades into a dream, becomes a mere image of itself. The ambiance of play is by nature unstable. At any moment, "ordinary life" may prevail once again. The geographical limitation of play is even more striking than its temporal limitation. Every game takes place within the boundaries of its own spatial domain.

[ 15 ] Moments later, Debord elaborates on the important goals of unitary urbanism in contemporary society: The atmosphere of a few places gave us a few intimations of the future powers of an architecture that it would be necessary to create in order to provide the setting for less mediocre games.

[ 15 ] Giving a quote that he attributed to Karl Marx , Debord says: People can see nothing around them that is not their own image; everything speaks to them of themselves. Their very landscape is animated. Obstacles were everywhere. And they were all interrelated, maintaining a unified reign of poverty.

[ 15 ] While a reading of the texts included in the journal Internationale Situationniste may lead to an understanding of psychogeography as dictated by Guy Debord, a more comprehensive elucidation of the term would come from research into those who have put its techniques into a more developed practise.

[ original research?

] While Debord's influence in bringing Chtchglov's text to an international audience is undoubted, his skill with the 'praxis' of unitary urbanism has been placed into question by almost all the subsequent protagonists of the Formulary's directives.

[ original research?

] Debord was indeed a notorious drunk (see his Panegyrique, Gallimard 1995) and this altered state of consciousness must be considered along with assertions he made regarding his attempts at psychogeographical activities such as dérive and constructed situation.

[ original research?

] The researches undertaken by WNLA, AAA and the London Psychogeographical Association during the 1990s support the contention of Asger Jorn and the Scandinavian Situationniste (Drakagygett 1962 - 1998) that the psychogeographical is a concept only known through practise of its techniques.

[ citation needed ] Without undertaking the programme expounded by Chtchglov, and the resultant submission to the urban unknown, comprehension of the Formulary is not possible.

[ original research?

] As Debord himself suggested, an understanding of the 'beautiful language' of situationist urbanism necessitates its practice.

[ citation needed ] Dérive [ edit ] Main article: Dérive Along with détournement , one of the main Situationist practices is the dérive ( French: [de.ʁiv] , "drift").

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 7 ] The dérive is a method of drifting through space to explore how the city is constructed, as well as how it makes us feel. Guy Debord defined the dérive as "a mode of experimental behavior linked to the conditions of urban society: a technique of rapid passage through varied ambiances." [ 16 ] He gave a fuller explanation in "Theory of the Dérive" (1956), first written as a member of the Letterist International : In a dérive one or more persons during a certain period drop their usual motives for movement and action, their relations, their work and leisure activities, and let themselves be drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the encounters they find there… But the dérive includes both this letting go and its necessary contradiction: the domination of psychogeographical variations by the knowledge and calculation of their possibilities.

[ 17 ] The dérive 's goals include studying the terrain of the city (psychogeography) and emotional disorientation, both of which lead to the potential creation of Situations .

[ 17 ] Contemporary psychogeography [ edit ] A proliferation of psychogeographical groups in the 90s and early 00s was credited to the re-emergence of the London Psychogeographical Association. evoL PsychogeogrAphix 2003 evoL PsychogeogrAphix 2004 In 1987 the psychoanthropologist Howard F. Stein of the University of Oklahoma published Developmental Time, Cultural Space: Studies in Psychogeography, introducing a new way of looking at how human beings deal with geographical entities, and how the latter resonate in their unconscious mind with personal ones. This was followed in 1989 by a book titled Maps from the Mind: Readings in Psychogeography , edited by Howard Stein and by William Niederland, an eminent psychoanalyst, which incorporated fifteen chapters on various psychogeographical subjects by interdisciplinary scholars. The main focus of this new psychogeography was the application of psychoanalytic insights to our interactions with geographical entities.

Since the 1990s, as situationist theory became popular in artistic and academic circles, avant-garde , neoist , and revolutionary groups emerged, developing psychogeographical praxis in various ways. Influenced primarily through the re-emergence of the London Psychogeographical Association and the foundation of The Workshop for Non-Linear Architecture , these groups have assisted in the development of a contemporary psychogeography.

[ 18 ] Between 1992 and 1996 The Workshop for Non-Linear Architecture undertook an extensive programme of practical research into classic (situationist) psychogeography in both Glasgow and London. The discoveries made during this period, documented in the group's journal Viscosity , expanded the terrain of the psychogeographic into that of urban design and architectural performance. Morag Rose has identified three dominant strands in contemporary psychogeography: literary, activist and creative.

[ 19 ] :29 The journal Transgressions: A Journal of Urban Exploration (which appears to have ceased publication sometime in 2000) collated and developed a number of post-avant-garde revolutionary psychogeographical themes. The journal also contributed to the use and development of psychogeographical maps which have, since 2000, been used in political actions, drifts and projections, distributed as flyers.

[ citation needed ] Since 2003 in the United States , separate events known as Provflux and Psy-Geo-conflux have been dedicated to action-based participatory experiments, under the academic umbrella of psychogeography. An article on the second annual Psy-Geo-conflux described psychogeography as "a slightly stuffy term that's been applied to a whole toy box full of playful, inventive strategies for exploring cities." [ 20 ] Psychogeography has also made a methodological appearance in Library and Information Science .

[ 21 ] Psychogeography also became a device used in literature . In Britain in particular, psychogeography has become a recognised descriptive term used in discussion of successful writers such as Iain Sinclair and Peter Ackroyd .

[ 5 ] [ 22 ] Sinclair is '[a]rguably the most high-profile British psychogeographer' and is credited with having a strong influence on the term's greater public use in the United Kingdom.

[ 5 ] :9 Though Sinclair makes infrequent use of the jargon associated with the Situationists, he has certainly popularized the term by producing a large body of work based on pedestrian exploration of the urban and suburban landscape.

[ citation needed ] Scholar Duncan Hay asserts that Sinclair's work does not represent the utopian and revolutionary foundations of Situationist practice, and instead 'finds its expression as a literary mode, a position that would have appeared paradoxical to its original practitioners'.

[ 5 ] :3 Sinclair has distanced himself from the term, declaring it a 'very nasty set of branding'.

[ 8 ] :19 Will Self also contributed to the popularisation of the term in Great Britain through a column in the Saturday magazine of the national broadsheet The Independent .

[ 5 ] :11; [ 23 ] The column, which started out in the British Airways inflight magazine , ran in The Independent until October 2008.

[ citation needed ] Sinclair and similar thinkers draw on a longstanding British literary tradition of the exploration of urban landscapes, predating the Situationists, found in the work of writers William Blake , Arthur Machen , and Thomas de Quincey .  The nature and history of London were a central focus of these writers, utilising romantic , gothic , and occult ideas to describe and transform the city.  Sinclair drew on this tradition combined with his own explorations as a way of criticising modern developments of urban space in the key text Lights Out for the Territory .  Peter Ackroyd's bestselling London: A Biography was partially based on similar sources. Merlin Coverley gives prominence to this literary tradition in his book Psychogeography (2006).

[ 22 ] Coverley recognises the situationist origins of psychogeographic practice are sometimes overshadowed by literary traditions, but that they had a shared tradition through writers like Edgar Allan Poe , Daniel Defoe , and Charles Baudelaire.

The documentaries of filmmaker Patrick Keiller are also considered to be an example of psychogeography.

[ 24 ] The concepts and themes seen in the popular comics' writer Alan Moore in From Hell are also now seen as significant works of psychogeography.  Other key figures in this version of the idea are Walter Benjamin , J. G. Ballard , and Nicholas Hawksmoor .  Part of this development saw increasing use of ideas and terminology by some psychogeographers from Fortean and occult areas including earth mysteries , ley lines and chaos magic , a course pioneered by Sinclair.  A core element in virtually all these developments remains a dissatisfaction with the nature and design of the modern environment, and a desire to make the everyday world more interesting.

[ citation needed ] Aleksandar Janicijevic , the initiator of the Urban Squares Initiative, [ 25 ] defined psychogeography for the group in the following terms: "The subjective analysis–mental reaction, to neighbourhood behaviours related to geographic location. A chronological process based on the order of appearance of observed topics, with the time delayed inclusion of other relevant instances".

[ 26 ] In 2013 Aleksandar Janicijevic published "Urbis – Language of the urban fabric" as a visual attempt to rediscover lost or neglected urban symbols. In 2015 another book was published, "MyPsychogeography", an attempt to synthesize sketches and ideas which have informed his art practice.

[ 27 ] [ self-published source?

] Groups involved in psychogeography [ edit ] Psychogeography is practiced both experimentally and formally in groups or associations, which sometimes consist of just one member.  Known groups, some of whom are still operating, include: Glowlab Loiterers Resistance Movement London Psychogeographical Association Nottingham Psychogeographical Unit Providence Initiative for Psychogeographic Studies The Unilalia Group (see Unilalianism ) The Workshop for Non-Linear Architecture Noted psychogeographers [ edit ] Peter Ackroyd Michèle Bernstein Pat Barker Paul Conneally Guy Debord Stewart Home Jacqueline de Jong Robert Macfarlane Geoff Nicholson Iain Sinclair Laura Oldfield Ford Nick Papadimitriou Will Self Cathy Turner (artist) Jean Rolin Philippe Vasset Applications for mobile devices [ edit ] A number of applications have been made for mobile devices to facilitate dérives: Dérive app Serendipitor Drift Dérive See also [ edit ] Desire path Ecocriticism Edgelands Environmental psychology Flâneur Graffiti Hypergraphy Landscape zodiac Parkour Psychohistory Psychonaut Rhizome (philosophy) Social trail Urban acupuncture Urban exploration Wayfinding References [ edit ] ^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 546.

ISBN 9780415252256 .

^ a b c Marcus, Greil (2014-10-09).

Lipstick Traces: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century . Faber & Faber.

ISBN 978-0-571-26120-8 .

^ a b c d Plant, Sadie (2002-01-22).

The Most Radical Gesture: The Situationist International in a Postmodern Age . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-92530-8 .

^ a b c "Introduction to a Critique of Urban Geography" .

The Situationist International Text Library .

^ a b c d e f g h Richardson, Tina (2015-07-07).

Walking Inside Out: Contemporary British Psychogeography . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-1-78348-087-6 .

^ "potlach #1: information bulletin of the french section of the lettrist international" .

www.cddc.vt.edu . 22 June 1954 . Retrieved 2020-10-26 .

^ a b Morris, Blake (2019-11-05).

Walking Networks: The Development of an Artistic Medium . Rowman & Littlefield International.

ISBN 978-1-78661-022-5 .

^ a b c Elkin, Lauren (2016-07-28).

Flaneuse: Women Walk the City in Paris, New York, Tokyo, Venice and London . Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4481-9195-6 .

^ Baudelaire, Charles (1964-01-01).

The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays Translated and Edited by Jonathan Mayne . Phaidon Press.

^ a b Chtcheglov, Ivan.

"Formulary for a New Urbanism" .

Bureau of Public Secrets .

^ Knabb 1995 , p. 50.

^ Wolman, Gil (1956).

Address by the Lettrist International Delegate to the Alba Conference of September 1956 . ALba: Lettrist International.

^ A Critique of Separation (1961). Complete Cinematic Works ( AK Press , 2003, Trans. Knabb. K) ^ Kaufmann, Vincent, 1955- (2006).

Guy Debord : revolution in the service of poetry . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 0-8166-4455-1 .

OCLC 65165348 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Debord G. Sur le passage de quelques personnes à travers une assez courte unité de temps (1959) ^ Guy Debord (June 1958).

"Definitions" .

Internationale Situationniste (1). Translated by Ken Knabb. Paris.

^ a b Debord, Guy (November 1956).

"Theory of the Dérive" .

Les Lèvres Nues (9). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ "psychogeography.org weblog and archive" . Retrieved 2017-07-28 .

^ Rose, Morag (2017).

Women walking Manchester : desire lines through the original modern city (Ph.D. thesis). University of Sheffield.

^ Hart, Joseph (Jun 1, 2004).

"A New Way of Walking" .

Utne Reader .

^ Evans, Woody (2020).

"The Library Ceremony: Oracles, Accidents, and Information Discovery" .

Weave: Journal of Library User Experience .

3 .

doi : 10.3998/weave.12535642.0003.104 .

^ a b Coverley, Merlin (2018-06-28).

Psychogeography . Oldcastle Books.

ISBN 978-0-85730-270-0 .

^ Self, Will.

Psychogeography: Disentangling the Modern Conundrum of Psyche and Place . Ralph Steadman.

ASIN 1596914661 .

^ "Psychogeography – Art Term" .

^ Yılmaz, Ebru (2016).

"Subjectivity in Design Education: The Perception of the City through Personal Maps" .

International Journal of Art & Design Education .

35 (1): 121– 139.

doi : 10.1111/jade.12005 .

hdl : 11147/6126 .

ISSN 1476-8070 .

^ "Psychogeography Maps" .

urbansquares.com . 2008-12-26. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009.

^ "psychogeography now – window to the urban future | ……" . Photoblog.urbansquares.com. Archived from the original on 2013-06-06 . Retrieved 2013-04-18 .

Sources [ edit ] Kaufman, Vincent (2006).

Guy Debord: Revolution in the Service of Poetry . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Knabb, Ken, ed. (1995).

Situationist International Anthology . Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets.

McDonough, Tom, ed. (2004).

Guy Debord and the Situationist International: Texts and Documents . Boston: October Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Balsebre, Gianluigi (September 1995).

Della critica radicale. Bibliografia ragionata sul'internazionale situazionista con testi inediti in italiano (in Italian). Bologna: Grafton.

Balsebre, Gianluigi (1997).

Il territorio dello spettacolo (in Italian). Bologna: Potlatch.

Coverley, Merlin (2006).

Psychogeography . London: Pocket Essentials.

Debord, Guy, ed. (1996).

Guy Debord presente Potlatch . Paris: Folio.

Ford, Simon (2005).

The Situationist International: A User's Guide . London: Black Dog Publishing .

Home, Stewart (1997).

Mind Invaders: A Reader in Psychic Warfare, Cultural Sabotage and Semiotic Terrorism . London: Serpent's Tail.

Larry Miller's Flux-Tour at NYU's Grey Art Gallery.

https://greyartgallery.nyu.edu/2011/11/performing-in-larry-millers-flux-tour-at-the-grey/ George Maciunas Flux-Tours.

https://www.fondazionebonotto.org/en/collection/fluxus/maciunasgeorge/10/1520.html Janicijevic, Aleksandar (June 2008).

"Psychogeography Now - Window to the Urban Future" . (Toronto) (International Journal for Neighbourhood Renewal, Liverpool, UK) Law, Larry; Chris Gray, editors (1998).

Leaving the 20th Century: the Incomplete Work of the Situationist International . London: Rebel P.

Sadler, Simon (1998).

The Situationist City . Cambridge: MIT P.

Smith, Phil.

Mythogeography: A Guide to Walking Sideways Vazquez, Daniele (2010).

Manuale di Psicogeografia . Cuneo: Nerosubianco edizioni.

Wark, McKenzie (2008).

50 Years of Recuperation of the Situationist International . New York, Princeton Architectural.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Psychogeography Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Guide psychogeographique de Paris.

Guy Debord's famous map of Paris Interview with Merlin Coverley 4th World Congress of Psychogeography- annual conference Links to related articles v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees v t e Culture jamming Forms Art intervention Billboard hacking Broadcast signal intrusion Détournement Flash mob Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Media prank Subvertising Tactical frivolity Groups Adbusters Anonymous Barbie Liberation Organization Billboard Liberation Front Billionaires for Bush The Bubble Project Cacophony Society Guerrilla Girls Improv Everywhere Luther Blissett Merry Pranksters monochrom Negativland RTMark Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence Society for Indecency to Naked Animals Space Hijackers Veterans of Future Wars Whirl-Mart Wu Ming The Yes Men Yippies Movements Discordianism Church of the SubGenius Provo Psychogeography Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping People Alan Abel Banksy Reverend Billy Captain Midnight Captain Crunch Ron English Abbie Hoffman Naomi Klein John Law Malaclypse the Younger Ben Masel Sal Randolph Jerry Rubin Joey Skaggs Ivan Stang Kerry Wendell Thornley Bill Wasik Robert Anton Wilson Peter Lamborn Wilson Works The Illuminatus! Trilogy Schrödinger's Cat Trilogy Principia Discordia Book of the SubGenius Temporary Autonomous Zone No Logo Steal This Book Events Notre-Dame Affair (1950) Saint Stupid's Day Parade (late 1970s) Burning Man (1986) Max Headroom signal hijacking (1987) Grunge speak (1992) K Foundation (1993) SantaCon (1994) Portland Urban Iditarod (2001) Pillow fight flash mob (2008) Related Anti-consumerism Artivist Critique of work List of culture jamming organizations and people Performance art Street art Subculture Surreal humour Operation Mindfuck v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐h9rx2
Cached time: 20250814224001
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.123 seconds
Real time usage: 1.336 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7595/1000000
Revision size: 30744/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 396865/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 111163/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 181898/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.729/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21589185/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1100.782      1 -total
 27.65%  304.338      1 Template:Navboxes
 26.36%  290.183      8 Template:Navbox
 21.73%  239.147      1 Template:Anarchism
 20.84%  229.420      9 Template:Excerpt
 18.83%  207.256      1 Template:Reflist
 12.45%  136.997     13 Template:Cite_book
  8.91%   98.113      1 Template:Situationists
  8.71%   95.843     20 Template:Fix
  8.65%   95.187      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:221554:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224001 and revision id 1304138626. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychogeography&oldid=1304138626 " Categories : Psychogeography Human geography Cultural geography Situationist International Performance art Underground culture Social philosophy Culture jamming Walking Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2025 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing context from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing context All pages needing cleanup Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from July 2025 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from October 2020 Pages with French IPA All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from October 2020 Pages using div col with small parameter Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 06:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychogeography 16 languages Add topic

