Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Selected publications 4 External sources 5 Further reading 6 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Johann Rudolf Glauber 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latina Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German-Dutch alchemist (1604–1670) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( November 2016 ) Johann Rudolf Glauber Born ( 1604-03-10 ) 10 March 1604 Karlstadt am Main , Germany Died 16 March 1670 (1670-03-16) (aged 66) Amsterdam , Netherlands Nationality German-Dutch Known for "Glauber's salt" Johann Rudolf Glauber (10 March 1604 – 16 March 1670) was a German-Dutch alchemist and chemist . Some historians of science have described him as one of the first chemical engineers .

[ 1 ] His discovery of sodium sulfate in 1625 led to the compound being named after him: "Glauber's salt".

Life [ edit ] Born in 1604 in Karlstadt am Main , the son of a barber , he was one of a large family and did not finish school, but is thought to have studied pharmacy and visited laboratories.

[ 2 ] He said that he was glad that he had not suffered the grind of high school but had instead learned by experience. He lived in Vienna (1625), Salzburg , Giessen , Wertheim (1649–1651), Kitzingen (1651–1655), Basel , Paris , Frankfurt am Main , Cologne and Amsterdam (1640–1644, 1646–1649, 1656–death).  He worked first manufacturing mirrors and later for two periods as Apothecary to the court in Giessen , the second time as the Chief Apothecary, leaving because of the Thirty Years War .  In Amsterdam he built up a business manufacturing pharmaceuticals (including chemicals such as Glauber's salt).  This led to both great financial success and, in 1649, bankruptcy , which is the reason for his move from Amsterdam to Wertheim.

He married twice and, with his second wife Helena Cornelius (married 1641), had eight children. His son Johannes Glauber probably helped him with his engraved illustrations.

In 1660 he became seriously ill, which has been attributed to poisoning from the various heavy metals used in his work, [ 3 ] and in 1666 was crippled by a fall from a wagon and was confined to bed for the rest of his life.  As a result, he had to sell off books and equipment to provide for his family.  He died on 16 March 1670 in Amsterdam.

Work [ edit ] Glauber conducted studies on the chemistry of wine production and had commercial success through licensing improvements. He was also an apothecary , supplying medicines and known for providing free medical treatment to the poor. He is known for his contributions to inorganic chemistry and the fact that he was able to live from the proceeds of chemical production based upon his discoveries and was thus an industrial chemist . His improvements to chemical processes and equipment (notably furnaces and distillation devices [ 4 ] ) make him an early chemical engineer .

[ 1 ] He was the first to produce concentrated hydrochloric acid in 1625 by combining sulfuric acid and table salt. He also made an improved process for the manufacture of nitric acid in 1648 by heating potassium nitrate with concentrated sulfuric acid. His production of sodium sulfate , which he called sal mirabilis or "wonderful salt", brought him fame and the honor of being named "Glauber's salt". It was an effective but relatively safe laxative at a time when purging (emptying the digestive tract) was a popular treatment for many diseases.

[ 5 ] The chemical garden (or silica garden) was first observed by Glauber and described by him in 1646.

[ 4 ] In its original form, the chemical garden involved the introduction of ferrous chloride (FeCl 2 ) crystals into a solution of potassium silicate (K 2 SiO 3 , water glass ).

He was the first to synthesize and isolate antimony trichloride , arsenic trichloride , tin tetrachloride and zinc chloride .

In addition, he wrote about 40 books. A visionary one is Dess Teutschlands Wohlfahrt ( Germany's Prosperity ), in which he proposed the chemical industries as a means for Germany's economic recovery after the Thirty Years War .

Selected publications [ edit ] Library resources about Johann Rudolf Glauber Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Johann Rudolf Glauber Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Apologia contra mendaces Christophori Farnneri , 1655 Dess Teutschlands Wohlfahrt 1656–1661 Operis mineralis Oder Vieler künstlichen und nutzlichen metallischen Arbeiten Beschreibung , 1651–1652 Opera omnia (Collected Works), 7 vols 1669 De Auri Tinctura sive Auro Potabili Vero: Was solche sey/ vnnd wie dieselbe von einem falschen vnd Sophistischen Auro Potabili zu vnterscheiden vnd zu erkennen ... wozu solche in Medicina könne gebraucht werden. Beschrieben vnd an Tag gegeben Durch Joh. Rud. Glauberum 1646 Furni Novi Philosophici Oder Beschreibung einer New-erfundenen Distilir-Kunst: Auch was für Spiritus, Olea, Flores, und andere dergleichen Vegetabilische/ Animalische/ und Mineralische Medicamenten/ damit ... können zugericht und bereytet werden , 2 vols. 1646-1647 Miraculum Mundi, oder Außführliche Beschreibung der wunderbaren Natur/ Art/ vnd Eigenschafft/ deß Großmächtigen Subiecti: Von den Alten Menstruum Vniversale oder Mercurius Philosophorum genandt. . - an Tag geben/ vnd jetzo auff das newe corrigiret vnd verbesert Durch Iohann Rudolph Glaubern , 7 vols. 1653–1658 Johann Rudolf Glauberi Apologia oder Verthaidigung gegen Christoff Farners Lügen und Ehrabschneidung , 2 vols 1655 Zweyte Apologia, oder Ehrenrettung gegen Christoff Farnern, Speyerischen Thom-Stiffts Schaffnern zu Löchgaw, unmenschliche Lügen und Ehrabschneidung 1656 Tractatus De Medicina Universali, Sive Auro Potabili Vero. Oder Außführliche Beschreibung einer wahren Universal Medicin: wie auch deroselben Wunderbahrlichen grossen Krafft und Wirckung. . - Der jetzigen blinden Welt ... wolmeinend beschrieben und an Tag gegeben Durch Johan. Rudolph. Glauber , 2 vols. 1657 Tractatus de natura salium , 2 vols 1658–1659 Tractatus de signatura salium, metallorum, et planetarum, sive fundamentalis institutio, evident. monstrans, quo pacto facillime non solum salium, metall., atque planetarum ... supputari queant (1658) ( Digital edition from 1703 ) Opera chymica: Bücher und Schrifften, so viel deren von ihme bißhero an Tag gegeben worden; jetzo vom neuen übersehen und vermehret (Collected Works), 2 vols 1658–1659 ( Digital edition ) Explicatio oder Außlegung über die Wohrten Salomonis: In herbis, verbis, et lapidibus, magna est virtus , 2 vols. 1663–1664 Libellus dialogorum, sive colloquia, nonnullorum Hermeticae medicinae, ac tincturae universalis 1663 Novum lumen chimicum: oder e. new-erfundenen u.d. Weldt noch niemahlen bekand-gemachten hohen Secreti Offenbarung 1664 Von den dreyen Anfangen der Metallen, alß Schwefel, Mercurio und Salz der Weisen 1666 Tractatus de tribus principiis metallorum, videlicet sulphure, mercurio et sale philosophorum, quemadmodzum illa in medicina, alchymia aliisque artibus associatis utiliter adhiberi valeant 1667 Glauberus Concentratus Oder Laboratorium Glauberianum: Darinn die Specification, vnd Taxation dehren Medicinalischen/ vnd Chymischen Arcanitäten begriffen; Sambt Aller dehren künstlichen Oefen vnd Instrumenten ... Durch Den Authorem ... obgedachter Raritäten ... an tag gegeben 1668 De Elia artista 1667 De tribus lapidibus ignium secretorum: Oder von den drey Alleredelsten Gesteinen 1667 ( Digital edition 1703 ) De lapide animali 1669 Libellus ignium: Oder Feuer-Buechlein, Darinnen von unterschiedlichen frembden und biß Dato noch gantz unbekandten Feuern gehandelt: Wozu sie dienen und was für unglaubliche Dinge und unaußsprechlicher Nutzen dem Menschlichen Geschlecht dadurch kommen und zu wegen gebracht werden koenne. Zu Gottes Ehre und Dienst deß Nechsten wolmeinend beschrieben und an Tag gegeben durch Joh. Rudoph. Glauberum 1663  ( Digital edition 1703 ) External sources [ edit ] Biography at the Galileo Project Further reading [ edit ] John T. Young (1998) Faith, Medical Alchemy and Natural Philosophy: Johann Moriaen, Reformed Intelligencer, and the Hartlib Circle (Aldershot: Ashgate) Chapter 6: Universal Medicines: Johann Rudolph Glauber and his Reception in England The works of the highly experienced and famous chymist, John Rudolph Glauber (1689), London: Christopher Packe Notes and references [ edit ] ^ a b Skolnik, Herman (1982). Furter, William F. (ed.).

A Century of Chemical Engineering . New York: Plenum Press. p. 230.

ISBN 0-306-40895-3 .

Some historians of science consider Glauber as one of the first chemical engineers as he developed processes for the manufacture of sulfuric, nitric, acetic, and hydrochloric acids ^ This section incorporates material from the German Wikipedia and the Galileo Project, which are referenced to German sources.

^ Mercury was used in silvering mirrors and also in medicine.

Arsenic and antimony were used in medicines.

Lead was used in the preparation of acids.  These are all cumulative poisons.

^ a b Glauber, Johann Rudolf (1646).

Furni Novi Philosophici . Amsterdam.

OCLC 5515255 .

^ Martini, Albert (27 May 2015).

The Renaissance of Science: The Story of the Cell and Biology . Albert Martini. p. 288.

ISBN 978-0-692-48512-5 .

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Rudolf_Glauber&oldid=1301276130 " Categories : 1604 births 1670 deaths People from Karlstadt am Main 17th-century German chemists 17th-century Dutch scientists 17th-century German engineers Dutch chemists Dutch alchemists German alchemists German chemical engineers 17th-century alchemists Engineers from Bavaria Emigrants from the Holy Roman Empire to the Dutch Republic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from November 2016 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from November 2016 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 01:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Rudolf Glauber 42 languages Add topic

