Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General information 2 Primary mirror 3 Instrumentation 4 Internet connectivity 5 Science working group 6 Partners 7 Research 8 Tourism 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Southern African Large Telescope 21 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 32°22′33″S 20°48′39″E ﻿ / ﻿ 32.375918°S 20.810757°E ﻿ / -32.375918; 20.810757 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical optical telescope Southern African Large Telescope Alternative names SALT Location(s) Sutherland , Karoo Hoogland Local Municipality , Namakwa District Municipality , Northern Cape , RSA Coordinates 32°22′33″S 20°48′39″E ﻿ / ﻿ 32.375918°S 20.810757°E ﻿ / -32.375918; 20.810757 Altitude 1,798 m (5,899 ft) [ 1 ] Wavelength 320 nm (940 THz)–1,700 nm (180 THz) Built 2005 Diameter hexagonal array of ~ 11.1 m × 9.8 m 9.2 m (effective aperture) Angular resolution EE(50) ≤ 0.6" Collecting area 79 m 2 (91 × 0.87 m 2 ) 66.5 m 2 (effective aperture) Mounting 45 ton steel structure Enclosure 25 m spherical Website www .salt .ac .za Location of Southern African Large Telescope Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] The Southern African Large Telescope ( SALT ) is a 9.2-metre optical telescope designed mainly for spectroscopy . It consists of 91 hexagonal mirror segments each with a 1-metre inscribed diameter, resulting in a total hexagonal mirror of 11.1 by 9.8 m.

[ 2 ] However, its effective aperture is only 9.2 m. It is located close to the town of Sutherland in the semi-desert region of the Karoo , South Africa . It is a facility of the South African Astronomical Observatory , the national optical observatory of South Africa.

SALT is the largest optical telescope in the southern hemisphere .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It enables spectroscopic and polarimetric analysis and imaging of the radiation from astronomical objects that are out of reach of northern hemisphere telescopes.

It is closely based on the Hobby–Eberly Telescope (HET) at McDonald Observatory , with some changes in its design, especially to the spherical aberration corrector. The main purpose for these changes was to improve the telescope's field of view . It shares the same fixed mirror altitude design, which limits access to 70% of the visible sky.

[ 5 ] First light with the full mirror was declared on 1 September 2005, with 1-arc-second resolution images of globular cluster 47 Tucanae , open cluster NGC 6152 , spiral galaxy NGC 6744 , and the Lagoon Nebula .

[ 6 ] The official opening by President Thabo Mbeki took place during the inauguration ceremony on 10 November 2005.

[ 7 ] South Africa contributed about a third of the total of US$36 million that will finance SALT for its first 10 years (US$20 million for the construction of the telescope, US$6 million for instruments, and US$10 million for operations). The rest was contributed by the other partners: Germany , Poland , the United States , the United Kingdom , and New Zealand .

[ 8 ] General information [ edit ] SALT is located on a hilltop 1837 m above sea level in a nature reserve in the Hantam, Karoo 370 km (230 mi) north-east of Cape Town , near the small town of Sutherland . In March 2004, installation of the massive mirror began. The last of the 91 smaller mirrored hexagon segments was put in place in May 2005.

Korea , Japan , Poland and Google [ citation needed ] have telescopes at the site and South Africa has at least five optical telescopes there.  The University of Birmingham has a solar telescope to help monitor the Sun .
SALT will probe quasars and enable scientists to view stars and galaxies a billion times too faint to be seen by the naked eye .

Primary mirror [ edit ] SALT's primary mirror Cleaning of the South African Large Telescope mirrors with dry ice Both SALT and HET have an unusual design for an optical telescope. Similar to the Keck Telescopes , the primary mirror is composed of an array of mirrors designed to act as a single larger mirror; however, the SALT mirrors produce a spherical primary, rather than the paraboloid shape associated with a classical Cassegrain telescope. Each SALT mirror is a 1-meter hexagon, and the array of 91 identical mirrors produces a hexagonally shaped primary 11 by 9.8 meters in size. To compensate for the spherical primary, the telescope has a four-mirror spherical aberration corrector (SAC) that provides a corrected, flat focal plane with a field of view of 8 arcminutes at prime focus.

Size comparison: primary mirrors of some notable telescopes Each of the 91 mirrors is made of low-expansion Sitall glass and can be adjusted in tip, tilt and piston in order to properly align them so as to act as a single mirror. Because the mirror is spherical, light emitted from a position corresponding to the center of curvature of the mirror is reflected and refocused to the same position. Therefore, the telescope employs a center-of-curvature alignment sensor (CCAS) situated at the top of a tall tower adjacent to the dome. Laser light is shone down on all the segments, and the position of the reflections from each mirror measured. A process called "stacking" thus allows the telescope operator to optimize the adjustments of the mirrors.

The telescope is also unusual in that during an observation, the mirror remains at a fixed altitude and azimuth, and the image of an astronomical target produced by the telescope is tracked by the "payload", which resides at the position of prime focus and includes the SAC and prime-focus instrumentation. This is similar in operation to the Arecibo Radio Telescope . Although this results in only a limited observing window per target, it greatly simplifies the primary mirror mount, when compared to a fully steerable telescope, transferring the complexity to the smaller and lighter payload tracking system, providing for an overall reduction in total telescope construction cost. SALT has a fixed zenith angle of 37 degrees, optimised for the Magellanic clouds, but because of the full range of azimuths and the celestial rotation, SALT has access to a good fraction of the sky available at the Sutherland site.

Another consequence of this design is that the entrance pupil varies in size during the tracking of a target.

Instrumentation [ edit ] The first generation instrumentation for SALT includes the SALT Imaging Camera (SALTICAM), designed and built by the South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO); the Robert Stobie Spectrograph (RSS) (née Prime Focus Imaging Spectrograph), a multi-purpose long-slit and multi-object imaging spectrograph and spectropolarimeter, designed and built by the University of Wisconsin–Madison , Rutgers University, and the SAAO; and a fiber-fed High Resolution Spectrograph (HRS), designed by the University of Canterbury (New Zealand). SALTICAM was installed in early 2005, while the RSS was installed on 11 October 2005.

Internet connectivity [ edit ] The telescope is connected to the SAAO site in Cape Town via a 1 Gbit/s fibre connection over the SANREN network. The SAAO has a 1 Gbit/s connection to the SANREN network with 30 Mbit/s of that link being the international portion.

Science working group [ edit ] Membership of the SALT science working group: David Buckley, Gerald Cecil, Brian Chaboyer, Richard Griffiths, Janusz Kałużny, Michael Albrow, Karen Pollard, Kenneth Nordsieck, Darragh O'Donoghue, Larry Ramsey, Anne Sansom, Pat Cote.

Partners [ edit ] Dartmouth College Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Hobby-Eberly Telescope Board National Research Foundation of South Africa Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center of the Polish Academy of Sciences Rutgers , the State University of New Jersey University of Wisconsin–Madison University of Canterbury (New Zealand) University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill United Kingdom SALT Consortium (UKSC), comprising: Armagh Observatory Keele University University of Central Lancashire University of Nottingham Open University University of Southampton In 2007, the following new partners joined the SALT consortium: American Museum of Natural History Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (India) Research [ edit ] Research using SALT at the South African Astronomical Observatory has led the facility to important discoveries. By using the Southern African Large Telescope, SAAO has the ability to take "snapshots" of stars in very quick succession. It is optimized for wavelengths and observing modes not available on other very large telescopes. As a result, astronomers can study rapidly changing properties of compact stars, primarily as they pull in gas from their companion stars or surroundings. The significance of this discovery allows us to detect black holes. The gravitational field of a compact star commonly pulls in gas from a companion star, thus radiation (especially X-ray ) is emitted. Scientists used this as an indirect way to locate black holes. Another phenomenon that SALT has helped astronomers investigate is the way that masses build up on some compact stars until supernova explosions blow them apart, which gives scientists a "Type 1a" supernovae used to show that the expansion of the universe is speeding up.

[ 9 ] Other note-worthy research the South African Astronomical Observatory has achieved using SALT include the discovery of a class of stars known as "polar", or a pair of stars. The "polar" binary star system, where a compactor star called a "white dwarf" whose volume has shrunk about one millionth of a star like the Sun. Studies using SALT concluded that these polar binary star systems take only an hour and a half to complete an orbit. Also, the SALT telescope allows scientists to study the rapid brightness changes in exotic stars.

More research using SALT has aided astronomers to investigate the structure and evolution of our galaxy , such as quasars , Magellanic clouds , the galactic structure and stellar astrophysics .

[ 10 ] SALT released its first color images, which marked the achievement of the "first light". This also marked the debut of the fully operating SALTICAM, which is a $600,000 digital camera designed and built for SALT.

Tourism [ edit ] Despite initial estimates by SAAO that SALT would bring up to 30,000 tourists to Sutherland, the telescope has so far only resulted in about 14,000 annual visitors, which has nevertheless resulted in the creation of at least 300 jobs in the town of 5,000.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] South African Astronomical Observatory List of astronomical observatories SEDS SEDS South Africa List of optical telescopes List of largest optical reflecting telescopes References [ edit ] Reuters.

South Africa looks to stars with super scope . United Kingdom: Reuters Limited . 15 March 2004.

South African Large Telescope Makes Its Debut .

PhysOrg.com . 1 September 2005 Notes [ edit ] ^ [2013 "SALT Key Design & Performance Characteristics"].

Operational wavelengths: 320nm to 1700nm {{ cite web }} : Check |url= value ( help ) ^ "Mirror Segments" .

Southern African Large Telescope website . SOAA . Retrieved 10 May 2013 .

The spherical primary mirror has a master radius of curvature of 26 165 mm. It consists of 91 interchangeable hexagonal mirror segments, each of 1 m inscribed diameter, forming a hexagon of ~11.1 x ~9.8 m.

^ "Deep Space Observatories: The Southern African Large Telescope" . Space Today Online . Retrieved 28 January 2009 .

^ "273 Precision Actuators for the Largest Telescope in the Southern Hemisphere" . Physik Instrumente (PI) GmbH & Co. KG. May 2003 . Retrieved 28 January 2009 .

^ "Southern African Large Telescope" . Armagh Observatory. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012 . Retrieved 28 January 2009 .

^ "S.a.l.t" . May 2008.

^ "SALT Inauguration Ceremony. Address by the Honourable Minister of Science and Technology, Mr Mosibudi Mangena" .

South African Department of Science and Technology . 10 November 2005. Archived from the original on 25 September 2008 . Retrieved 30 January 2009 .

^ a b Kahn, Tamar (1 June 2018).

"Sutherland: Wishing on a rising star" .

^ "First Science with SALT: Observations of eclipsing polar: SAAO" . Archived from the original on 25 December 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2009 .

^ "NRF - the South African Astronomical Observatory" . Archived from the original on 24 December 2008 . Retrieved 30 January 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Southern African Large Telescope .

Official website Near Earth Object Observations by SALT SALT Camera [ permanent dead link ] –  Live view of SALT.

v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons Authority control databases : Geographic Structurae Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southern_African_Large_Telescope&oldid=1269583641 " Categories : Buildings and structures completed in 2005 Astronomical observatories in South Africa Karoo Reflecting telescopes Dartmouth College facilities 21st-century architecture in South Africa Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2019 Use South African English from June 2012 All Wikipedia articles written in South African English Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using Infobox telescope using locally defined parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 15 January 2025, at 10:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Southern African Large Telescope 21 languages Add topic

