Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Military service 3 Astronomy 4 Honours 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Palm Heinrich Ludwig von Boguslawski 7 languages Deutsch Español Français مصرى 日本語 Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German astronomer (1789–1851) "Boguslawsky" redirects here. For the lunar crater, see Boguslawsky (crater) .

See also: Boguslawski (disambiguation) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Later depiction Palm (or Palon) Heinrich Ludwig (Pruß) von Boguslawski (7 September 1789 – 5 June 1851) was a German astronomy professor and observatory director in Breslau (Wrocław) .

Early life [ edit ] A native of Magdeburg , Boguslawski met Johann Elert Bode (1747–1826), who was an observatory director in Berlin and published the celestial atlas Uranographia , at the Prussian Military Academy in Berlin between 1811 and 1812, when Boguslawski did his military service.

Military service [ edit ] Boguslawski was an artillery officer in the Prussian Army during the French invasion of Russia (1812) led by Napoleon . He retired as Hauptmann .

[ citation needed ] Astronomy [ edit ] After the war, he took up residence on his family's lands outside Breslau. In 1831 he became curator at the observatory in Breslau, and was appointed in 1836 to an honorary professorship at the University of Breslau .

In the night from 20 April to 21 April 1835, Boguslawski detected a comet, estimated its course, and reported it to Herr Geheimer Ober-Regierungs-Rath . For this, the comet (also known as 1835 I) was named after him.

He also did valuable observations and calculations of Biela's , Encke's and Halley's Comets , published contributions in astronomy magazines and participated in the publication of the magazine Uranus from 1842 to his death in 1851.

At the university, the mechanics [1] Ernst Carl Gottfried Wilhelm (1794–1843) and Ernst Karl Gustav Theodor Pinzger (1819–1882) supported him. They also were active for the "Schlesische Gesellschaft für vaterländische Kultur".

Honours [ edit ] Boguslawski has the comet he discovered named after him, as well as a lunar crater . Further, he received the first gold comet medal for his work in identifying Comet Boguslawksi. He was awarded the Lalande Prize in 1835.

External links [ edit ] Schreiben des Herrn Hauptmanns v. Boguslawski, Conservators der Breslauer Sternwarte, an den Herausgeber Der Comet muß etwa einen Tag vorher den O. passirt haben ... Der Comet wird hiernach, wie es scheint, gegen den 16ten Nov. durch das Perihel gehen (in German) Meyers Konversationslexikon (in German) Gauß-Register: Boguslawski, Palm Heinrich Ludwig Pruss von (1789-1851) (in German) Handwerkergelehrte und Instrumentenmacher (in German) Who's Who in Comet History: Boguslawski, Palm Heinrich Ludwig von (1789-1851) Original report of comet in German, Biography in Swedish Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Netherlands People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other SNAC This article about a German academic is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Palm_Heinrich_Ludwig_von_Boguslawski&oldid=1261293740 " Categories : 19th-century German astronomers Astronomers from the Kingdom of Prussia German untitled nobility Prussian Army personnel of the Napoleonic Wars Academic staff of the University of Breslau Scientists from Magdeburg 1789 births 1851 deaths Recipients of the Lalande Prize German academic biography stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with German-language sources (de) All stub articles This page was last edited on 5 December 2024, at 09:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Palm Heinrich Ludwig von Boguslawski 7 languages Add topic

