Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Career 3 Contribution 4 Works 5 Views and reception 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents D. P. Agrawal 2 languages हिन्दी தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from D.P. Agrawal ) Indian historian, archaeologist, and author This article is about the science and technology historian. For the chairman of the Union Public Service Commission, see D. P. Agrawal (UPSC chairman) .

Dharampal Agrawal with Rajiv Dixit D. P. Agrawal ( Dharmapal Agrawal ) is a historian of Indian science and technology, archaeologist, [ 1 ] and author. He has published works on Indian archaeology , metallurgy , the history of science, and palaeoclimate .

Biography [ edit ] Dharma Pal Agrawal was born on 15 March 1933 at Almora , United Provinces of British India (presently in Uttarakhand ).

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] He has worked with the Archaeological Survey of India , Tata Institute of Fundamental Research and Physical Research Laboratory , all of which are All-India institutions. His researches were mainly done in the fields of palaeoenvironment , prehistoric archaeology , radiocarbon & TL dating , archaeometallurgy , India's contributions to the world of science and technology. At the Physical Research Laboratory, he was a Senior Professor and Area Chairman of the Quaternary Paleo-Climate Study Area, a large multi-disciplinary research group.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He has been a visiting professor at the University of Pennsylvania and at the International Research Center at Kyoto , [ 2 ] Contribution [ edit ] Agrawal has made significant contributions to the fields of paleoenvironment, pre-historic archaeology, radiocarbon dating, the archaeology of metallurgy, and the history of science and technology in India. He has edited the journal Man and Environment for a number of years, and served on the advisory board of journals World Archaeology and Le anthropologie . He is a fellow of the National Academy of Sciences.

[ 4 ] and a member of the National Commission on the History of Science. During his academic career he has published 15 books and about 250 papers on different topics.

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] After retirement from the Physical Research Laboratory in 1993, he has been working as the Honorary Director of the Lok Vigyan Kendra in Almora, where he coordinates research on " traditional knowledge systems," codifying the accumulated folk knowledge on the crops, medicinal plants and biodiversity. He is also the chief editor of a multi-volume international project on the history of science and technology.

[ 3 ] Works [ edit ] Books The Copper Bronze Age in India , Munshiram Manoharlal, 1971.

Prehistoric Chronology and Radiocarbon Dating in India (with S. Kusumgar) Munshiram Manoharlal, 1974.

ISBN 8121503167 .

Protohistoric Archaeology of India (in Hindi, with P. L. Agrawal), U.P. Granth Akademi, Lucknow, 1975.

Essays in Indian Protohistory (with D. K. Chakrabarti ). B.R.Publishers, 1978.

ISBN 8170180430 .

The Archaeology of India . London : Curzon Press, 1981.

Man and Environment in India through Ages , New Delhi: Books and Books, 1992.

Dating the Human Past (with M. G. Vadava), Poona: Indian Society for Prehistoric and Quaternary Studies, 1995.

Central Himalayas: An Archaeological, Linguistic and Cultural Synthesis (with J.S. Kharakwal). Aryan Books International, 1998.

ISBN 8173051321 .

Ancient Metal Technology and Archaeology of South Asia: A Pan-Asian Perspective . Aryan Books International, 2000.

ISBN 8173051771 .

South Asian Prehistory: A Multidisciplinary Study (with J.S. Kharakwal), Aryan Books International, 2002.

ISBN 8173052360 .

Bronze and Iron Ages in South Asia (with J.S. Kharakwal), Aryan Books International, 2003.

ISBN 8173052522 .

The Indus Civilization: An Interdisciplinary Perspective , Aryan Books International, 2007.

ISBN 8173053103 .

Edited works Palaeoclimatic and Palaeoenvironmental Changes in Asia (with S. K. Gupta and P. Sharma).. New Delhi : Indian National Science Academy, 1988.

Radiocarbon and Indian Archaeology (with A. Ghosh). Bombay: Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 1973.

Ecology and Archaeology of Western India (with Agrawal, D.P. and B.M. Pande). New Delhi: Concept Publishers, 1977.

Climate and Geology of Kashmir and Central India : The Last 4 Million years (with R. V. Krishnamurthy and S. Kusumgar). T.T. Publishers (New Delhi), 1985.

Traditional Knowledge and Archaeology , (with Sameer Jamal and Manikant Shah). Aryan Books International, 2007.

ISBN 8173053340 .

The Harappan Technology and its Legacy , Rupa and Co, 2009 (with Infinity Foundation).

ISBN 8129115328 .

Views and reception [ edit ] The 1971 book Copper Bronze Age in India reports an integrated study of the Copper-Bronze Age carried out at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, covering its chronology, technology and ecology.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "UPSC questions poorly framed, says Indian History Congress" .

The Hindu . 19 February 2011 . Retrieved 5 May 2011 .

^ a b Dharma Pal Agrawal, Brief Bio-Data , Infinity Foundation, retrieved 2015-08-27.

^ a b c Traditional Knowledge Systems and Archaeology, About the Author , Amazon India.

^ a b Fellows Archived 26 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine , National Academy of Sciences, India, ^ Dharma Pal Agrawal , Participant detail, 2002 Indic Colloquium, Infinity Foundation.

^ Aspects of Ancient Indian Technology , Motilal Banarsidass, 1979, pp. 7–, ISBN 978-81-208-3040-0 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to D. P. Agrawal .

Some publications online Interview: Dr D P Agrawal; History of Indian Science and Technology , Shivanand Kanavi Blog.

v t e Sangh Parivar (RSS Family of Organisations) Organisations Foundation Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Political party Bharatiya Janata Party (1980-present) Bharatiya Jana Sangh (1951-1977) Akhil Bharatiya Ram Rajya Parishad (1948-1971) Religion-specific wings Vishva Hindu Parishad Bajrang Dal Durga Vahini Muslim Rashtriya Manch Rashtriya Sikh Sangat Hindu Jagarana Vedike Dharm Jagaran Samiti Hindu Rashtra Sena Strata and trade-based wings Farmers wing: Bharatiya Kisan Sangh Rashtra Sevika Samiti Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh National Hindu Students' Forum NGOs and social welfare: Vidya Bharati Ekal Vidyalaya Seva Bharati Vivekananda Kendra Bharat Vikas Parishad Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram Friends of Tribals Society Bharat Lok Shiksha Parishad India Development and Relief Fund Think tank affiliates India Foundation India Policy Foundation Swadeshi Jagaran Manch Syama Prasad Mookerjee Research Foundation Vivekananda International Foundation Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana Project specific Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas Sabarimala Ayyappa Seva Samajam Region specific Hindu Munnani Hindu Aikya Vedi News and communication Organiser Panchjanya Vishwa Samvad Kendra Others Samskrita Bharati Kreeda Bharati Central Hindu Military Education Society Sarsanghchalaks Present Mohan Bhagwat (2009–present) Past K. S. Sudarshan (2000–2009) Rajendra Singh (1994–2000) Madhukar Dattatraya Deoras (1973–1994) M. S. Golwalkar (1940–1973) Laxman Vasudev Paranjape (1930–1931) K. B. Hedgewar (1925–1930 and 1931–1940) Other major figures Head of state Atal Bihari Vajpayee (Prime Minister of India) Lal Krishna Advani (Deputy Prime Minister of India) Narendra Modi (Prime Minister of India) Ram Nath Kovind (President of India) Venkaiah Naidu (Vice President of India) C. P. Radhakrishnan (Vice President of India) Freedom fighters Balkrishna Shivram Moonje Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Senior affiliates Ashok Singhal Babasaheb Apte Bal Thackeray Chinmayananda Saraswati Eknath Ranade Prabhakar Balwant Dani Praveen Togadia Ram Madhav Ramchandra Das Paramhans S. S. Apte Suresh Joshi Sambhaji Bhide Activists Seshadri Chari Giriraj Kishore K. N. Govindacharya Madhukar Rao Bhagwat Swami Karpatri Authors Present Bibliography Arun Shourie David Frawley D. P. Agrawal Dilip Kumar Chakrabarti François Gautier Koenraad Elst Michel Danino Rajiv Malhotra Ram Gopal Subhash Kak Suresh Chavhanke Past Balraj Madhok Dharampal Girilal Jain K. D. Sethna K. S. Lal N. S. Rajaram Raj Krishna Rajiv Dixit Ram Swarup Sita Ram Goel Swaraj Prakash Gupta Philosophy Cultural Hinduism Bharat Mata Hindu nationalism Hindutva Greater India Akhand Bharat Indianisation Indian influence on Southeast Asia Indosphere Mandala Sanskritisation Integral humanism Equality without appeasement Anti-minoritarianism Sarva Dharma Sama Bhava Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam Dharma-Dhamma unity Unity of Indian-origin religions : Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism This biographical article about an Indian historian is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=D._P._Agrawal&oldid=1291959730 " Categories : 20th-century Indian archaeologists Living people University of Calcutta alumni Scientists from Uttarakhand Indian social sciences writers Indian metallurgists Indian technology writers 1933 births Indian academic biography stubs Asian historian stubs Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 All stub articles This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 11:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents D. P. Agrawal 2 languages Add topic

