Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Topics Toggle Topics subsection 1.1 Planning 1.2 Planners 1.3 Methodology 2 Examples of plans 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Plan 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Eesti فارسی Gagauz 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Македонски मराठी 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia List of steps with details of timing and resources, used to achieve a goal For other uses, see Plan (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Plan" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A plan is typically any list of steps, with details of timing and resources, used to achieve an objective . It is commonly understood as a temporal set of intended actions through which one expects to achieve a goal , and is sometimes represented by a diagram .

For spatial or planar topologic or topographic sets see map .

Plans can be formal or informal: Structured and formal plans, used by multiple people, are more likely to occur in projects , diplomacy , careers , economic development , military campaigns, combat , sports , games , or in the conduct of other business . In most cases, the absence of a well-laid plan can have adverse effects: for example, a non-robust project plan can cost the organization time and money.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Informal or ad hoc plans are created by individuals in all of their pursuits.

The most popular ways to describe plans are by their breadth, time frame, and specificity; however, these planning classifications are not independent of one another. For instance, there is a close relationship between the short- and long-term categories and the strategic and operational categories.

It is common for less formal plans to be created as abstract ideas, and remain in that form as they are maintained and put to use. More formal plans as used for business and military purposes, while initially created with and as an abstract thought, are likely to be written down, drawn up or otherwise stored in a form that is accessible to multiple people across time and space. This allows more reliable collaboration in the execution of the plan.

Topics [ edit ] Planning [ edit ] The term planning implies the working out of sub-components in some degree of elaborate detail. Broader-brush enunciations of objectives may qualify as metaphorical roadmaps . Planning literally just means the creation of a plan; it can be as simple as making a list . It has not acquired a technical meaning, however, to cover the area of government legislation and regulations elated to the use of resources.

Planning can refer to the planned use of any and all resources, as in the succession of Five-Year Plans through which the government of the Soviet Union sought to develop the country. However, the term is most frequently used in relation to planning for the use of land and related resources, for example in urban planning , transportation planning , etc.

In a governmental context, "planning" without any qualification is most likely to mean the regulation of land use . See also zoning .

Planners [ edit ] Planners are the professionals that have the requisite training to take or make decisions that will help or balance the society in order to have a functional, aesthetic, and convenient environment.

Methodology [ edit ] Concepts such as top-down planning (as opposed to bottom-up planning) reveal similarities with the systems thinking behind the top-down model .

The subject touches such broad fields as psychology , game theory , communications and information theory , which inform the planning methods that people seek to use and refine; as well as logic and science (i.e. methodological naturalism) which serve as a means of testing different parts of a plan for reliability or consistency.

The specific methods used to create and refine plans depend on who is to make it, who is to put it to use, and what resources are available for the task. The methods used by an individual in his or her mind or personal organizer , may be very different from the collection of planning techniques found in a corporate board-room, and the planning done by a project manager has different priorities and uses different tools to the planning done by an engineer or industrial designer .

Examples of plans [ edit ] Architectural plan Business plan Fragplan Flight plan Health plan Marketing plan Military plan Project plan Site plan The Schlieffen Plan The Five-Year Plan system in the former Soviet Union The Marshall Plan See also [ edit ] Automated planning Critical path method PDCA (plan–do–check–act) Program evaluation and review technique (PERT) Roadmap Strategy References [ edit ] ^ "What Should Be Included in a Project Plan" .

www.pmhut.com . 9 June 2009 . Retrieved December 18, 2009 .

^ J. Scott Armstrong (1986).

"The Value of Formal Planning for Strategic Decisions: A Reply" (PDF) .

Strategic Management Journal .

7 (2): 183– 185.

doi : 10.1002/smj.4250070207 .

S2CID 29733040 .

Wikiquote has quotations related to plans .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plan&oldid=1304823742 " Categories : Management Intention Planning Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from October 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 10:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plan 25 languages Add topic

