Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Geography 3 Coat of arms 4 Towns and municipalities 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents County of Bentheim (district) 40 languages Aragonés 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Ladin Latina Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies Nordfriisk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°25′N 7°05′E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.42°N 7.08°E ﻿ / 52.42; 7.08 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia District in Lower Saxony, Germany This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "County of Bentheim" district – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) District in Lower Saxony, Germany Grafschaft Bentheim District Flag Coat of arms Country Germany State Lower Saxony Capital Nordhorn Government • District admin.

Uwe Fietzek Area • Total 981 km 2 (379 sq mi) Population (31 December 2023) [ 1 ] • Total 144,212 • Density 150/km 2 (380/sq mi) Time zone UTC+01:00 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+02:00 ( CEST ) Vehicle registration NOH Website grafschaft.de County of Bentheim ( German : Grafschaft Bentheim ) is a district ( Landkreis ) in Lower Saxony , Germany . It is bounded by (from the west and clockwise) the Dutch provinces of Overijssel and Drenthe , the district of Emsland , and the districts of Steinfurt and Borken in North Rhine-Westphalia .

History [ edit ] The District has roughly the same territory as the County of Bentheim , a state of the Holy Roman Empire that was dissolved in 1803.

Geography [ edit ] Railway station Bad Bentheim The district's north-western region named Niedergrafschaft [ de ] ( low county ) protrudes into Dutch territory, and borders it to the north, west and south. The Vechte River (Dutch Vecht ) traverses the district from south to north and flows into the Netherlands .

Coat of arms [ edit ] The arms are identical to the arms of the historic County of Bentheim . The origin of these arms is unknown.

Towns and municipalities [ edit ] Clickable map of towns and municipalities in the district Towns Samtgemeinden Bad Bentheim Nordhorn Free municipalities Wietmarschen 1.

Emlichheim Emlichheim 1 Hoogstede Laar Ringe 2.

Neuenhaus Esche Georgsdorf Lage Neuenhaus 1, 2 Osterwald 3.

Schüttorf Engden Isterberg Ohne Quendorf Samern Schüttorf 1, 2 4.

Uelsen Getelo Gölenkamp Halle Itterbeck Uelsen 1 Wielen Wilsum 1 seat of the Samtgemeinde; ²town References [ edit ] ^ "Fortschreibung des Bevölkerungsstandes auf Basis des Zensus 2022, Stand 31. Dezember 2023" (in German).

Landesamt für Statistik Niedersachsen .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Landkreis Grafschaft Bentheim .

Official website (in German) v t e Urban and rural districts in the state of Lower Saxony in Germany Region Hanover Urban districts Braunschweig Delmenhorst Emden Oldenburg Osnabrück Salzgitter Wilhelmshaven Wolfsburg Rural districts Ammerland Aurich Bentheim Celle Cloppenburg Cuxhaven Diepholz Emsland Friesland Gifhorn Goslar Göttingen Hameln-Pyrmont Harburg Heidekreis Helmstedt Hildesheim Holzminden Leer Lüchow-Dannenberg Lüneburg Nienburg Northeim Oldenburg Osnabrück Osterholz Peine Rotenburg Schaumburg Stade Uelzen Vechta Verden Wesermarsch Wittmund Wolfenbüttel Districts of German states ( Full list ) Baden-Württemberg Bavaria Brandenburg Bremen Hesse Lower Saxony Mecklenburg-Vorpommern North Rhine-Westphalia Rhineland-Palatinate Saarland Saxony Saxony-Anhalt Schleswig-Holstein Thuringia v t e Regions and landscapes of Lower Saxony Achim-Verden Geest Altes Land Ammerland Brunswick Land Calenberg Land Eichsfeld Elbe–Weser Emsland County of Bentheim Land Hadeln Land Wursten Harz Hildesheim Börde Hümmling Innerste Uplands Kehdingen Leine Uplands Lüneburg Heath Middle Weser Oldenburg Land Oldenburg Münsterland Osnabrück Land Eastphalia East Frisia Schaumburg Land Solling South Lower Saxony Stade Geest Wendland Weser Uplands Wümme Depression Zeven Geest Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX 52°25′N 7°05′E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.42°N 7.08°E ﻿ / 52.42; 7.08 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=County_of_Bentheim_(district)&oldid=1252909317 " Categories : Districts of Lower Saxony County of Bentheim (district) Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2013 All articles needing additional references Pages using infobox settlement with no coordinates Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 23 October 2024, at 13:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents County of Bentheim (district) 40 languages Add topic

