Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Timing of seasonal breeding 2 Physiology Toggle Physiology subsection 2.1 Day length 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Seasonal breeder 19 languages العربية Български Deutsch Esperanto فارسی हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Македонски Bahasa Melayu Русский Simple English کوردی Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Breeding season ) Animal species that successfully mate during certain times of year "mating season" redirects here. For other uses, see The Mating Season (disambiguation) .

Seasonal breeders are animal species that successfully mate only during certain times of the year. These times of year allow for the optimization of survival of young due to factors such as ambient temperature, food and water availability, and changes in the predation behaviors of other species.

[ 1 ] Related sexual interest and behaviors are expressed and accepted only during this period. Female seasonal breeders will have one or more estrus cycles only when she is "in season" or fertile and receptive to mating . At other times of the year, they will be anestrus , or have a dearth of their sexual cycle. Unlike reproductive cyclicity, seasonality is described in both males and females.

[ citation needed ] Male seasonal breeders may exhibit changes in testosterone levels, testes weight, and fertility depending on the time of year.

[ 2 ] Seasonal breeders are distinct from opportunistic breeders , that mate whenever the conditions of their environment become favorable, and continuous breeders that mate year-round.

Timing of seasonal breeding [ edit ] The breeding season is when seasonal breeders reproduce. Various variables can affect when it occurs.

[ 3 ] A primary influence on the timing of reproduction is food availability. Organisms generally time especially stressing events of reproduction to occur in sync with increases in food availability. This is not always true, however, both because of the importance of other factors and the invalidation of this generalization. For example, in species reproducing at high latitudes, food availability before breeding is more important than availability during reproduction itself. Other factors can also be responsible. For example, species that are preyed upon frequently may time reproduction to occur out of sync with the peak in density of predators.

[ 4 ] Physiology [ edit ] The hypothalamus is considered to be the central control for reproduction due to its role in hormone regulation.

[ 5 ] Hence, factors that determine when a seasonal breeder will be ready for mating affect this tissue. This is achieved specifically through changes in the production of the hormone GnRH . GnRH in turn transits to the pituitary where it promotes the secretion of the gonadotropins LH and FSH , both pituitary hormones critical for reproductive function and behavior, into the bloodstream. Changes in gonadotropin secretion initiate the end of anestrus in females.

Day length [ edit ] Seasonal breeding readiness is strongly regulated by length of day ( photoperiod ) and thus season. Photoperiod likely affects the seasonal breeder through changes in melatonin secretion by the pineal gland that ultimately alter GnRH release by the hypothalamus.

[ 3 ] Hence, seasonal breeders can be divided into groups based on fertility period. "Long day" breeders cycle when days get longer (spring) and are in anestrus in fall and winter. Some animals that are long day breeders include ring-tailed lemurs , horses , hamsters , groundhogs , and mink . "Short day" breeders cycle when the length of daylight shortens (fall) and are in anestrus in spring and summer. The decreased light during the fall decreases the firing of the retinal nerves, in turn decreasing the excitation of the superior cervical ganglion, which then decreases the inhibition of the pineal gland, finally resulting in an increase in melatonin . This increase in melatonin results in an increase in GnRH and subsequently an increase in the hormones LH and FSH , which stimulate cyclicity.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Musth – Condition in male elephants Rut (mammalian reproduction) – Mating season of ruminant mammals References [ edit ] ^ Prendergast BJ (2005). "Internalization of seasonal time".

Horm. Behav .

48 (5): 503– 11.

doi : 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2005.05.013 .

PMID 16026787 .

S2CID 24785237 .

^ Johnson, A.D. (1970).

Development, Anatomy, and Physiology .

Academic Press .

ISBN 0-12-386601-4 .

^ a b M. N. Lehman; R. L. Goodman; F. J. Karsch; G. L. Jackson; S. J. Berriman; H. T. Jansen (1997). "The GnRH System of Seasonal Breeders: Anatomy and Plasticity".

Brain Res. Bull .

44 (4): 445– 57.

doi : 10.1016/S0361-9230(97)00225-6 .

PMID 9370210 .

S2CID 29049687 .

^ Williams, Cory T.; Klaassen, Marcel; Barnes, Brian M.; Buck, C. Loren; Arnold, Walter; Giroud, Sylvain; Vetter, Sebastian G.; Ruf, Thomas (2017).

"Seasonal reproductive tactics: annual timing and the capital-to-income breeder continuum" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

372 (1734): 20160250.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2016.0250 .

ISSN 0962-8436 .

PMC 5647277 .

PMID 28993494 .

^ "An Overview of the Hypothalamus" .

EndocrineWeb . Retrieved 2017-01-26 .

^ L. Senger, Phillip (2005).

Pathways to Pregnancy and Parturition (2nd Revised ed.). p.

154 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seasonal_breeder&oldid=1248348123 " Categories : Animal breeding Ethology Fertility Reproduction in animals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 This page was last edited on 29 September 2024, at 01:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seasonal breeder 19 languages Add topic

