Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Artistic styles 3 Representative artists 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Greek academic art of the 19th century 3 languages العربية 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on the History of Greek art Greek Bronze Age Aegean art Cycladic art Minoan art Minoan pottery Mycenaean art Mycenaean pottery Protogeometric art Ancient Greece Geometric art Archaic Greek art Ancient Greek art Ancient Greek architecture Ancient Greek pottery Ancient Greek sculpture Hellenistic art see also: Greco-Buddhist art Medieval Greece Byzantine art Byzantine Iconoclasm Macedonian art Post-Byzantine Greece Cretan school Heptanese school Modern Greece Modern Greek art Modern Greek architecture Munich School Contemporary Greek art v t e The most important artistic movement of Greek art in the 19th century was academic realism , often called in Greece "the Munich School " ( Greek : Σχολή του Μονάχου ) because of the strong influence from the Royal Academy of Fine Arts of Munich ( German : Münchner Akademie der Bildenden Künste ), [ 1 ] where many Greek artists trained. The Munich School painted the same sort of scenes in the same sort of style as Western European academic painters in several countries, and did generally not attempt to incorporate Byzantine stylistic elements into their work.

History [ edit ] The creation of romantic art in Greece can be explained mainly due to the particular relationships that were created between recently liberated Greece (1830) and Bavaria during King Otto 's years (see: Kingdom of Greece ). In this period the Greek state was encouraging young artists to study at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Munich and in particular study painting .

[ 2 ] In addition, after centuries of Ottoman rule, few opportunities existed for young artist in Greece itself, immediately after independence, so studying abroad was imperative for them. Munich was an important international center for the arts and was the place where the majority of Greek artists of the 19th century would choose to study; a minority would go to Paris . Both academic and personal bonds developed between early Greek painters and Munich artistry, giving birth to the Greek "Munich School" of painting. Many of these young artists later returned to Greece to teach at the Polytechnic School and later Athens School of Fine Arts , where they would transmit their artistic experiences. Some of them, like Nikolaus Gysis , chose to remain in Munich, the so-called Athens on the Isar .

[ 3 ] Artistic styles [ edit ] The works of the Munich school painters are characterized by an expert but over-use of colours that would overshadow the figures' expressions. Scenes were depicted in a pompous and theatrical way, although not lacking in emotional tension. In academic realism the imperative is the ethography , the representation of urban and/or rural life with a special attention in the depiction of architectural elements, the traditional cloth and the various objects. Munich School painters were specialized on portraiture , landscape painting and still life .

Representative artists [ edit ] Nikolaus Gysis , Eros and the Painter .

Artists belonging to the Munich School include the first painters of free Greece, such as Theodoros Vryzakis (1814–1878) and Dionysios Tsokos (1820–1862). According to other art critics, the latter belongs more to the Heptanese School . Both of them draw their subjects from the Greek War of Independence in 1821, focusing on idealised ideas on the Greek Revolution and not giving much attention to the violent and tragic aspects of a war. Even more dramatic in their depictions were the later Konstantinos Volanakis (1837–1907) and Ioannis Altamouras (1852–1878), who were focused more on the naval battles of the 1821 Revolution .

[ 1 ] Apart from Volanakis , the main representatives of this artistic movement were painters from the second half of the 19th century, such as Nikiphoros Lytras (1832–1904), Nikolaos Gysis (1842–1901), Georgios Iacovidis (1853–1907) and Georgios Roilos (1867–1928). In his mature career Roilos went beyond the principles of the Munich School and introduced impressionism into Greek painting.

Gysis stayed at the Academy in Germany while the others have returned to teach at the Athens School of Fine Arts . Their teaching and artistry have marked the 19th-century artistic era in Greece.

[ 2 ] Nikiphoros Lytras is considered the pope of Greek painting and the major iconographer of Greek life during the 19th century. Paintings such as The milkman or The awaiting consist reference points in Greek art .

Gysis worked mainly on ethography while at the maturity of his career he shifted towards the iconography of visions, allegories and symbolisms. The paintings of Georgios Iacovidis consisted mainly of portraits and scenes depicting children. The latter was the founder and first curator of the National Gallery of Greece in Athens .

[ 1 ] Other painters include Epameinondas Thomopoulos (1878–1976), Ioannis Koutsis (1860−1953), Stylianos Miliadis (1881−1965), Nikolaos Vokos (1854–1902), Ioannis Zacharias (1845–?) and Polychronis Lembesis (1848–1913). Influences of academic realism can also be seen in the work of many Greek artists such as Spyridon Vikatos (1878–1960), Nikolaos Davis (1883–1967), Thalia Flora-Karavia (1871–1960), Ioannis Doukas (1841–1916) and Ektor Doukas (1886–1969).

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] The end of the movement started when some Greek painters after the mid-19th century such as Periclis Pantazis (1849–1884) departed from academic realism towards impressionism and the final end occurred when expressionist Nikolaos Lytras (1883–1927), Georgios Roilos, and Konstantinos Parthenis (1878–1967) started to teach at the Athens School of Fine Arts.

[ 1 ] Gallery [ edit ] Constantinos Volanakis , Anchored boats .

Ioannis Altamouras , The port of Copenhagen .

Nikiphoros Lytras , Execution of Patriarch Gregory V of Constantinople .

Nikolaus Gyzis , Learning by heart .

Theodoros Rallis , The Booty .

Georgios Jakobides , Grandma's Favorite .

Nikiphoros Lytras , Carols .

Nikolaus Gyzis , Capuchin friar .

Nikiphoros Lytras , The blowing up of the Nasuh Ali Pasha's flagship by Kanaris .

Vassileios Chatzis , Boat in rough waters .

Georgios Jakobides , Bavarian village .

Theodoros Vryzakis , The sortie of Messologhi .

Nikolaus Gysis , Boy with cherries .

See also [ edit ] Art in modern Greece National Gallery of Athens Greek Art References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Bank of Greece – Events Archived 2007-06-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c New Page 1 ^ "Greek Artists at the Academy of Munich, 19th - 20th century" . Archived from the original on 2007-08-05 . Retrieved 2007-07-29 .

^ Towards the formation of a professional identity: women artists in Greece at the beginning of the twentieth century (2005) Chariklia-Glafki Gotsia Women's History Review , 14;pp: 285 - 300 External links [ edit ] National Gallery of Athens The Emergence of Modern Greek Painting, 1830-1930 From the Bank of Greece collection v t e Greek artists of the Munich school Nikolaos Alektoridis Ioannis Altamouras Nikolaos Gyzis Nicolaus Davis Ektor Doukas Ioannis Doukas Thalia Flora-Karavia Dimitrios Geraniotis Vasileios Hatzis Georgios Jakobides Ioannis Koutsis Emmanouil Lampakis Polychronis Lembesis Nikiforos Lytras Stylianos Miliadis Georgios Roilos Epameinondas Thomopoulos Spyridon Vikatos Nikolaos Vokos Konstantinos Volanakis Theodoros Vryzakis Ioannis Zacharias Georgios Chatzopoulos Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greek_academic_art_of_the_19th_century&oldid=1265056157 " Categories : Munich School Arts in Greece Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 24 December 2024, at 21:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greek academic art of the 19th century 3 languages Add topic

