Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Chronology 2 List of RER B stations 3 Service patterns Toggle Service patterns subsection 3.1 Off-peak service 3.2 Rush hour service 3.2.1 General scheme 3.3 Mission code 4 Rolling stock 5 Future Toggle Future subsection 5.1 "Aérofret" infill station 5.2 Northeastern extension of the Mitry–Claye branch to the Dammartin-en-Goële area 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents RER B 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hybrid suburban commuter and rapid transit system serving Paris, France and its suburbs.

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "RER B" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) RER B RER B train at Aéroport Charles de Gaulle 2 TGV Overview Termini Aéroport Charles de Gaulle 2 TGV (B3), Mitry–Claye (B5) Robinson (B2), Saint-Rémy-lès-Chevreuse (B4) Connecting lines Stations 47 Service Type Rapid transit / commuter rail System Réseau Express Régional Operator(s) RATP / SNCF Rolling stock MI 79 , MI 84 Ridership 165 million journeys per annum (2004) History Opened 8 December 1977 ; 47 years ago ( 1977-12-08 ) (last extension in 1994 ; 31 years ago ( 1994 ) ) Technical Line length 80 km (50 mi) Track gauge 1,435 mm ( 4 ft 8 + 1 ⁄ 2 in ) standard gauge Electrification Overhead line : 25 kV 50 Hz AC 1,500 V DC Route map Show geographically accurate map Legend proposed extension Rouvres Dammartin–Juilly –Saint-Mard Thieux–Nantouillet Compans Aéroport CDG 2 TGV B3 B5 Mitry–Claye Aéroport CDG 1 Villeparisis – Mitry-le-Neuf Aérofret Parc des Expositions Vert-Galant Villepinte Sevran – Livry * * Sevran – Beaudottes Aulnay-sous-Bois Le Blanc-Mesnil Drancy * Le Bourget La Courneuve–Aubervilliers La Plaine–Stade de France ↑ 25 kV AC ↓ 1.5 kV DC Gare du Nord ( Magenta Gare de l'Est ) Châtelet–Les Halles Seine Saint-Michel–Notre-Dame Luxembourg Port-Royal Denfert-Rochereau Cité Universitaire Gentilly Laplace * Arcueil–Cachan Bagneux Bourg-la-Reine Sceaux Parc de Sceaux Fontenay-aux-Roses La Croix de Berny Tvm Robinson B2 Antony Fontaine-Michalon Les Baconnets Massy–Verrières * Massy–Palaiseau Palaiseau Palaiseau–Villebon Lozère Le Guichet Yvette Orsay-Ville Bures-sur-Yvette La Hacquinière Gif-sur-Yvette Courcelle-sur-Yvette B4 Saint-Rémy-lès-Chevreuse All stations are accessible * Under construction This diagram: view talk edit Show diagram map RER B is one of the five lines in the Réseau Express Régional (English: Regional Express Network), a hybrid commuter rail and rapid transit system serving Paris , France and its Île-de-France suburbs. The 80-kilometre (50 mi) RER B line crosses the region from north to south, with all trains serving a group of stations in central Paris, before branching out towards the ends of the line.

The line opened in stages starting in December 1977 by connecting two existing suburban commuter rail lines with a new tunnel under Paris: the Chemin de Fer du Nord to the north (which formerly terminated at Gare du Nord ) and the Ligne de Sceaux to the south (which formerly terminated at Luxembourg station ).

The RER B, along with the rest of the RER network, has had a significant social impact on Paris and the surrounding region by speeding up trips across central Paris, by making far fewer stops than the Paris Métro and by bringing far-flung suburbs within easy reach of the city centre. The line has far exceeded all traffic expectations, with passengers taking 165 million journeys per year in 2004. That makes the RER B the second busiest single rail line in Europe (after RER A ).

The line faces capacity challenges as a result of sharing a tunnel with RER D trains between Châtelet–Les Halles and Gare du Nord.

Chronology [ edit ] The RER B opened in stages starting in December 1977 by connecting two existing suburban commuter rail lines with a new tunnel under Paris: the Chemin de Fer du Nord to the north (which formerly terminated at Gare du Nord ) and the Ligne de Sceaux to the south (which formerly terminated at Luxembourg station ).

June 1846 : The Ligne de Sceaux from Massy to Denfert-Rochereau opens to the public.

1862 : The Chemin de Fer du Nord line from Paris to Soissons via Mitry-Claye is opened.

1895 : The Ligne de Sceaux is extended from Denfert-Rochereau to Luxembourg .

1937 : The CMP (the operator of the Paris Métro and predecessor of today's RATP ) purchases the Ligne de Sceaux , planning to integrate it into a future regional metro network, now known as the Réseau Express Régional (RER).

May 1976 : A new 13.5 km (8.4 mi) long branch from Aulnay-sous-Bois to Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport ( terminal 1 ) is opened, linking the airport with Paris.

December 1977 : The Ligne de Sceaux is extended north 2 km (1.2 mi) from Luxembourg station to Châtelet-les Halles station and becomes the RER B .

December 1981 : The RER B is extended north 2.5 km (1.6 mi) from Châtelet-les Halles station to Gare du Nord connecting with trains to Mitry-Claye and the airport. Because the lines north of Gare du Nord used a different electrification system (1.5 kV DC to the south, 25 kV AC to the north), passengers need to make a cross-platform transfer between trains on the north and south lines.

January 1983 : A new station, Parc-des-Expositions , opens between Villepinte and Roissy .

June 1983 : Improvements and dual-voltage equipment allow trains to begin traveling through Gare du Nord and across the entire length of the line.

February 1988 : A new station, St-Michel – Notre-Dame opens between Luxembourg and Châtelet to offer a quick connection with RER C and Paris Métro Line 10 at Cluny – La Sorbonne , a station which had been closed since World War II and was entirely renovated.

October 1991 : OrlyVAL line opens, connecting Antony station with Orly Airport .

November 1994 : The line is extended 1 km (0.62 mi) north to Aéroport Charles de Gaulle 2 – TGV .

January 1998 : A new station, La Plaine–Stade de France , opens near the Stade de France in time for the 1998 FIFA World Cup .

List of RER B stations [ edit ] Inside a RER B train Luxembourg on the RER B.

Inside an RER B train Travelers waiting for RER B at Châtelet–Les Halles during a day of strike in 2019 RER B at La Plaine – Stade de France .

Branch Station Zone B3 Aéroport Charles de Gaulle 2 TGV 5 Aéroport Charles de Gaulle 1 5 Parc des Expositions 4 Villepinte 4 Sevran Beaudottes 4 B5 Mitry–Claye 5 Villeparisis–Mitry-le-Neuf 5 Vert-Galant 4 Sevran–Livry 4 Main Aulnay-sous-Bois 4 Le Blanc-Mesnil 3 Drancy 3 Le Bourget 3 La Courneuve–Aubervilliers 3 La Plaine–Stade de France Saint-Denis - Aubervilliers 2 Paris-Gare du Nord 1 Châtelet–Les Halles 1 Saint-Michel–Notre-Dame 1 Luxembourg Sénat 1 Port-Royal 1 Denfert-Rochereau Colonel Rol-Tanguy 1 Cité Universitaire 1 Gentilly 2 Laplace Maison des Examens 2 Arcueil–Cachan 3 Bagneux Pont Royal 3 Bourg-la-Reine 3 B2 Sceaux 3 Fontenay-aux-Roses 3 Robinson 3 B4 Parc de Sceaux 3 La Croix de Berny 3 Antony 3 Fontaine-Michalon 4 Les Baconnets 4 Massy–Verrières 4 Massy–Palaiseau 4 Palaiseau 4 Palaiseau–Villebon 4 Lozère École polytechnique 4 Le Guichet 5 Orsay-Ville 5 Bures-sur-Yvette 5 La Hacquinière 5 Gif-sur-Yvette 5 Courcelle-sur-Yvette 5 Saint-Rémy-lès-Chevreuse 5 Service patterns [ edit ] The RER B Line has two service patterns: Off-peak hours on weekdays, Saturdays and Sundays Rush hour during the week (and special events such as matches at the Stade de France or construction work) In any case, the stations from Cité Universitaire to Paris Gare du Nord are served by every single train.

Off-peak service [ edit ] In 2021, the off-peak service is made up of 3 missions per 1 / 4H: To the south: Mission K, (KALI, KARE, etc.) for Massy–Palaiseau (Massy) Non-stop train between CDG and Paris, then local train from Paris to Massy Mission S, (SVAN, SOLO, etc.) for Robinson Local train on the entire line between Mitry—Claye and Robinson Mission P, (PEPE, PILE, etc.) for St Remy-lès-Chevreuse Local train between CDG and Paris, rapid/semi-direct train between Paris and Massy–Palaiseau, then local train to St Remy To the north: Mission E, (EKLI, ELAN, etc.) for CDG2 Local train in the south between Massy and Paris, then non-stop/direct train between Paris and CDG2 Mission E, (EFLA, ERGE, etc.) for CDG2 Local train between St Remy and Massy, rapid/semi-direct train between Massy and Paris, then local train from Paris to CDG Mission I, (IBIS, IMRE, etc.) for Mitry-Mory Local train on the whole line Rush hour service [ edit ] Rush hour is between 07:00 and 09:45 in the morning and between 16:00 and 20:00 in the afternoon.

In 2021 the rush hour service is made up of 4 missions per 1 / 4H: General scheme [ edit ] In the northern section after Paris Gare du Nord, all trains are local trains.

To the south: Mission K, (KALI, KARE, etc ...) for Massy–Palaiseau (Massy) Rapid train from Paris to Massy Mission L, (LUNE, LEVE, etc ...) for Orsay Rapid train from Paris to Massy then local train between Massy and Orsay Mission S, (SVAN, SOLO, etc ...) for Robinson Local train until Robinson Mission P, (PEPE, PILE, etc ...) for St Remy-lès-Chevreuse Semi-direct train between Paris and Massy–Palaiseau, non-stop train between Massy and Orsay, then local train between Orsay and St Remy To the north: In the northern section after Paris Gare du Nord, all trains are local trains.

2 Mission E to Roissy 2 Mission I to Mitry Mory Some infrequent missions can be seen such as missions J to Denfert Rochereau in the evening.

Mission code [ edit ] RER B mission codes are made up of four letters followed by two numbers. The first letter always indicates the destination.

Meaning of first letter used regularly Letter Destination E Aéroport Charles-de-Gaulle 2 TGV I Mitry - Claye J Denfert-Rochereau K Massy - Palaiseau L Orsay-Ville P Saint-Rémy-lès-Chevreuse Q La Plaine - Stade de France S Robinson U Laplace Meaning of first letter used exceptionally Letter Destination A Gare du Nord G Aulnay-sous-Bois H Bourg-la-Reine M Châtelet - Les Halles V Lozère X Parc des Expositions Y Les Baconnets Rolling stock [ edit ] RER B is operated by 117 sets of the MI 79 series and 31 sets of the MI 84 series. These are to be replaced from 2025 by the MI 20 series.

[ 1 ] Past fleet include the MS 61 , which operated on the line from 29 June 1967 to 28 February 1983, and the Class Z 23000 , which operated from 16 November 1937 to 27 February 1987.

Future [ edit ] "Aérofret" infill station [ edit ] Main article: Aérofret station As part of the Grand Paris public works programme, the creation of a new infill station called "Aérofret" between Parc des Expositions station to the south and Aéroport Charles de Gaulle 1 station to the north was proposed. The new station would be located adjacent to and serve the Aéroville mall as well as planned development on the western side of the freight areas on the western side of Charles de Gaulle Airport . It is slated to open by 2025 along with the planned developments in the area.

[ 2 ] Northeastern extension of the Mitry–Claye branch to the Dammartin-en-Goële area [ edit ] Already proposed in the 1994 Schéma directeur de la région Île-de-France (Île-de-France regional development plan, SDRIF), but without any concrete plans ten years later, [ 3 ] the project to extend RER B northeast from Mitry–Claye station to the Dammartin-en-Goële area, serving intermediate stations at Compans and Thieux-Nantouillet , is proposed in Phase 3 (horizon 2021-2027) of the revised SDRIF, adopted by deliberation of the Regional Council of Île-de-France on September 25, 2008.

[ 4 ] It would also involve the creation of a new terminus station located in the neighbouring commune of Rouvres , some 3.5 km (2.2 mi) north of the current Dammartin Juilly Saint-Mard station near Saint-Mard , which is old and unsuitable for such a project.

[ 5 ] The project is now expected to be completed around 2030.

See also [ edit ] List of stations of the Paris Métro List of stations of the Paris RER References [ edit ] ^ MING fleet to replace RER B Interconnexion stock Metro Report International 28 June 2018 ^ "Convention cadre de développement territorial « Cœur économique Roissy Terres des France » (pages 5-9)" (PDF) . Île-de-France regional prefecture government. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 July 2015 . Retrieved 12 January 2016 .

^ "Les transports et la révision du SDRIF de 1994" (PDF) .

ceser-iledefrance.fr . 17 February 2005 . Retrieved 1 November 2018 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "SDRIF - Développer le réseau pour accompagner le projet urbain (page 81)" (PDF) .

^ "Les élus plaident pour un terminus à Saint-Mard" .

Le Parisien . 26 November 2011.

External links [ edit ] RATP official website Archived 25 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine (in French) RATP website in English v t e Paris transport network Métro Under construction Proposed RER Transilien Tramway Bus RATP Tvm Noctilien Others CDGVAL Orlyval Montmartre Funicular Projects Grand Paris Express CDG Express Line 3bis and Line 7bis merger Administration IDFM RATP SNCF Optile Keolis Transdev Finance Navigo card Public transport fares in the Île-de-France Versement transport Stations List of Paris Métro stations Architecture Ghost stations Lists of railway stations RER Transilien in Paris List of tram stops v t e Paris passenger rail stations Mainline Operating Austerlitz Bercy Est Lyon Montparnasse Nord Saint-Lazare Closed Bastille Orsay Transilien Est Lyon Montparnasse Nord Pont Cardinet Saint-Lazare RER Line A Charles de Gaulle–Étoile Auber Châtelet–Les Halles Lyon Nation Line B Nord Châtelet–Les Halles Saint-Michel–Notre-Dame Luxembourg Port-Royal Denfert-Rochereau Cité Universitaire Line C Porte de Clichy Pereire–Levallois Neuilly–Porte Maillot Avenue Foch Avenue Henri Martin Boulainvilliers Avenue du Président Kennedy Pont du Garigliano Javel Champ de Mars–Tour Eiffel Pont de l'Alma Invalides Musée d'Orsay Saint-Michel–Notre-Dame Austerlitz Bibliothèque François Mitterrand Line D Nord Châtelet–Les Halles Lyon Line E Neuilly–Porte Maillot Haussmann–Saint-Lazare Magenta Rosa Parks See also: List of Paris Métro stations , Tramways in Île-de-France , and Transport in Paris Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=RER_B&oldid=1303359434 " Categories : Réseau Express Régional Railway lines opened in 1977 1977 establishments in France Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 14:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents RER B 23 languages Add topic

