Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics 3 Phylogenetics 4 Classification 5 History 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Singelaviria Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Realm of viruses Singelaviria Virus classification (unranked): Virus Realm: Singelaviria Kingdom: Helvetiavirae Phylum: Dividoviricota Class: Laserviricetes Order: Halopanivirales Subtaxa See text Singelaviria is a realm of viruses that includes all DNA viruses that encode major capsid proteins that contain a single vertical jelly roll fold . All viruses in Singelaviria have two major capsid proteins (MCPs) that both have a single jelly roll (SJR) fold. The MCPs form into pseudohexameric subunits of the viral capsid , which stores the viral deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and are vertical, or perpendicular, to the surface of the capsid. Apart from the SJR fold MCP (SJR-MCP), viruses in the realm also share a minor capsid protein (mCP) that also has a vertical SJR, an ATPase that packages viral DNA into the capsid, capsids that are icosahedral in shape, and a lipid membrane inside the capsid that surrounds the viral genome.

Viruses in Singelaviria infect archaea that inhabit highly saline environments and bacteria that inhabit high-temperature environments. Their genomes consist of double-stranded DNA that is either linear or circular in shape. Some viruses in the realm are capable of replication both by the lytic cycle, which produces virions, and the lysogenic cycle, in which the virus resides in the host cell as an episome . Some viruses in the realm have spikes on the vertices of their capsid that are shaped like horns or propellers.

From 2019 to 2024, viruses in Singelaviria were classified in the realm Varidnaviria , which contains DNA viruses that encode MCPs that have two vertical jelly roll folds. It was originally believed that such viruses were descended from singelavirians, but further research showed that the two groups of viruses have separate evolutionary origins, so the SJR-MCP lineage was given its own realm, Singelaviria , in 2025. It is believed by virologists that the two MCPs of singelavirians are the result of a gene duplication event of a single MCP encoded by a portoglobovirus -like virus.

Etymology [ edit ] Singelaviria is a portmanteau of sing , from Latin singulus , which means "single", Latin gelata , which means "jelly", a reference to the jelly roll fold, and - viria , the suffix used for virus realms.

[ 1 ] Members of the realm are called singelavirians .

[ 2 ] The kingdom Helvetiavirae is derived from Latin helvetia , which means "Swiss", a reference to Swiss jelly rolls, and - virae , the suffix used for virus kingdoms. The phylum Dividoviricota is from Esperanto divido , which means "division", a reference to the two single jelly roll major capsid proteins, and - viricota , the suffix used for virus phyla. The class Laserviricetes is a portmanteau of Ser pentine La ke on Rottnest Island in Australia, where the first sphaerolipovirus, SH1, was discovered, and - viricetes , the suffix used for virus classes. Lastly, the order Halopanivirales is a portmanteau of Halo arcula his pani ca , the host of SH1, and - virales , the suffix used for virus classes.

[ 3 ] Characteristics [ edit ] All viruses in Singelaviria contain a capsid that is made primarily of two major capsid proteins that both contain a vertical single jelly roll fold.

[ 1 ] The major capsid proteins are named so because they are the primary proteins that the capsid is made of. A jelly roll fold is a type of folded structure in a protein in which eight antiparallel beta strands are organized into four antiparallel beta sheets in a layout resembling a jelly roll, also called a Swiss roll.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Each beta strand is a specific sequence of amino acids, and these strands bond to their antiparallel strands via hydrogen bonds.

[ 5 ] The SJR folds are vertical, or perpendicular, to the capsid surface, in contrast to horizontal folds that are parallel to the capsid surface.

[ 4 ] During the process of assembling the viral capsid, MCPs self-assemble into hexagonal structures, hexons, that contain three copies of both MCPs. Hexons then bond to form the relatively flat triangular sides of the icosahedral capsid.

[ 6 ] In addition to the shared MCP, all singelavirians encode a minor capsid protein (mCP) that contains an SJR fold. These mCPs assemble into pentagonal structures, pentons, that form the pentagonal vertices of the icosahedral capsid.

[ 6 ] Singelavirians also encode a genome packaging ATPase of the FtsK-HerA superfamily. The ATPases in Singelaviria are enzymes that package the viral DNA into the capsid during the process of assembling virions.

[ 3 ] FtsK-HerA is a family of proteins that contains a transmembrane domain with four membrane-spanning helices at the start of the protein's amino acid sequence , a central coiled-coil region, and an ATPase with a P-loop fold at the end of the protein's amino acid sequence . FtsK proteins are found in nearly all bacteria and HerA proteins in all archaea and some bacteria.

[ 7 ] The capsids of singelavirions are icosahedral in shape. Inside the capsid is a lipid membrane that surrounds the virus's genome.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The lipid membrane is obtained from host cell membranes and contains virus-specific proteins embedded in it.

[ 8 ] Sphaerolipoviruses have two scaffold proteins that guide the position of capsid subunits, called capsomeres, and they have spikes at the vertices of the capsid that attach to the surface of cells. These spikes are made of multiple proteins and are shaped like horns or propellers.

[ 8 ] The structure of the genome varies by family: sphaerolipoviruses have linear double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) genomes 28–31 kilobase pairs (kbp) in length, [ 11 ] simuloviruses have circular dsDNA genomes 16–19 kbp in length, [ 9 ] and matsushitaviruses have circular dsDNA genomes 17–19.6 in length.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Sphaerolipoviruses are lytic viruses, i.e. infection leads directly to lysis and death of the host cell.

[ 8 ] Simuloviruses and matsushitaviruses, on the other hand, are temperate viruses capable of both lytic and lysogenic cycles . During the lysogenic cycle, simuloviruses reside as proviruses in the host cell as extra-chromosomal episomes . Furthermore, they encode a protein that controls the switch from lysogenic to lytic cycles and vice versa.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Simuloviruses and sphaerolipoviruses infect archaea that reside in highly saline environments, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] whereas matshushitaviruses infect bacteria that live in high temperature environments.

[ 10 ] Phylogenetics [ edit ] Singelavirians likely evolved from a portoglobovirus -like virus that encoded a single vertical SJR-MCP. The two SJR-MCPs of singelavirians appear to be the result of a gene duplication event that duplicated the single SJR MCP. The ancestor of the portoglobovirus SJR-MCP is unknown but is hypothesized to be a cellular SJR-containing protein. The minor capsid protein (mCP) is believed to have evolved from cellular pentameric SJR proteins. Singelavirians, like viruses of Varidnaviria , encode an ATPase of the FtsK-HerA superfamily. It is, however, thought that the need for ATP hydrolysis evolved independently in these two groups of viruses and that they incidentally recruited ATPases from the same lineage.

[ 6 ] Classification [ edit ] Singelaviria is monotypic down to the rank of order and contains three families. This taxonomy is shown hereafter.

[ 14 ] Realm: Singelaviria Kingdom: Helvetiavirae Phylum: Dividoviricota Class: Laserviricetes Order: Halopanivirales Family: Matsushitaviridae , which infect thermophilic bacteria [ 10 ] Family: Simuloviridae , which infect halophilic archaea [ 9 ] Family: Sphaerolipoviridae , which infect halophilic archaea [ 8 ] All singelavirians belong to Group I: dsDNA viruses of the Baltimore classification system, which groups viruses together based on how they produce messenger RNA and is commonly used alongside virus taxonomy, which is based on evolutionary history.

[ 1 ] Realms are the highest level of taxonomy used for viruses and Singelaviria is one of seven. The others are Adnaviria , Duplodnaviria , Monodnaviria , Riboviria , Ribozyviria , and Varidnaviria .

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] The first singelavirian to be discovered was bacteriophage IN93 , a matsuhitavirus discovered in 1995.

[ 15 ] The first sphaerolipovirus was discovered in 2003: Haloarcula Hispanic virus SH1 .

[ 16 ] [ 8 ] That same year, Natrinema virus SNJ1 was the first simulovirus discovered, but it was first mistaken to be a plasmid since it was discovered in its episomal, proviral form, which resembles plasmids.

[ 9 ] [ 17 ] The three families in the realm were initially classified as three genera within the family Sphaerolipoviridae and named Alphaspherolipovirus , Betasphaerolipovirus , and Gammasphaerolipovirus . In 2020, betasphaerolipoviruses were renamed and moved to the family Simuloviridae , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] and gammasphaerolipoviruses were renamed and moved to the family Matsushitaviridae .

[ 19 ] [ 10 ] From 2019 to 2024, singelavirians were classified in the realm Varidnaviria , which was created to accommodate all viruses with vertical jelly roll fold MCPs.

[ 3 ] After it was discovered that single and double vertical jelly roll fold MCP-encoding viruses had different evolutionary origins, the vertical SJR-MCP lineage was given its own realm, Singelaviria , in 2025.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Viruses portal List of higher virus taxa References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Koonin EV, Fischer MG, Yutin N, Kuhn JH, Krupovic M (10 April 2024).

"Reorganization of the realm Varidnaviria " (docx) .

ictv.global . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ Koonin EV, Kuhn JH, Dolja VV, Krupovic M (8 January 2024).

"Megataxonomy and global ecology of the virosphere" .

ISME J .

18 (1): wrad042.

doi : 10.1093/ismejo/wrad042 .

PMC 10848233 .

PMID 38365236 .

^ a b c d Koonin EV, Dolja VV, Krupovic M, Varsani A, Wolf YI, Yutin N, Zerbini M, Kuhn JH (18 October 2019).

"Create a megataxonomic framework, filling all principal taxonomic ranks, for DNA viruses encoding vertical jelly roll-type major capsid proteins" (docx) .

International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ a b San Martin C, van Raaij MJ (23 November 2018).

"The So Far Farthest Reaches of the Double Jelly Roll Capsid Protein Fold" .

Virol J .

15 (1): 181.

doi : 10.1186/s12985-018-1097-1 .

PMC 6260650 .

PMID 30470230 .

^ Robinson SW, Afzal AM, Leader DP (28 April 2014). "Bioinformatics: Concepts, Methods, and Data".

Handbook of Pharmacogenomics and Stratified Medicine . Academic Press. pp.

259– 287.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-386882-4.00013-X .

ISBN 9780123868831 .

^ a b c Krupovic M, Makarova KS, Koonin EV (1 February 2022).

"Cellular homologs of the double jelly-roll major capsid proteins clarify the origins of an ancient virus kingdom" .

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A .

119 (5): e2120620119.

Bibcode : 2022PNAS..11920620K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2120620119 .

PMC 8812541 .

PMID 35078938 .

^ Iyer LM, Makarova KS, Koonin EV, Aravind L (2004).

"Comparative genomics of the FtsK–HerA superfamily of pumping ATPases: implications for the origins of chromosome segregation, cell division and viral capsid packaging" .

Nucleic Acids Res .

32 (17): 5260– 5279.

doi : 10.1093/nar/gkh828 .

PMC 521647 .

PMID 15466593 .

^ a b c d e f g h Demina TA, Dyall-Smith M, Jalasvuori M, Du S, Oksanen HM (March 2023).

"ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: Sphaerolipoviridae 2023" .

J Gen Virol .

104 (3).

doi : 10.1099/jgv.0.001830 .

PMID 36916406 .

^ a b c d e f Liu Y, Du S, Chen X, Dyall-Smith M, Jalasvuori M, Oksanen HM (April 2023).

"ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: Simuloviridae 2023" .

J Gen Virol .

104 (4).

doi : 10.1099/jgv.0.001841 .

PMID 37093734 .

^ a b c d Oksanen HM, Krupovic M, Jalasvuori M (29 July 2020).

"Create one new family ( Matsushitaviridae ) including one renamed genus ( Hukuchivirus – formerly Gammasphaerolipovirus ) moved from the family Sphaerolipoviridae ( Halopanivirales )" (docx) .

ictv.global . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ Dyall-Smith M, Porter K, Tan SL, Pawlowski A, Rissanen I, Bamford JK, Krupovic M, Jalasvuori M (June 2014).

"Create the family Sphaerolipoviridae , comprising three new genera and 6 new species" (PDF) .

ictv.global . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ Matsushita I, Yanase H (December 2009).

"The genomic structure of thermus bacteriophage {phi}IN93" .

J Biochem .

146 (6): 775– 785.

doi : 10.1093/jb/mvp125 .

PMID 19675097 .

^ Rissanen I, Grimes JM, Pawlowski A, Mäntynen S, Harlos K, Bamford JK, Stuart DI (7 May 2013).

"Bacteriophage P23-77 capsid protein structures reveal the archetype of an ancient branch from a major virus lineage" .

Structure .

21 (5): 718– 726.

doi : 10.1016/j.str.2013.02.026 .

PMC 3919167 .

PMID 23623731 .

^ a b "Virus Taxonomy: 2024 Release" .

talk.ictvonline.org . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ Matsushita I, Yamashita N, Yokota A (January 1995). "Isolation and characterization of bacteriophage induced from a new isolate of Thermus aquaticus".

Microbiol Cult Collect .

11 : 133– 138.

^ Pawlowski A, Rissanen I, Bamford JK, Krupovic M, Jalasvuori M (June 2014).

"Gammasphaerolipovirus, a newly proposed bacteriophage genus, unifies viruses of halophilic archaea and thermophilic bacteria within the novel family Sphaerolipoviridae" .

Arch Virol .

159 (6): 1541– 1554.

doi : 10.1007/s00705-013-1970-6 .

PMID 24395078 .

^ a b Liu Y, Du S, Chen X, Krupovic M (31 July 2020).

"Create one new family Simuloviridae including genus Yingchengvirus (formerly Betasphaerolipovirus ) moved from the family Sphaerolipoviridae ( Halopanivirales )" (docx) .

ictv.global . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ "History of the taxon: Genus: Betasphaerolipovirus (2019 Release, MSL #35)" .

ictv.global . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ "History of the taxon: Genus: Gammesphaerolipovirus (2019 Release, MSL #35)" .

ictv.global . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ward CW (1993).

"Progress towards a higher taxonomy of viruses" .

Res Virol .

144 (6): 419– 453.

doi : 10.1016/S0923-2516(06)80059-2 .

PMC 7135741 .

PMID 8140287 .

v t e Life , non-cellular life , and comparable structures Cellular life " Prokaryota " Archaea Bacteria Mitochondrion Plastid LUCA Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae " Protista " Incertae sedis Parakaryon Microbes with highly unusual DNA (?) Non-cellular life Virus Viroid Satellite Realms Adnaviria Duplodnaviria Monodnaviria Riboviria Ribozyviria Varidnaviria Unassigned Classes Naldaviricetes Families Alphasatellitidae Ampullaviridae Anelloviridae Avsunviroidae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Finnlakeviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Pospiviroidae Spiraviridae Thaspiviridae Tolecusatellitidae Genera Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus Other Nanobe (?) Obelisk Comparable structures Bio-like structure Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Cosmid Defective interfering particle Endogenous viral element Fosmid Integrative and conjugative element Jeewanu " Nanobacterium " Phagemid Plasmid Prion Fungal prion Proteinoid microsphere Retroelements not elsewhere classified Retron Diversity-generating retroelement Telomerase reverse transcriptase Reverse transcriptase-related cellular gene Ribozyme Spiegelman's Monster Tandem repeat Transposable element Retroposon Transpoviron Xenobot v t e Baltimore ( virus classification ) DNA I: dsDNA viruses Adnaviria Zilligvirae Taleaviricota Tokiviricetes Ligamenvirales Lipothrixviridae Rudiviridae Primavirales Tristromaviridae Duplodnaviria Heunggongvirae Peploviricota Herviviricetes Herpesvirales Alloherpesviridae Herpesviridae Malacoherpesviridae Uroviricota Caudoviricetes Caudovirales Ackermannviridae Autographiviridae Chaseviridae Demerecviridae Drexlerviridae Guelinviridae Herelleviridae Myoviridae Podoviridae Rountreeviridae Salasmaviridae Schitoviridae Siphoviridae Zobellviridae Monodnaviria Shotokuvirae Cossaviricota Papovaviricetes Sepolyvirales Polyomaviridae Zurhausenvirales Papillomaviridae Varidnaviria Bamfordvirae Nucleocytoviricota Pokkesviricetes Asfuvirales Asfarviridae Chitovirales Poxviridae Megaviricetes Algavirales Phycodnaviridae Imitervirales Mimiviridae Pimascovirales Ascoviridae Iridoviridae Marseilleviridae Preplasmiviricota Maveriviricetes Priklausovirales Lavidaviridae Polintoviricetes Orthopolintovirales Adintoviridae Tectiliviricetes Belfryvirales Turriviridae Kalamavirales Tectiviridae Rowavirales Adenoviridae Vinavirales Corticoviridae Helvetiavirae Dividoviricota Laserviricetes Halopanivirales Matshushitaviridae Simuloviridae Sphaerolipoviridae Unassigned Naldaviricetes Lefavirales Baculoviridae Hytrosaviridae Nudiviridae Unassigned Nimaviridae Unassigned Families : Ampullaviridae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Thaspiviridae Genera : Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus II: ssDNA viruses Monodnaviria Loebvirae Hofneiviricota Faserviricetes Tubulavirales Inoviridae Paulinoviridae Plectroviridae Sangervirae Phixviricota Malgrandaviricetes Petitvirales Microviridae Shotokuvirae Commensaviricota Cardeaviricetes Sanitavirales Anelloviridae Cossaviricota Mouviricetes Polivirales Bidnaviridae Quintoviricetes Piccovirales Parvoviridae Cressdnaviricota Arfiviricetes Baphyvirales Bacilladnaviridae Cirlivirales Circoviridae Cremevirales Smacoviridae Mulpavirales Metaxyviridae Nanoviridae Recrevirales Redondoviridae Repensiviricetes Geplafuvirales Geminiviridae Genomoviridae Trapavirae Saleviricota Huolimaviricetes Haloruvirales Pleolipoviridae Varidnaviria Abedenavirae Produgelaviricota Ainoaviricetes Lautamovirales Finnlakeviridae Unassigned Families : Spiraviridae RNA III: dsRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Duplornaviricota Chrymotiviricetes Ghabrivirales Chrysoviridae Megabirnaviridae Quadriviridae Totiviridae Resentoviricetes Reovirales Reoviridae Vidaverviricetes Mindivirales Cystoviridae Pisuviricota Duplopiviricetes Durnavirales Amalgaviridae Curvulaviridae Hypoviridae Picobirnaviridae Partitiviridae Unassigned Families : Birnaviridae Polymycoviridae Genera : Botybirnavirus IV: (+)ssRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Kitrinoviricota Alsuviricetes Hepelivirales Alphatetraviridae Benyviridae Hepeviridae Matonaviridae Martellivirales Bromoviridae Closteroviridae Endornaviridae Kitaviridae Mayoviridae Togaviridae Virgaviridae Tymovirales Alphaflexiviridae Betaflexiviridae Deltaflexiviridae Gammaflexiviridae Tymoviridae Flasuviricetes Amarillovirales Flaviviridae Magsaviricetes Nodamuvirales Nodaviridae Sinhaliviridae Tolucaviricetes Tolivirales Carmotetraviridae Luteoviridae Tombusviridae Lenarviricota Leviviricetes Norzivirales Atkinsviridae Duinviridae Fiersviridae Solspiviridae Timlovirales Blumeviridae Steitzviridae Amabiliviricetes Wolframvirales Narnaviridae Howeltoviricetes Cryppavirales Mitoviridae Miaviricetes Ourlivirales Botourmiaviridae Pisuviricota Pisoniviricetes Nidovirales Abyssoviridae Arteriviridae Cremegaviridae Coronaviridae Euroniviridae Gresnaviridae Medioniviridae Mesoniviridae Mononiviridae Nanghoshaviridae Nanhypoviridae Olifoviridae Roniviridae Tobaniviridae Picornavirales Picornaviridae Marnaviridae Solinviviridae Caliciviridae Iflaviridae Secoviridae Dicistroviridae Polycipiviridae Sobelivirales Alvernaviridae Barnaviridae Solemoviridae Stelpaviricetes Patatavirales Potyviridae Stellavirales Astroviridae Unassigned Families : Permutotetraviridae Sarthroviridae V: (–)ssRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Negarnaviricota Chunqiuviricetes Muvirales Qinviridae Ellioviricetes Bunyavirales Cruliviridae Arenaviridae Fimoviridae Hantaviridae Leishbuviridae Mypoviridae Nairoviridae Peribunyaviridae Phasmaviridae Phenuiviridae Tospoviridae Wupedeviridae Insthoviricetes Articulavirales Amnoonviridae Orthomyxoviridae Milneviricetes Serpentovirales Aspiviridae Monjiviricetes Jingchuvirales Aliusviridae Chuviridae Crepuscuviridae Myriaviridae Natareviridae Mononegavirales Artoviridae Bornaviridae Filoviridae Lispiviridae Mymonaviridae Nyamiviridae Paramyxoviridae Pneumoviridae Rhabdoviridae Sunviridae Xinmoviridae Yunchangviricetes Goujianvirales Yueviridae Ambiviricota Suforviricetes Crytulvirales Dumbiviridae Quambiviridae Trimbiviridae Unambiviridae RT VI: ssRNA-RT viruses Riboviria Pararnavirae Artverviricota Revtraviricetes Ortervirales Belpaoviridae Metaviridae Pseudoviridae Retroviridae VII: dsDNA-RT viruses Riboviria Pararnavirae Artverviricota Revtraviricetes Blubervirales Hepadnaviridae Ortervirales Caulimoviridae Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Singelaviria&oldid=1306532479 " Categories : Singelaviria Virus realms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxobox articles possibly missing a taxonbar This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 07:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Singelaviria Add languages Add topic

