Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Earth bounded axes conventions Toggle Earth bounded axes conventions subsection 1.1 World reference frames: ENU and NED 1.1.1 World reference frames for attitude description 1.2 Frames mounted on vehicles 1.2.1 Conventions for land vehicles 1.2.2 Conventions for sea vehicles 1.2.3 Conventions for aircraft local reference frames 2 Frames for space navigation Toggle Frames for space navigation subsection 2.1 Local conventions for space ships as satellites 3 Frames used to describe attitudes 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Axes conventions 3 languages Deutsch Español Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Location and orientation references Heading, elevation and bank angles (Z-Y’-X’’) for an aircraft. The aircraft's pitch and yaw axes Y and Z are not shown, and its fixed reference frame xyz has been shifted backwards from its center of gravity (preserving angles) for clarity. Axes named according to the air norm DIN 9300 In ballistics and flight dynamics , axes conventions are standardized ways of establishing the location and orientation of coordinate axes for use as a frame of reference . Mobile objects are normally tracked from an external frame considered fixed. Other frames can be defined on those mobile objects to deal with relative positions for other objects. Finally, attitudes or orientations can be described by a relationship between the external frame and the one defined over the mobile object.

The orientation of a vehicle is normally referred to as attitude . It is described normally by the orientation of a frame fixed in the body relative to a fixed reference frame. The attitude is described by attitude coordinates , and consists of at least three coordinates.

[ 1 ] While from a geometrical point of view the different methods to describe orientations are defined using only some reference frames, in engineering applications it is important also to describe how these frames are attached to the lab and the body in motion.

Due to the special importance of international conventions in air vehicles, several organizations have published standards to be followed. For example, German DIN has published the DIN 9300 norm for aircraft [ 2 ] (adopted by ISO as ISO 1151–2 :1985).

Earth bounded axes conventions [ edit ] Representation of the Earth with parallels and meridians World reference frames: ENU and NED [ edit ] Main article: Local tangent plane Basically, as lab frame or reference frame, there are two kinds of conventions for the frames: East, North, Up (ENU), used in geography North, East, Down (NED), used specially in aerospace This frame referenced w.r.t. Global Reference frames like Earth Center Earth Fixed (ECEF) non-inertial system.

World reference frames for attitude description [ edit ] To establish a standard convention to describe attitudes, it is required to establish at least the axes of the reference system and the axes of the rigid body or vehicle. When an ambiguous notation system is used (such as Euler angles ) the convention used should also be stated. Nevertheless, most used notations (matrices and quaternions) are unambiguous.

Earth Centered Earth Fixed and East, North, Up coordinates.

Tait–Bryan angles are often used to describe a vehicle's attitude with respect to a chosen reference frame, though any other notation can be used. The positive x -axis in vehicles points always in the direction of movement. For positive y - and z -axis, we have to face two different conventions: In case of land vehicles like cars, tanks etc., which use the ENU-system (East-North-Up) as external reference ( World frame ), the vehicle's (body's) positive y - or pitch axis always points to its left, and the positive z - or yaw axis always points up. World frame's origin is fixed at the center of gravity of the vehicle.

[ 3 ] By contrast, in case of air and sea vehicles like submarines, ships, airplanes etc., which use the NED-system (North-East-Down) as external reference ( World frame ), the vehicle's (body's) positive y - or pitch axis always points to its right, and its positive z - or yaw axis always points down. World frame's origin is fixed at the center of gravity of the vehicle.

Finally, in case of space vehicles like the Space Shuttle etc., a modification of the latter convention is used, where the vehicle's (body's) positive y - or pitch axis again always points to its right, and its positive z- or yaw axis always points down, but “down” now may have two different meanings: If a so-called local frame is used as external reference, its positive z-axis points “down” to the center of the Earth as it does in case of the earlier mentioned NED-system, [ 4 ] but if the inertial frame is used as reference, its positive z-axis will point now to the north celestial pole , and its positive x-axis to the Vernal Equinox [ 5 ] or some other reference meridian.

Frames mounted on vehicles [ edit ] Specially for aircraft, these frames do not need to agree with the earth-bound frames in the up-down line. It must be agreed what ENU and NED mean in this context.

Conventions for land vehicles [ edit ] RPY angles of cars and other land vehicles For land vehicles it is rare to describe their complete orientation, except when speaking about electronic stability control or satellite navigation . In this case, the convention is normally the one of the adjacent drawing, where RPY stands for roll-pitch-yaw .

Conventions for sea vehicles [ edit ] RPY angles of ships and other sea vehicles As well as aircraft, the same terminology is used for the motion of ships and boats . Some words commonly used were introduced in maritime navigation. For example, the yaw angle or heading, has a nautical origin, with the meaning of "bending out of the course". Etymologically, it is related with the verb 'to go'.

[ 6 ] It is related to the concept of bearing . It is typically assigned the shorthand notation ψ .

[ 7 ] Conventions for aircraft local reference frames [ edit ] RPY angles of airplanes and other air vehicles Mnemonics to remember angle names Main article: aircraft principal axes Coordinates to describe an aircraft attitude (Heading, Elevation and Bank) are normally given relative to a reference control frame located in a control tower, and therefore ENU, relative to the position of the control tower on the earth surface.

Coordinates to describe observations made from an aircraft are normally given relative to its intrinsic axes, but normally using as positive the coordinate pointing downwards, where the interesting points are located. Therefore, they are normally NED.

These axes are normally taken so that X axis is the longitudinal axis pointing ahead, Z axis is the vertical axis pointing downwards, and the Y axis is the lateral one, pointing in such a way that the frame is right-handed .

The motion of an aircraft is often described in terms of rotation about these axes, so rotation about the X -axis is called rolling, rotation about the Y -axis is called pitching, and rotation about the Z -axis is called yawing.

Frames for space navigation [ edit ] Main article: Celestial coordinate system Different reference systems for coordinates in space For satellites orbiting the Earth it is normal to use the Equatorial coordinate system . The projection of the Earth's equator onto the celestial sphere is called the celestial equator . Similarly, the projections of the Earth's north and south geographic poles become the north and south celestial poles , respectively.

Deep space satellites use other Celestial coordinate system , like the Ecliptic coordinate system .

Local conventions for space ships as satellites [ edit ] RPY angles of the Space Shuttle and other space vehicles, first using a local frame as reference and second using an inertial frame as reference.

If the goal is to keep the shuttle during its orbits in a constant attitude with respect to the sky, e.g. in order to perform certain astronomical observations, the preferred reference is the inertial frame , and the RPY angle vector (0|0|0) describes an attitude then, where the shuttle's wings are kept permanently parallel to the Earth's equator, its nose points permanently to the vernal equinox , and its belly towards the northern polar star (see picture).  (Note that rockets and missiles more commonly follow the conventions for aircraft where the RPY angle vector (0|0|0) points north, rather than toward the vernal equinox).

On the other hand, if the goal is to keep the shuttle during its orbits in a constant attitude with respect to the surface of the Earth, the preferred reference will be the local frame , with the RPY angle vector (0|0|0) describing an attitude where the shuttle's wings are parallel to the Earth's surface, its nose points to its heading, and its belly down towards the centre of the Earth (see picture).

Frames used to describe attitudes [ edit ] Normally the frames used to describe a vehicle's local observations are the same frames used to describe its attitude with respect to the ground tracking stations. i.e. if an ENU frame is used in a tracking station, also ENU frames are used onboard and these frames are also used to refer local observations.

An important case in which this does not apply is aircraft. Aircraft observations are performed downwards and therefore normally NED axes convention applies. Nevertheless, when attitudes with respect to ground stations are given, a relationship between the local earth-bound frame and the onboard ENU frame is used.

See also [ edit ] Attitude dynamics and control (spacecraft) Euler's rotation theorem Gyroscope Triad Method Rotation formalisms in three dimensions Geographic coordinate system Astronomical coordinate systems References [ edit ] ^ Hanspeter Schaub ; John L. Junkins (2003).

"Rigid body kinematics" .

Analytical mechanics of space systems . American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. p. 71.

ISBN 1-56347-563-4 .

^ Luft- und Raumfahrt; Begriffe, Größen und Formelzeichen der Flugmechanik; Bewegungen des Luftfahrzeugs und der Atmosphäre gegenüber der Erde [1] ^ NavCommand. Software to Operate and Configure iMAR Inertial Measuring and Surveying Systems. Operation and User Instructions. St.Ingbert 2007, str.11–12.

http://www.imar-navigation.de/download/nav_command_en.pdf Archived 2006-09-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ Exploration: Local Reference Orbiter Attitude (September 18, 1995) "LVLH Attitude" . Archived from the original on 2007-07-14 . Retrieved 2010-10-08 .

(article no more available since 2007) ^ Exploration: Inertial Reference Orbiter Attitude (October 3, 1995) "Inertial Attitude" . Archived from the original on 2007-07-14 . Retrieved 2010-10-08 .

(article no more available since 2007) ^ Etymology online dictionary Archived November 15, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Hurt, H. H. Jr. (January 1965) [1960].

Aerodynamics for Naval Aviators . U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.: U.S. Navy, Aviation Training Division. p. 284. NAVWEPS 00-80T-80.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8klz6
Cached time: 20250812013405
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.215 seconds
Real time usage: 0.285 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 522/1000000
Revision size: 12624/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 10639/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 430/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 18771/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.135/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4354510/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  230.171      1 -total
 35.23%   81.090      2 Template:Cite_book
 28.17%   64.834      1 Template:Short_description
 15.22%   35.039      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.34%   23.811      1 Template:Main
 10.16%   23.374      1 Template:Multiple_image
  8.40%   19.332      2 Template:Main_other
  7.67%   17.654      1 Template:SDcat
  5.20%   11.974      2 Template:Cite_web
  4.28%    9.858      2 Template:Webarchive Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:29119741:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812013405 and revision id 1257452617. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Axes_conventions&oldid=1257452617 " Categories : Euclidean symmetries Rotation in three dimensions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 November 2024, at 23:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Axes conventions 3 languages Add topic

