Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 The establishment of Buddhism in China 1.2 The development of a Chinese Buddhism 1.3 Modernity 1.3.1 People's Republic of China 2 Teaching and practice Toggle Teaching and practice subsection 2.1 Doctrine and texts 2.2 Practices 2.3 Deities and temples 2.4 Monasticism 2.5 Vegetarianism and Veganism 2.6 Laypeople in Chinese Buddhism 2.7 Syncretism and multiple religious belonging 3 Traditions Toggle Traditions subsection 3.1 Major Chinese Buddhist traditions 3.2 New religious movements 4 Holidays and festivals Toggle Holidays and festivals subsection 4.1 List of Holidays 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 History 8.2 First Buddhist revival 8.3 Contemporary Chinese Buddhism Toggle the table of contents Chinese Buddhism 33 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí བོད་ཡིག Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Shqip සිංහල Simple English தமிழ் Türkçe اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Buddhism with Chinese characteristics This article is about the Chinese form of Mahayana Buddhism. For all Buddhist branches practiced in China, see Buddhism in China .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article should specify the language of its non-English content using {{ lang }} or {{ langx }} , {{ transliteration }} for transliterated languages, and {{ IPA }} for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's multilingual support templates may also be used.

See why .

( February 2024 ) This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chinese Buddhism Traditional Chinese 漢傳佛教 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Hànchuán Fójiào Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Hon3 Cyun4 Fat6 Gaau3 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Hàn-thoân Hu̍t-kàu Institutions of Chinese Buddhism Buddhist monks at Jintai Temple in Zhuhai , Guangdong Interior of the Ling Shan Brahma Palace in Wuxi , Jiangsu A Buddhist house assembly Part of a series on Chinese Buddhism Chinese: "Buddha" History Buddhism in Central Asia Dharmaguptaka Silk Road transmission Dunhuang manuscripts Four Buddhist Persecutions in China Religion in the Song dynasty Major Figures Han dynasty to Northern and Southern dynasties (202 BC – 589 AD) Lokakṣema Kumārajīva Sengzhao Dharmakṣema Tanluan Fu Dashi Paramartha Nanyue Huisi Jingying Huiyuan Zhiyi Guanding Bodhidharma Bodhiruci Budai Sui dynasty to Tang dynasty (581 - 907) Daochuo Jizang Daoxuan Daman Hongren Zhiyan Xuanzang Shandao Woncheuk Kuiji Li Tongxuan Huineng Fazang Śubhakarasiṃha Vajrabodhi Yi Xing Amoghavajra Mazu Daoyi Zhanran Huiguo Guifeng Zongmi Chengguan Linji Yixuan Daosui Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms to Song dynasty (907 - 1279) Yongming Yanshou Siming Zhili Dānapāla Devasantika Furong Daokai Yuanzhao Yuanwu Keqin Hongzhi Zhengjue Zhenxie Qingliao Dahui Zonggao Mao Ziyuan Wumen Huikai Yuan dynasty to Ming dynasty (1271 - 1644) Yao Guangxiao Yunqi Zhuhong Daguan Zhenke Hanshan Deqing Miyun Yuanwu Ouyi Zhixu Youxi Chuandeng Qing dynasty to Modern Period (1644 - present) Peng Shaosheng Yang Wenhui Xuyun Yinguang Tanxu Hong Yi Nenghai Taixu Hsuan Hua Nan Huai-Chin Hsing Yun Wei Chueh Sheng-yen Cheng Yen Traditions Chan Tiantai Huayan Pure Land Vinaya Weishi Sanlun Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Practices Nianfo Chan meditation Hua Tou Gong'an Walking meditation Repentance rites Dhāraṇī Transfer of merit Puja Offerings Prostration Music Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Refuge Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Samadhi tiyong Texts Chinese Buddhist canon Taishō Tripiṭaka Architecture Buddhist architecture in China Shanmen Mahavira Hall Guanyin Dian Dizang Dian Yaoshi Dian Tianwang Dian Zushi Dian Luohan Dian Zangjing Ge Fatang Sacred Sites Mount Wutai Mount Emei Mount Jiuhua Mount Putuo Mount Lu Tiantai Mountain White Horse Temple Mount Heng (Hunan) Culture Buddhist Association of China Cuisine Martial arts v t e Chinese Buddhism or Han Buddhism ( traditional Chinese : 漢傳佛教 ; simplified Chinese : 汉传佛教 ; pinyin : Hànchuán Fójiào ; Jyutping : Hon3 Cyun4 Fat6 Gaau3 ; Pe̍h-ōe-jī : Hàn-thoân Hu̍t-kàu ) is a Chinese form of Mahayana Buddhism. Chinese Buddhism emphasizes the study of Mahayana sutras and treatises. Some of the most important scriptures in Chinese Buddhism include the Lotus Sutra , Flower Ornament Sutra , Vimalakirtī Sutra , Nirvana Sutra , and Amitābha Sutra .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Chinese Buddhism is the largest institutionalized religion in mainland China .

[ 3 ] Currently, there are an estimated 185 to 250 million Chinese Buddhists in the People's Republic of China .

[ 3 ] It is also a major religion in Taiwan, Singapore, and Malaysia, as well as among the Chinese Diaspora .

[ 1 ] Buddhism was first introduced to China during the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE). It was promoted by multiple emperors , especially during the Tang dynasty (618–907), which helped it spread across the country.

[ 4 ] The translation of a large body of Indian Buddhist scriptures into Chinese and the inclusion of these translations (along with Taoist and Confucian works) into a Chinese Buddhist canon had far-reaching implications for the dissemination of Buddhism throughout the East Asian cultural sphere , including Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. Chinese Buddhism also developed various unique traditions of Buddhist thought and practice, including Tiantai , Huayan , Chan , Pure Land and Esoteric Buddhism .

From its inception, Chinese Buddhism has been influenced by native Chinese religions and philosophy , especially Confucianism and Taoism, but also Chinese folk religion . The Chinese Buddhist canon [ 5 ] also draws from the traditions of Confucianism and Taoism as well as the rituals of local folk religions.

History [ edit ] Further information: History of Chinese Buddhism See also: Silk Road transmission of Buddhism and Indianization Buddhist expansion in Asia : Mahayana Buddhism first entered the Chinese Empire ( Han dynasty ) through the Silk Road during the Kushan Era . The overland and maritime "Silk Roads" were interlinked and complementary, forming what scholars have called the "great circle of Buddhism".

[ 6 ] White Horse Temple in Luoyang , one of the earliest Chinese Buddhist temples Buddhist temple at Wutaishan Buddhist art from the Mogao Caves at Dunhuang ( Gansu ), Dunhuang was a thriving center of Buddhism between 500 and 1000 CE.

Statues at Longmen Grottoes , Luoyang The establishment of Buddhism in China [ edit ] Buddhist missionaries began bringing Buddhism to China during the Han dynasty , and the religion was present in China at the beginning of the common era.

[ 7 ] [ 1 ] [ 8 ] Buddhist missionaries made use of both the overland Central Asian Silk Road and the maritime routes.

[ 9 ] Initially, Buddhism was poorly understood and often confused with and mixed with Taoism.

[ 10 ] The Chinese saw many similarities between the two religions.

[ 11 ] There was also much criticism leveled at the new foreign religion by the Confucian elites.

[ 1 ] Centuries after Buddhism originated in India , the Mahayana Buddhism arrived in China through the Silk Route in the 1st century CE via Tibet .

[ 12 ] One of the central tasks of the initial missionaries was the translation of Buddhist texts. The first surviving translations of Buddhist texts into Chinese were those of the 2nd century Parthian An Shigao (Ch.

安世高 ), who worked in the capital of Luoyang . His work was followed by the extensive Mahayana translations of the Kushan monk Lokakṣema (Ch.

支婁迦讖 , active c.

164 –186 CE), as well as the work of Dharmarakṣa (3rd century).

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] During this early period, the Dharmaguptaka school was very influential in establishing Buddhism in China.

[ 15 ] This resulted in the widespread adoption of the Dharmaguptaka school's Vinaya (monastic rule) by all Chinese Buddhist schools .

The arrival of the Kuchan scholar Kumārajīva (334–413 CE) was a key event. Unlike the previous translators, Kumārajīva was supported by the state and given the title of national preceptor.

[ 16 ] The high-quality translations produced by his team had a significant impact on Chinese Buddhism. He is also known for introducing the Madhyamaka school of Buddhist philosophy, which would later be called Sanlun (the "Three Treatise school").

[ 17 ] His work also established an Indic foundation for Chinese Buddhist philosophy, which previously had been heavily influenced by Taoist philosophy.

[ 18 ] By the 460s, Buddhism was a mainstream institution in China, and its iconography and art were widely recognized.

[ 19 ] The Dunhuang and Yungang cave complexes are a great example of early Chinese Buddhist art from this period.

[ 20 ] Another important translator was Paramārtha ( Zhēndì , 499–569 CE), who, along with his team of Chinese disciples, translated numerous works on Abhidharma , Yogachara philosophy, and other Mahayana texts.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The work of other sixth-century translators like Bodhiruci and Ratnamati also contributed to the establishment of a new Chinese Yogacara school , also known as the "Consciousness-Only school" ( 唯識宗 ; Wéishí-zōng ).

[ citation needed ] The development of a Chinese Buddhism [ edit ] The Great Buddha Hall of Nanchan Temple at Mount Wutai , Shanxi . Originally built in the Tang dynasty and is the oldest surviving timber architecture in China.

The 6th and 7th centuries saw a flowering of new and unique Chinese Buddhist traditions, including: The Tiantai school, mainly founded by the efforts of master Zhiyi (538–597 CE) and based on the Lotus Sutra and the works of Zhiyi.

The Huayan ( Avatamsaka Sutra ) school, based on the works of Chinese masters like Dushun (557–640), Zhiyan (602–668), and Fazang (643–712).

The Pure Land tradition , based on the veneration of Amitabha and the works of Pure Land masters like Tanluan (476–542), Daochuo (562–645), and Shandao (613–81).

Chan Buddhism , based on the teachings of various Chan masters such as Bodhidharma , Dazu Huike (487–593), Sengcan (d. 606), Dayi Daoxin (580–651), and Hongren (601–674).

During the Tang dynasty, the monk Xuanzang (602–664) journeyed to India and back and wrote extensive and detailed reports of his findings, which have subsequently become important for the study of India during this period. Xuanzang also brought back many Buddhist texts and led a translation team responsible for many influential Chinese translations of classic Buddhist works.

[ 23 ] His efforts led to the establishment of the idealistic Yogachara (Consciousness-only) tradition in East Asia.

The Tang era was a period of significant development for Buddhism in China.

[ 24 ] During this time, a sinicized Buddhism was widely accepted and practiced throughout the empire, with many monasteries and temples. Buddhism was popular with all social classes and was influential on Chinese culture, [ 1 ] having more followers than Taoism.

[ 25 ] Buddhist themes can be found in much of the literature of this period, such as in the works of famous poets like Wang Wei (701–761) and Bo Juyi (772 – 846). Artistic complexes from this period, such as the Longmen Grottoes , also attest to the artistic expression of Chinese Buddhism during this era.

[ 1 ] A well-known proponent of Buddhism during the Tang era was Empress Wu Zetian (r. 690–705) and she is known for her promotion of the Longmen cave complex .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] She also depicted herself as a bodhisattva.

[ 28 ] The next important event in the history of Chinese Buddhism was the arrival of Subhakarasimha , Vajrabodhi , and Amoghavajra , and their establishment of Chinese Esoteric Buddhism from 716 to 720, during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang . This Chinese form of Vajrayana Buddhism now became popular with the elites and by the time of Emperor Daizong of Tang (r. 762–779), its influence among the upper classes was significant.

The Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution (841–845) under Emperor Wuzong of Tang greatly impacted and weakened the Buddhist institutions in China. Perhaps the main reason for this persecution was the Chinese state's need for taxes and wealth.

[ 29 ] Pagoda of Fogong Temple at Ying County , Shanxi province , constructed during 1056-1195 Liao dynasty .

The Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period (907–960/979), an era of political upheaval and civil war, also negatively impacted Chinese Buddhism. Various Chinese Buddhist traditions contracted or died out during this period.

The Song dynasty (960–1279) saw the flourishing of Chinese Buddhist culture.

[ 1 ] During this era, Chan Buddhism grew to become the most influential school, with close ties to the imperial government and an organized system of temple rank and administration.

[ 30 ] It was during this time that the Five Houses of Chan developed. Many classic Chan texts were written during this era, such as the koan collections of the Linji school , like the Blue Cliff Record (1125) and The Gateless Gate (1228).

[ 31 ] Likewise, during this time, the works of Hongzhi Zhengjue (1091–1157) developed the silent sitting method of "silent illumination".

[ 32 ] Both of these traditions of Chan practice were influential (and remain so) on East Asian Zen Buddhism (including on Japanese Zen , Korean Seon , and Vietnamese Thiền ).

The Yuan dynasty (1271–1368) patronized Tibetan Buddhism ; thus, during this period, there was a steady growth of this tradition in China.

[ 33 ] A common perception was that this patronage of lamas caused corrupt forms of tantra to become widespread.

[ 33 ] When the Yuan dynasty was overthrown and the Ming dynasty was established, the Tibetan lamas were expelled from the court, and this form of Buddhism was denounced as not being an orthodox path.

[ 33 ] During the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), there was a revival of the study of native Chinese traditions like Tiantai, Huayan , and Yogachara, and most monks belonged to the two dominant Chan schools: Linji and Caodong .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] At this point in its history, Chinese Buddhism had also become quite eclectic, drawing from all the main Chinese traditions. An example of this is the figure of Hanshan Deqing , one of the great reformers of Chinese Buddhism.

[ 37 ] Like many of his contemporaries, he advocated the dual practice of the Chan and Pure Land methods.

[ 37 ] He also directed practitioners in the use of mantras as well as scripture reading. He was also renowned as a lecturer and commentator and was admired for his strict adherence to the precepts.

[ 37 ] Modernity [ edit ] An aerial view of Fo Guang Shan Monastery , in Kaohsiung , Taiwan .

During the Qing dynasty (1644–1911), the imperial court shifted its support to the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism.

[ 38 ] Chinese Buddhism suffered during the various imperial and internal conflicts of the Qing dynasty, especially the Taiping rebellion (December 1850 – August 1864), which saw many temples destroyed and scriptures burned by rebels.

[ 39 ] This era also saw the arrival of Christian missionaries to China, a right which had been granted to Western powers after the Opium Wars .

[ 38 ] During the Republican period (1912–1949), there were efforts to reform and modernize Chinese Buddhism in response to the challenges of modernity.

[ 40 ] [ 1 ] The most notable of these reformers were the Humanistic Buddhists , like Taixu and Yin Shun . Humanistic Buddhism sought to move away from ritualistic and otherworldly obsessions to embrace more worldly pursuits like education and charitable work.

[ 1 ] There was also a revival of Chinese Chan by Hsu Yun and Sheng Yen [ 40 ] as well as a revival of Tiantai Buddhism by Dixian and Tanxu (1875 – 1963).

[ 41 ] People's Republic of China [ edit ] Guangyou Temple at Liaoyang , Liaoning . Rebuilt in 2002.

Further information: Antireligious campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party After the Chinese Communist Revolution , many Buddhists and monastics followed the Republican exodus to Taiwan . In the latter half of the twentieth century, many new Buddhist temples and organizations were set up by the exiles in Taiwan, including Fo Guang Shan , Dharma Drum Mountain , and Tzu Chi .

[ 1 ] These organizations also became influential back in Mainland China after the end of the Cultural Revolution .

[ citation needed ] Chinese Buddhism suffered extensive repression, persecution, and destruction during the Cultural Revolution (from 1966 until Mao Zedong 's death in 1976).

Maoist propaganda depicted Buddhism as one of the Four Olds , as a superstitious instrument of the ruling class and as counter-revolutionary .

[ 42 ] Buddhist clergy were attacked, disrobed, arrested, and sent to camps. Buddhist writings were burned. Buddhist temples, monasteries, and art were systematically destroyed and Buddhist lay believers ceased any public displays of their religion.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] During the normalization period ( Boluan Fanzheng , 1977 to the early 80s) led by Deng Xiaoping , a new revival of Chinese Buddhism began to take place.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] This was a period that saw the restoration of damaged Buddhist temples like Guoqing Temple and Guanghua Temple , as well as the return of monastic ordination and Buddhist institutions. Monks like Zhenchan ( 真禪 ) and Mengcan ( 夢參 ), who were trained in the Chan and Huayan traditions, traveled widely throughout China as well as other countries, such as the United States, and lectured on both Chan and Huayan teachings.

[ 47 ] Monks are required to obtain certificates from the authorities that permit them to reside in monasteries.

[ 48 ] : 190 The Buddhist Association of China is the sole official government supervisory organ of Buddhism in the country.

[ 49 ] It is directed by the United Front Work Department of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).

[ 50 ] Part of a series on Mahāyāna Buddhism Teachings Bodhisattva Buddhahood Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Skillful Means Transcendent Wisdom Transcendent Virtues Emptiness Two truths Consciousness-only Three bodies Three vehicles Non-abiding Nirvana One Vehicle Bodhisattva Precepts Bodhisattva vow Bodhisattva stages Pure Lands Luminous mind Dharani Three Turnings Buddhas and Bodhisattvas Shakyamuni Amitabha Adi-Buddha Akshobhya Prajñāpāramitā Devī Bhaiṣajyaguru Vairocana Mañjuśrī Avalokiteśvara Vajrapāṇi Vajrasattva Maitreya Kṣitigarbha Ākāśagarbha Samantabhadra Tara Wrathful deities Mahayana sutras Prajñāpāramitā sūtras Lotus Sūtra Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra Mahāsaṃnipāta Sūtra Vimalakirtinirdeśa Pure Land Sutras Lalitavistara Sūtra Samādhirāja Sūtra Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra Tathāgatagarbha sūtras Śrīmālādevī Sūtra Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra Ghanavyūha sūtra Golden Light Sutra Tathāgataguhyaka Sūtra Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra Main traditions Mādhyamaka Yogācāra Tiantai Tendai Huayan Zen (Chan) Shingon Pure Land Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Nichiren Trúc Lâm Vajrayāna Newar Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Dzogchen Bon Shugendō Humanistic Buddhism Key figures Nāgārjuna Aśvaghoṣa Āryadeva Lokakṣema Kumārajīva Asanga Vasubandhu Sthiramati Buddhapālita Dignāga Bhāvaviveka Dharmakīrti Candrakīrti Sengzhao Jizang Zhiyi Shandao Bodhidharma Huineng Xuanzang Fazang Amoghavajra Zhanran Chengguan Zongmi Saichō Kūkai Shāntideva Shāntarakshita Wohnyo Mazu Daoyi Linji Siming Zhili Jinul Dahui Zonggao Hongzhi Zhengjue Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Śaṅkaranandana Virūpa Ratnākaraśānti Abhayākaragupta Nāropā Atisha Sakya Pandita Dolpopa Rangjung Dorje Tsongkhapa Longchenpa Hakuin Hanshan Ouyi Zhuhong Taixu D. T. Suzuki Sheng-yen 14th Dalai Lama Thích Nhất Hạnh Regional traditions China Han Chinese Taiwan Japan Korea North Korea South Korea Vietnam Tibet Nepal Newar Bhutan Mongolia Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Malaysia Indonesia West v t e Teaching and practice [ edit ] Buddhist monastics and laypeople chanting sutras in the Buddha Tooth Relic Temple , Singapore Buddha statues at the Mahavira Hall of Baoning Temple , Hunan , China.

Volunteers of the Buddhist Tzu Chi Foundation at a health screening event for foreign workers in Taipei .

Doctrine and texts [ edit ] Chinese Buddhism is a sinicized form of Mahāyāna Buddhism , which draws on the Chinese Buddhist Canon ( 大藏經 ; Dàzàngjīng ; "Great Storage of Scriptures") [ 5 ] as well as numerous Chinese traditions. Chinese Buddhism focuses on studying Mahāyāna sutras and Mahāyāna treatises and draws its main doctrines from these sources. Some of the most important scriptures in Chinese Buddhism include: the Lotus Sutra , the Flower Ornament Sutra , the Vimalakirtī Sutra , the Nirvana Sutra , and the Amitābha Sutra .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] As such, Chinese Buddhism follows the classic Mahāyāna Buddhist worldview, which includes a belief in many realms of existence , the existence of many Buddhas and bodhisattvas , as well as many other kinds of divine beings, ghosts, and so on.

[ 1 ] Chinese Buddhism also upholds classic Mahāyāna Buddhist doctrines like karma ( 報應 ) and rebirth ( 超生 ), the bodhisattva path, and the doctrines of emptiness , buddha-nature , and the one vehicle .

[ 1 ] When it comes to Buddhist philosophy , Chinese Buddhism contains various doctrinal traditions, the most important being the Tiantai, Huayan , Sanlun , and Weishi schools of thought.

[ 1 ] These different doctrinal traditions developed their own scriptural commentaries and treatises and also various doctrinal classifications ( panjiao ), which hierarchically ordered the mass of Buddhist scriptures in order to advance their school's hermeneutical worldview.

[ 1 ] For example, according to master Zhiyi's "eight teachings and five periods" classification, the final and supreme teaching of the Buddha is found in the Lotus Sutra and the Nirvana Sutra .

[ 1 ] According to the Huayan masters like Fazang , the Huayan sutra contains the supreme teaching, while the Weishi school held that the Yogachara texts are where the "third turning" of the Dharma can be found, and thus, represent the final and ultimate teaching of the Buddha.

Practices [ edit ] Chanting the Buddhist Scriptures , by Taiwanese painter Li Mei-shu .

Part of a series on Chinese folk religion Concepts Tian — Shangdi Qi Shen Ling Xian ling Yinyang Hundun Mingyun Yuanfen Baoying Wu Theory Chinese theology Chinese gods and immortals Chinese mythology Chinese astrology Chinese zodiac Chinese creation myth Chinese spiritual world concepts Model humanity: Xian Zhenren Wen and wu Practices Fenxiang Jingxiang Feng shui Miaohui Wu shamanism Jitong mediumship Precious scrolls Institutions and temples Associations of good-doing Lineage associations or churches Chinese temple Ancestral shrine Chinese Folk Temples' Association Festivals Qingming Zhongyuan Zhongqiu Jiuhuangye Qixi Duanwu Nian Internal traditions Major cultural forms Chinese ancestral religion Chinese communal deity religion Chinese food therapy Chinese geomancy Chinese mother goddess worship Northeast China folk religion Traditional Chinese medicine Qigong Main philosophical traditions: Confucianism ( state rites ) Taoism Three teachings Other schools ( Mohism ) Ritual traditions: Folk ritual masters' orders Jitong mediumship Nuo folk religion Chinese shamanism Devotional traditions: Mazuism Ong Yah worship Zhenkong, "Void of Truth".

Salvation churches and sects : De teaching Jiugongdao Luo teaching Maitreya teachings Tiandi teachings Tianxian miaodao Xia teaching Xiantiandao Yiguandao Zaili teaching Confucian churches and sects: Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Taigu school Related religions and movements Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Dongbaism Han Buddhism Miao folk religion Vietnamese folk religion Qiang folk religion Yao folk religion Zhuang folk religion House church (China) Religion portal v t e Chinese Buddhism contains a wide array of religious practices and observances. Ritual and devotional practices are commonly seen as generating karmic merit , which can bring about positive results in this life or the next.

[ 1 ] According to Mario Poceski, for the vast majority of ordinary Chinese Buddhists, "prevalent expressions of Buddhist piety were (and still are) channeled via a variety of popular modes of worship and ritual observance." [ 1 ] Worship services can include Buddhist devotional practices like offerings to an altar (of items like incense, flowers, food, and candles), ceremonial bowing, and extensive liturgies (including repentance ceremonies, rites for good health, and memorials for the dead).

[ 1 ] According to Chün-fang Yü, the most popular Chinese Buddhist ritual that is most widely performed today is the Great Compassion Repentance associated with Guanyin and the Great Compassion Dharani .

[ 51 ] Keeping sets of ethical rules, like the classic Buddhist five precepts , is another key part of Buddhist practice. Taking up the ethical precepts in a ceremony, along with taking refuge in the three jewels (Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha), is a common way of entering the Buddhist path.

[ 1 ] Another important set of ethical precepts is the " bodhisattva precepts " of the Brahmā's Net Sutra , which are often practiced by both laity and monastics.

[ 1 ] Acts of charity or social service ( 結緣 ) are also an important of part of Chinese Buddhist ethics .

Another key part of Chinese Buddhism is engaging in Buddhist meditations such as chanting the Buddha's name ( nianfo ), which is the core practice of Pure Land Buddhism , and seated meditation ( zazen ), which is the focus of the Chan tradition. The practice of recitation of the Buddha's name is commonly done in a group setting, sometimes as part of an intensive nianfo recitation retreat, which can last for several days. These retreats might also include chanting sutras, taking of the eight precepts , silent meditation, and Dharma lectures .

[ 52 ] A major type of practice for Chinese Buddhist monastics is the performance of rituals aiming to help facilitate the nourishment and universal salvation ( 普渡 ; pǔdù ) of all sentient beings in the six realms of saṃsāra.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] This type of rituals often involves tantric or Vajrayana practices and usually requires the setting-up of a dedicated ritual space, the invocation of the Buddhist pantheon and the transference of merit from the performance of the ritual. A few examples of this type of ritual are the Yujia Yankou rite and the Shuilu Fahui ceremony.

[ 55 ] Textual practices are also commonly practiced by monks and laypersons. These include printing, copying, propagating and reciting Buddhist scriptures, studying Buddhist texts, and attending lectures.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Buddhist temples may also have special elements associated with sacred texts, such as lecture halls or dharma halls , libraries, and scripture platforms ( 施法壇 ), a kind of sacred podium.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Other important Buddhist rituals are those related to death, which is seen as a key moment for Buddhists who want to attain a good rebirth in the pure land of a Buddha (the most popular being Amitabha's pure land).

[ 52 ] The focus of these rituals is to keep the dying person free of distractions and offer spiritual support (so they can focus their minds on Amitabha Buddha through the repetition of the Buddha's name).

[ 52 ] It is commonly believed that during these rituals one can experience auspicious signs, like visions of Amitabha and bright lights.

[ 52 ] Pilgrimages to well-known monasteries and sites, like the Four Sacred Buddhist Mountains ( Mount Wutai , Mount Emei , Mount Jiuhua , and Mount Putuo ) are also undertaken by monastics and lay practitioners alike.

[ 58 ] Another popular practice is the use of mantras and dhāraṇī s . A few examples include the Mahā Karuṇā Dhāraṇī , the Uṣṇīṣa Vijaya Dhāraṇī , the Śūraṅgama mantra , the Ucchuṣma mantra , the Ekādaśamukha mantra and the Cundī Dhāraṇī , which is one of the Ten Small Mantras that are regularly chanted as part of standard morning and evening liturgical services.

[ 58 ] Robert Gimello has also observed that in Chinese Buddhist communities, the esoteric practices of Cundī enjoyed popularity among both the common people and the elite.

[ 59 ] Deities and temples [ edit ] The Spring Temple Buddha , a colossal statue of Vairocana , in Henan , China.

Statue of Samantabhadra at Mount Emei.

Shrine to Cintāmaṇicakra within the Universal Wisdom Hall of the Buddha Tooth Relic Temple and Museum , Singapore.

Various Mahāyāna Buddhist deities are venerated in Chinese Buddhism, most of which are Buddhas and bodhisattvas. Some of the key figures include: [ 60 ] [ 1 ] Śākyamuni ( 釋迦摩尼 ; Shìjiāmóní ; "sage of the śākyas "), the historical founder of Buddhism, commonly depicted with Ᾱnanda and Mahākāśyapa , or in a triad with Amitabha and Medicine Buddha .

The Five Tathāgatas , an esoteric grouping of Five Buddhas who are commonly invoked in rituals such as the Yujia Yankou .

Guānyīn ( 觀音 ), the bodhisattva of compassion who has various forms (such as the thousand arms form) and is the East Asian version of the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara .

Amitābha Buddha ( 阿彌陀佛 ; Āmítuó Fó ; 'Limitless Light'), also called Amitāyus ("Limitless Life"), associated with the pure land of Sukhavati , which many hope to reach after death.

Vairocana ( 大日如來 ; Dàrì Rúlái ), the cosmic primordial Buddha Medicine Buddha ( 藥師佛 ; Yàoshī Fó ), associated with medicinal powers.

Maitreya bodhisattva ( 彌勒菩薩 ; Mílè púsà ), is seen as the Buddha of the future, sometimes depicted as the monk Budai .

Manjushri bodhisattva ( 文殊 ; Wénshū ), the bodhisattva of wisdom, associated with Mount Wutai , often appears mounted on a lion.

Samantabhadra bodhisattva ( 普賢 ; Pǔxián ), often depicted riding an elephant, is associated with confession and repentance rites and the bodhisattva vows.

Kṣitigarbha bodhisattva ( 地藏 ; Dìzàng ), the savior monk associated with rites for the deceased.

Acala ( 不動明王 ; Bùdòng Míngwáng ), a manifestation of Vairocana.

Ucchuṣma ( 穢跡金剛 ; Huìjì Jīngāng ), a manifestation of Śākyamuni.

The Eighteen Arhats ( 十八羅漢 ; Shíbā Luóhàn ) The Four Great Heavenly Kings ( 四大天王 ; Sìdà Tiānwáng ) The Twenty-Four Protective Deities ( 二十四諸天 ; Èrshísì Zhūtiān ), a common set of Chinese Buddhist protector deities ( dharmapalas ).

The Ten Wisdom Kings ( 十大明王 ; Shídà Míngwáng ), another common set of Chinese Buddhist protector deities ( dharmapalas ).

Chinese Buddhist temples usually include numerous images and statues of Buddhas and bodhisattvas. They are often ritually carved and installed as part of a consecration ritual that may include chanting and scripture reading.

[ 61 ] Devotion towards these is a major part of Chinese Buddhism. As Chün-fang Yü writes, "people in China worship Buddhas and bodhisattvas in rituals, write poems and novels about them, praise them in songs and hymns, and tell stories and stage plays about them. And above all else, they worship the images of these holy beings." [ 62 ] According to Mario Poceski, Chinese Buddhist temples generally follow a traditional Chinese palace layout. They "consist of a series of halls and courtyards that are arranged symmetrically around a central axis, which usually runs from north to south. The main hall is typically a large building that is centrally located along the main axis. In larger monasteries or temples, a number of ancillary halls also house the images of lesser Buddhist divinities, giving residents and visitors alike a wide choice of objects of worship and supplication." [ 1 ] Another common structure is a pagoda , which may contain Buddhist relics and statues or images of Buddhas and bodhisattvas.

[ 63 ] Monasticism [ edit ] Buddhist Monks at Kunming Yuantong Temple .

Buddhist monasticism is an important part of Chinese Buddhism. Chinese Buddhist monastics (both male and female) follow the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya , which is known as the Four Part Vinaya ( Sifen lü ) in China and has 250 rules for monks and 348 for nuns.

[ 1 ] Buddhist monks and nuns perform numerous religious practices and services, including offerings to altars, liturgical services, circumambulating the Buddha hall, preaching the scriptures, Dharma lectures, ritual meals, and chanting at mealtime, as well as confession and repentance rituals.

[ 57 ] There have been many different types of monasteries throughout Chinese Buddhist history. There are city monasteries, country monasteries, and monasteries deep in the mountains. Some monasteries may be large and rich, with thousands of monastics, while others are small with just a few monastics. The most prestigious monasteries have support from rich elites, and the smallest are usually in small villages.

[ 64 ] Vegetarianism and Veganism [ edit ] The vegetarian restaurant of South Putuo Temple is well known throughout China.

The Chinese word 純淨素 ( chún jìng sù ), meaning pure Buddhist Vegan/ Vegetarian, is widely promoted and practiced in Chinese Buddhism.

[ 1 ] The practice is promoted in various Mahayana sutras, like the 楞伽阿跋多羅寶經 ( léngqié ābáduōluó bǎojīng ).

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ 65 ] Monastics are often required to be vegetarian or Vegan and other animal products are often banned in Buddhist temples and monasteries.

[ 1 ] Other dietary restrictions may include avoiding eggs, dairy, and the five types of pungent vegetables.

[ 1 ] Devout laity are also often vegetarian. Some laypersons may practice being vegetarian on certain sacred days, during religious retreats, or on certain festivals.

Temples and monasteries often have vegetarian dining halls and vegetarian feasts are a common feature of popular celebrations.

[ 1 ] Laypeople in Chinese Buddhism [ edit ] Lay Buddhists at the recitation hall of the Temple of the Six Banyan Trees in Guangzhou .

In Chinese Buddhism, lay Buddhist practitioners have traditionally played an important role, and lay practice of Buddhism has had similar tendencies to those of monastic Buddhism in China.

[ 58 ] Many historical biographies of lay Buddhists are available, which give a clear picture of their practices and role in Chinese Buddhism. In addition to these numerous biographies, there are accounts from Jesuit missionaries, such as Matteo Ricci , which provide extensive and revealing accounts to the degree Buddhism penetrated elite and popular culture in China.

[ 58 ] Traditional practices such as meditation, mantra recitation, mindfulness of Amitābha Buddha, asceticism, and vegetarianism were all integrated into the belief systems of ordinary people.

[ 58 ] It is known from accounts in the Ming dynasty that lay practitioners often engaged in practices from both the Pure Land and Chan traditions, as well as the study of the Buddhist sutras. The Heart Sūtra and the Diamond Sūtra were the most popular, followed by the Lotus Sūtra and the Avatamsaka Sutra .

[ 58 ] Syncretism and multiple religious belonging [ edit ] A statue of Guan Yu at Daxiangguo Temple Part of a series on Chinese folk religion Concepts Tian — Shangdi Qi Shen Ling Xian ling Yinyang Hundun Mingyun Yuanfen Baoying Wu Theory Chinese theology Chinese gods and immortals Chinese mythology Chinese astrology Chinese zodiac Chinese creation myth Chinese spiritual world concepts Model humanity: Xian Zhenren Wen and wu Practices Fenxiang Jingxiang Feng shui Miaohui Wu shamanism Jitong mediumship Precious scrolls Institutions and temples Associations of good-doing Lineage associations or churches Chinese temple Ancestral shrine Chinese Folk Temples' Association Festivals Qingming Zhongyuan Zhongqiu Jiuhuangye Qixi Duanwu Nian Internal traditions Major cultural forms Chinese ancestral religion Chinese communal deity religion Chinese food therapy Chinese geomancy Chinese mother goddess worship Northeast China folk religion Traditional Chinese medicine Qigong Main philosophical traditions: Confucianism ( state rites ) Taoism Three teachings Other schools ( Mohism ) Ritual traditions: Folk ritual masters' orders Jitong mediumship Nuo folk religion Chinese shamanism Devotional traditions: Mazuism Ong Yah worship Zhenkong, "Void of Truth".

Salvation churches and sects : De teaching Jiugongdao Luo teaching Maitreya teachings Tiandi teachings Tianxian miaodao Xia teaching Xiantiandao Yiguandao Zaili teaching Confucian churches and sects: Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Taigu school Related religions and movements Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Dongbaism Han Buddhism Miao folk religion Vietnamese folk religion Qiang folk religion Yao folk religion Zhuang folk religion House church (China) Religion portal v t e Chinese Buddhism also include influences from native Chinese Religions , including Confucianism, Taoism, and Chinese folk religion .

[ 1 ] This ecumenical attitude and embrace of religious pluralism has been a common feature of Chinese culture since ancient times.

[ 1 ] For example, Chinese Buddhists may practice qigong , tai chi , and gongfu , venerate native Chinese deities (like Guan Yu , Mazu , and Monkey King ), engage in ancestor veneration , practice traditional Chinese medicine , and make use of Feng shui and Chinese talismans . Chinese religions like Taoism and Confucianism were also, in turn, influenced by Chinese Buddhism.

[ 1 ] The ancient idea of the compatibility of the Three Teachings (Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism) is common in China and is expressed in the phrase the three teachings harmonious as one ( 三 敎 合 一 ; Sānjiào Héyī ).

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Chinese Buddhism developed Chinese mythologies and philosophies which incorporated and accommodated Chinese religions. For example, Chinese Buddhist apocryphal texts tell of how Laozi was actually a disciple of the Buddha and also how Confucius was a bodhisattva.

[ 8 ] Chinese Buddhist thinkers like Guifeng Zongmi argued that all three teachings should be followed and practiced since they all contain important truths (though he also considered Buddhism to reveal the highest truth).

[ 68 ] One such important element of Chinese Buddhism is that religious practices focus on one's ancestors, something that is shared in common with other traditional Chinese religions. This can include paying respect to them at various sites and at festivals like the Qingming and Zhong Yuan Festival , as well as participating in services to pray for one's deceased ancestors.

The ritual burning of incense (shaoxiang, jingxiang ) is another common religious practice in Buddhist spaces derived from traditional Chinese religion. During the Zhou dynasty , the Chinese believed that smoke resulting from the burning of sandalwood would act as a bridge between the human world and the spirits.

[ 69 ] The practice remains a common offering in Chinese Buddhism, which it shared with other Chinese religions.

Another common feature of Chinese religion is multiple religious belonging . As such, Chinese adherents may also practice Buddhism alongside other Chinese religious practices without seeing this as conflicting. According to Mario Poceski: Many or even most people who actually come to worship at Buddhist temples are not hardcore believers. A good number of them assume the kinds of fuzzy or hybrid religious identities that are typical of Chinese religiosity; among other things, that can mean that many of them also worship at Daoist temples or shrines associated with popular religion. This is one of the reasons why it is very difficult to arrive at reliable data about the number of " Buddhists " in China.

[ 1 ] During the Tang and Yuan dynasties, Chinese Buddhism was also in proximity to Chinese branches of the Church of the East [ 70 ] and Christianity in general, and competed with these traditions, [ 71 ] especially in the Tang dynasty.

[ 72 ] Chinese, [ 71 ] Tibetan , and Mongolian Buddhism [ 73 ] were also significantly influenced by them [ 74 ] as Mongolian Buddhism, influenced by Nestorian beliefs [ 73 ] and Tibetan Buddhism, spread out during the Yuan dynasty. The three Buddhist traditions also heavily influenced each other at the time.

Traditions [ edit ] Donglin Temple at Mountain Lu , considered the birthplace of East Asian Pure Land Buddhism Bailin Temple ( Hebei ), a Chinese Chan temple A model of Guoqing Temple , a center of the Tiantai school The Jing'an Temple in Shanghai , a modern Chinese Esoteric tradition temple.

Major Chinese Buddhist traditions [ edit ] Traditional Chinese Buddhist scholars like Sheng-yen enumerate thirteen Buddhist traditions or schools ( zōng ).

[ 75 ] This list is also found in traditional Japanese Buddhist histories, particularly that of Gyōnen (1240–1321).

[ 76 ] Over time, some of these schools survived or were revived as living traditions, while others are now defunct historical traditions or were absorbed into other schools. These "traditions" are not rigid designations and there has always been much intermixing, and many temples and communities are influenced by many of these traditions (and also by local Chinese custom and traditional Chinese religions like Taoism). Some traditions may also have numerous sub-schools or sects.

[ 77 ] The various Chinese Buddhist traditions are not exclusivist , and are better seen as trends, emphases, schools of thought , or "dharma-gates" ( 法門 ; fǎmén ), instead of as separate sects.

[ 24 ] [ 78 ] Chün-fang Yü quotes a famous saying which describes the harmonious situation in Chinese Buddhism, "Tiantai and Huayan for doctrine, Chan and Pure Land for practice." [ 79 ] As Mario Poceski notes, Chinese Buddhism "lacks clear sectarian divisions of the kind we find in other Buddhist traditions".

[ 1 ] All Chinese monastics follow the same ordination procedures and monastic precepts, and as such, there is no rigid separation between "schools" or "sects". While traditions like Chan and Tiantai are understood as distinctive teachings, they are all part of the single Chinese Buddhist tradition, which is "characterized by broad-minded acceptance of a variety of styles of discourse, modes of worship, and approaches to spiritual cultivation." [ 1 ] Due to Chinese Buddhism's acceptance of diversity, ecumenism , and difference, most Chinese Buddhists would not identify themselves as being part of a specific "school".

[ 1 ] That being said, there are still disagreements and doctrinal debates within the community.

[ 1 ] The "thirteen schools" are: [ 75 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] The Chengshi school (historical), which focused on the study of the Tattvasiddhi-Śāstra ("The Treatise that Accomplishes Reality"; 成實論 ; Chengshilun ).

The Kosa School (俱舍宗) (historical), based on the study of Abhidharma using the Abhidharmakośa of Vasubandhu .

The "Three Treatises" school ( 三論 ; Sānlùn ; Chinese Madhyamaka ), founded by Kumarajiva (344–413 CE).

The Pure Land school The Nirvana School (historical), based on the Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra translated by Dharmarakṣa (c. 233–310); this was later absorbed into the Tiantai school.

[ 80 ] The Dilun school (based on the Daśabhūmikā sutra translated by Bodhiruci ); this was later absorbed into the Huayan tradition.

[ 80 ] The She lun school (based on Asanga 's Summary of the Mahayana translated by Paramartha ); it was later absorbed into the Huáyán and Consciousness-only schools.

[ 80 ] [ 75 ] The Consciousness Only school ( 唯識宗 ; Wéishí , Yogācāra ), a.k.a. Faxiang ("dharma characteristics") school, founded by Xuanzang (602–664) and based on his Chengweishilun ("The Demonstration of Consciousness-only").

The Tiantai school, also known as the Lotus school, due to their focus on the Lotus Sutra .

The Huayan school, the school of the Avatamsaka Sutra .

The Vinaya school or Nanshan school, a historical tradition which focused on the Dharmaguptaka monastic discipline, established by the monk Daoxuan (596–667).

[ 82 ] The Chan ( Dhyana ) school, i.e. the Zen tradition attributed to the founder Bodhidharma , which focuses on sitting meditation ( zuòchán ) and developed numerous sub-schools like Caodong and Linji .

The Zhenyan school ( 真言宗 ; 'true word'; " mantra " school", i.e., Chinese Esoteric Buddhism . Also called Mìjiao ( 密教 ; "Esoteric Teaching"), Mìzōng ( 密宗 ; "Esoteric Tradition"), or Tángmì ( 唐密 ; "Tang Esoterica").

Many of these traditions were also later exported to other East Asian nations, like Japan, Korea, and Vietnam.

According to Sheng-yen , the Chan school is the most popular school in China today, and it is often eclectically combined with the other Buddhist traditions of Pure Land, Tiantai, Huayan, Three Treatises , Consciousness Only , Vinaya, and Esoteric.

[ 83 ] There is also a modernist movement called Humanistic Buddhism , which emphasizes humanism , charity , and other humanitarian practices that help improve social conditions.

New religious movements [ edit ] There are many sects and organisations proclaiming a Buddhist identity and pursuit ( fo or fu : "awakening", "enlightenment") that are not recognised as legitimate Buddhism by the Chinese Buddhist Association and the government of the People's Republic of China. These groups include: Guanyin Buddhism [Awakening Teaching] ( 观音佛教 ; Guānyīn Fójiào ) or Guanyin Church ( 观音会 ; Guānyīn Huì ) [ 84 ] True Buddha School Buddhism [Awakening Teaching] of the Lord of Heaven of Infinite Thriving of the Mountain of Longevity ( 寿山万隆天主佛教 ; Shòushān Wànlóng Tiānzhǔ Fójiào ) Wulian Jingang Dadao ("Great Way of the Innumerable Attendants of Awakening") Hanmi Chinese esoteric Buddhism, Living Buddha Dechan Jueren Holidays and festivals [ edit ] Traditional Buddhist ceremony in Hangzhou , Zhejiang Ghost festival floating lanterns, Hong Kong Buddha's Birthday celebration of bathing baby Buddha statues.

Chinese Buddhists celebrate numerous religious festivals and holidays and these are the most widely attended and popular Chinese Buddhist events.

[ 85 ] During religious festivals, Chinese people visit temples to take part in rituals, chanting, food, celebrations, parades, and to make offerings of prayers, incense, fruits, flowers, and donations. On such days, they may observe the moral precepts very strictly, as well as a full day's vegetarian diet. Some of the most important holidays celebrated by Chinese Buddhists include: Buddha's Birthday (on the eighth day of the fourth lunar month), Chinese New Year and the Lantern Festival (on the first and fifteenth days of the first lunar month), and the Ghost Festival (fifteenth day of the seventh lunar month).

[ 86 ] List of Holidays [ edit ] The following holiday dates given are based on the Chinese calendar, so that 8.4 means the Eighth day of the fourth month in Chinese calendar and so on.

[ 87 ] 8.12 — Enlightenment Day of Sakyamuni Buddha 1.1 — Birthday of Maitreya Buddha 9.1 — Birthday of Śakra , Lord of the Devas 8.2 — Renunciation Day of Śākyamuni Buddha 15.2 — Mahāparinirvāṇa Day of Śākyamuni Buddha 19.2 — Birthday of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara ( Guan Yin ) 21.2 — Birthday of Bodhisattva Samantabhadra 4.4 — Birthday of Bodhisattva Manjusri 8.4 — Birthday of Śākyamuni Buddha 15.4 — Vesak 13.5 — Birthday of Bodhisattva Sangharama (Qie Lan) 3.6 — Birthday of Skanda (Wei Tuo) 19.6 — Enlightenment Day of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara 13.7 — Birthday of Bodhisattva Mahāsthāmaprāpta 15.7 — Ullambana Festival Ghost Festival 24.7 — Birthday of Bodhisattva Nagarjuna 30.7 — Birthday of Bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha 22.8 — Birthday of Dīpaṃkara Buddha (an ancient buddha) 19.9 — Renunciation Day of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara 30.9 — Birthday of Bhaiṣajyaguru Buddha (Medicine Buddha) 5.10 — Anniversary of the death of Bodhidharma 17.11 — Birthday of Amitabha Buddha See also [ edit ] Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e Avalokitesvara ( Guanyin ) Budai ( Maitreya ) Buddhism in Southeast Asia Buddhism in China Buddhism in Hong Kong Buddhism in Taiwan Buddhism and Eastern religions Chan Buddhism Chinese Buddhist canon Chinese Buddhist cuisine Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Chinese folk religion Dharma Drum Mountain East Asian Buddhism Fo Guang Shan Four Buddhist Persecutions in China Kṣitigarbha (Di Zang) List of Buddhist architecture in China List of converts to Buddhism Manjusri (Wen Shu) Samantabhadra (Pu Xian) Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Tiantai Persecution of Buddhists in the People's Republic of China Timeline of Buddhism Shuilu ritual paintings Zhiyuan fabao kantong zong lu , a translation catalog Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak Poceski, Mario. "Chinese Buddhism" in The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Chinese Religions (pp. 197-218) edited Randall L. Nadeau. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

^ a b Yü 2020 , pp. 29–70 ^ a b Cook, Sarah (2017).

The Battle for China's Spirit: Religious Revival, Repression, and Resistance under Xi Jinping.

Archived 2021-08-08 at the Wayback Machine Freedom House Report. Rowman & Littlefield.

^ "Six facts about Buddhism in China" .

Pew Research Center . 2023-09-21 . Retrieved 2023-09-21 .

^ a b Jiang Wu, "The Chinese Buddhist Canon" in The Wiley Blackwell Companion to East and Inner Asian Buddhism , p. 299, Wiley-Blackwell (2014).

^ a b Acri, Andrea (20 December 2018).

"Maritime Buddhism" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion .

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.638 .

ISBN 978-0-19-934037-8 .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2019 . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .

^ 中国文化科目认证指南 .

华语教学出版社.

Sinolingua. 2010. p. 64.

ISBN 978-7-80200-985-1 .

公元1世纪———传入中国内地，与汉文化交融，形成汉传佛教。 ^ a b Yü 2020 , p. 14 ^ Maspero 1981 , pp. 401–405 ^ Yü 2020 , p. 15 ^ Maspero 1981 , p. 409 ^ Cite error: The named reference camb1 was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Williams, Paul.

Mahāyāna Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations . 2008. p. 30 ^ Yü 2020 , p. 18 ^ Warder, A.K.

Indian Buddhism . 2000. pp. 280–281 ^ Yü 2020 , p. 22 ^ Mair, Victor H.; Sanping Chen, Wood, Frances (2013).

Chinese Lives: The People Who Made a Civilization, #28, Kumarajiva. Thames & Hudson.

^ Fan Muyou.

A Reexamination of the Influence of Kumārajīva's Thought on His Translation of the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa . The Eastern Buddhist 47/1: 57-80 ©2018 The Eastern Buddhist Society.

^ Frankopan, Peter (March 2017).

The Silk Roads: A New History of the World (First Vintage Books ed.). New York: Vintage Books . p. 32.

ISBN 978-1-101-94633-6 .

^ Yü 2020 , p. 76 ^ Radich, Michael.

The Doctrine of *Amalavijnana in Paramartha (499-569), and Later Authors to Approximately 800 C.E.

Archived 2022-11-26 at the Wayback Machine Zinbun 41:45-174 (2009)  Copy  BIBT E X ^ Keng Ching and Michael Radich.

"Paramārtha." Brill's Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Volume II: Lives Archived 2022-11-26 at the Wayback Machine , edited by Jonathan A. Silk (editor-in chief), Richard Bowring, Vincent Eltschinger, and Michael Radich, 752-758. Leiden, Brill, 2019.

^ Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 81.

^ a b "Living in the Chinese Cosmos | Asia for Educators" .

afe.easia.columbia.edu .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-16 . Retrieved 2022-12-01 .

^ Chua, Amy (2007).

Day of Empire: How Hyperpowers Rise to Global Dominance–and Why They Fall (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday . p. 65.

ISBN 978-0-385-51284-8 .

OCLC 123079516 .

^ Sullivan, Michael (2008).

The Arts of China . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-520-25569-2 .

^ Ebrey, Patricia (2003).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

116– 117.

ISBN 0-521-43519-6 .

^ Rothschild, N, Henry (2015). Emperor Wu Zhao and Her Pantheon of Devis, Divinities, and Dynastic Mothers. Columbia UP. p. 221.

^ Graeber, David (2011).

Debt: The First 5000 Years . Brooklyn, NY: Melville House. pp.

265–6 .

ISBN 978-1-933633-86-2 .

^ Yampolski, Philip (2003), "Zen. A Historical Sketch", in Takeuchi Yoshinori (ed.), Buddhist Spirituality. Indian, Southeast Asian, Tibetan, Early Chinese, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass ^ McRae, John (2003), Seeing Through Zen , The University Press Group Ltd ^ Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005), Zen Buddhism: A History. Volume 1: India and China, World Wisdom Books , pp. 256–257.

ISBN 978-0-941532-89-1 ^ a b c Nan Huai-Chin 1998 , p. 99 ^ Wu, Jiang (2008-04-01).

Enlightenment in Dispute . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195333572.003.0003 .

ISBN 978-0-19-533357-2 .

Archived from the original on 2018-06-02 . Retrieved 2021-10-24 .

^ Ma, Yung-fen (2011).

The Revival of Tiantai Buddhism in the Late Ming: On the Thought of Youxi Chuandeng (1554-1628) D81G0T8P (Thesis). Columbia University.

doi : 10.7916/d81g0t8p .

^ Stanley Weinstein, "The Schools of Chinese Buddhism", in Kitagawa & Cummings (eds.), Buddhism and Asian History (New York: Macmillan 1987) pp. 257–265, 264.

^ a b c Keown, Damien.

A Dictionary of Buddhism . 2003. p. 104 ^ a b Mullin 2001, p. 358 ^ Yü 2020 , pp. 240 ^ a b Nan Huai-Chin 1998 [ pages needed ] ^ Ji Zhe, Gareth Fisher, André Laliberté (2020).

Buddhism after Mao: Negotiations, Continuities, and Reinventions, pp. 136-137. University of Hawaii Press.

^ a b Yu, Dan Smyer. "Delayed contention with the Chinese Marxist scapegoat complex: re-membering Tibetan Buddhism in the PRC".

The Tibet Journal , 32.1 (2007) ^ "murdoch edu" . Archived from the original on December 25, 2005.

^ Lai 2003 .

^ "RELIGION-CHINA: Buddhism Enjoys A Revival" .

Inter Press Service . November 30, 2010.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2022 . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

^ "Erica B. Mitchell (201), A Revival of Buddhism?

" . Archived from the original on July 14, 2014.

^ Hammerstrom, Erik J. (2020).

The Huayan University Network: The Teaching and Practice of Avataṃsaka Buddhism in Twentieth-Century China . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-55075-8 .

OCLC 1154101063 .

^ Pei, Minxin (2023-12-31).

The Sentinel State: Surveillance and the Survival of Dictatorship in China .

Harvard University Press .

doi : 10.4159/9780674296459 .

ISBN 978-0-674-29645-9 .

JSTOR jj.10860939 .

OCLC 1419055794 .

^ Madsen, Richard , ed. (2021-05-28), "The Sinicization of Buddhism and Its Competing Reinventions of Tradition", The Sinicization of Chinese Religions: From Above and Below , Brill , pp.

64– 85, doi : 10.1163/9789004465183_005 , ISBN 978-90-04-46517-6 , S2CID 242677252 ^ Joske, Alex (May 9, 2019).

"Reorganizing the United Front Work Department: New Structures for a New Era of Diaspora and Religious Affairs Work" .

Jamestown Foundation . Retrieved 2019-11-18 .

^ Yü 2020 , p. 111 ^ a b c d Jones, Charles B. (2021).

Pure Land: History, Tradition, and Practice , pp. 198-210. Shambhala Publications, ISBN 978-1-61180-890-2 .

^ "Universal Salvation Ritual" .

open.library.ubc.ca . Retrieved 2025-05-02 .

^ Liu, Jingyu (May 2020).

The Unimpeded Passage: The Making of Universal Salvation Rites and Buddho-Daoist Interactions in Medieval China (PhD thesis). Harvard University: Graduate School of Arts & Sciences.

^ Lye, Hun Yeow, Department of Religious Studies, University of Virginia.

"Feeding Ghosts: A Study of the Yuqie Yankou Rite" .

libraetd.lib.virginia.edu . Retrieved 2025-05-02 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Jones, Charles B. (2021).

Pure Land: History, Tradition, and Practice , pp. 188-198. Shambhala Publications, ISBN 978-1-61180-890-2 .

^ a b c Huaiyu Chen, "East Asian Transformations of Monasticism" in The Wiley Blackwell Companion to East and Inner Asian Buddhism , p. 299, Wiley-Blackwell (2014).

^ a b c d e f Twitchett, Denis, and Fairbank, John.

The Cambridge History of China, Volume 8, Part 2 . 1998. p. 949 ^ Jiang, Wu (2008).

Enlightenment in Dispute: The Reinvention of Chan Buddhism in Seventeenth-Century China : p. 146 ^ Kuan Ming.

Popular Deities of Chinese Buddhism Archived 2022-11-13 at the Wayback Machine , Contemplative Order Malaysia.

^ Yü 2020 , p. 72 ^ Yü 2020 , p. 71 ^ Yü 2020 , p. 121 ^ Yü 2020 , p. 125 ^ "Chinese Veganism" .

^ Vuong, Quan-Hoang (2018).

"Cultural additivity: behavioural insights from the interaction of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism in folktales" .

Palgrave Communications .

4 (1) 143.

doi : 10.1057/s41599-018-0189-2 .

S2CID 54444540 .

^ "Living in the Chinese Cosmos: Understanding Religion in Late-Imperial China" .

afe.easia.columbia.edu .

Archived from the original on 2017-05-08 . Retrieved 2022-11-30 .

^ Gregory, Peter N. (2002), Tsung-mi and the Sinification of Buddhism , University of Hawaiʻi Press, Kuroda Institute, p. 257. (originally published Princeton University Press, 1991, Princeton, N.J.), ISBN 0-8248-2623-X ^ 中央研究院網站 .

Archived from the original on 2020-04-05 . Retrieved 2016-01-29 .

^ Jenott, Lance (2002-05-07).

"The Eastern (Nestorian) Church" .

Silk Road Seattle .

University of Washington . Retrieved 2023-03-01 .

^ a b Clasquin-Johnson, M. (December 2009).

"The centuries-old dialogue between buddhism and christianity" .

Acta Theologica .

29 (2).

ISSN 1015-8758 .

Archived from the original on 2020-07-09 – via SciELO .

^ Lau, Hua Teck (2003). "The Cross and the Lotus".

Church and the Society .

26 (2): 85– 87, 90, 93– 94.

^ a b Willard Gurdon Oxtoby, ed. (2002).

World Religions: Eastern Traditions (2nd ed.). Don Mills, Ontario: Oxford University Press . p. 434.

ISBN 0-19-541521-3 .

OCLC 46661540 .

^ "Nestorians" .

McClintock and Strong Biblical Cyclopedia Online . StudyLamp Software . Retrieved 2023-03-01 .

^ a b c Chan Master Sheng Yen (2007).

Orthodox Chinese Buddhism: A Contemporary Chan Master's Answers to Common Questions, pp. 116-119. North Atlantic Books.

^ Blum, Mark L. (2002).

The Origins and Development of Pure Land Buddhism: A Study and Translation of Gyonen's Jodo Homon Genrusho, p. 15. Oxford University Press.

^ "Buddhism in China Today: An Adaptable Present, a Hopeful Future" .

Archived from the original on 2020-09-27 . Retrieved 2020-06-01 .

.

^ Jones, Charles B. (2019) Chinese Pure Land Buddhism, Understanding a Tradition of Practice, pp. 10-12. University of Hawaiʻi Press / Honolulu.

^ Yü 2020 , p. 127 ^ a b c d William Edward Soothill, Lewis Hodous (1977).

A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms: With Sanskrit and English Equivalents and a Sanskrit-Pali Index.

p. 256. Motilal Banarsidass Publ.

^ "Buddhist Schools: The Chinese Buddhist Schools" .

www.buddhanet.net .

Archived from the original on 2013-12-14 . Retrieved 2022-11-29 .

^ "Vinaya school" .

Oxford Reference .

Archived from the original on 2022-11-29 . Retrieved 2022-11-29 .

^ Chan Master Sheng Yen (2007).

Orthodox Chinese Buddhism: A Contemporary Chan Master's Answers to Common Questions, pp. 118-119. North Atlantic Books.

^ Munro & Spiegel (1994) , p. 269–271.

^ Yü 2020 , p. 97 ^ Yü 2020 , pp. 97–100.

^ "2020 Buddhist Calendar" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-09-18 . Retrieved 2020-01-04 .

Sources [ edit ] Broughton, Jeffrey L. (1999), The Bodhidharma Anthology: The Earliest Records of Zen , Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-21972-4 Chen, Kenneth Kuan Sheng (1964), Buddhism in China: A Historical Survey , Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press Dumoulin, Heinrich (2005), Zen Buddhism: A History , vol. 1: India and China, Bloomington, IN: World Wisdom, ISBN 978-0-941532-89-1 Han Yu.

Sources of Chinese Tradition . c. 800.

Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1999), The Cambridge Illustrated History of China (paperback) , Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978-0-521-66991-7 Ebrey, Patricia; Walthall, Anne; Palais, James (2006), East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political History , Boston, Mass.: Houghton Mifflin Company, ISBN 978-0-618-13384-0 Hill, John E. (2009), Through the Jade Gate to Rome: A Study of the Silk Routes during the Later Han Dynasty, 1st to 2nd Centuries CE , Charleston, S.C.: BookSurge, ISBN 978-1-4392-2134-1 Hodus, Lewis (1923), Buddhism and Buddhists in China , archived from the original on 2019-03-09 , retrieved 2013-03-29 Kambe, Tstuomu (n.d.), Bodhidharma. A collection of stories from Chinese literature (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-11-06 , retrieved 2013-02-19 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: year ( link ) Lai, Hongyi Harry (2003), "The Religious Revival in China" , Copenhagen Journal of Asian Studies , 18 , archived from the original on 2013-07-22 , retrieved 2013-03-29 Laliberte, Andre (2011), "Buddhist Revival under State Watch" , Journal of Current Chinese Affairs , 40 (2): 2, 107– 134, doi : 10.1177/186810261104000205 , archived from the original on 2019-12-25 , retrieved 2013-03-29 Liebenthal, Walter (1968), Chao Lun - The Treatises of Seng-Chao , Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press Liebenthal, Walter.

Was ist chinesischer Buddhismus Asiatische Studien: Zeitschrift der Schweizerischen Asiengesellschaft, 1952 Was ist chinesischer Buddhismus Archived 2016-03-06 at the Wayback Machine Maspero, Henri (1981), Taoism and Chinese Religion , translated by Kierman Jr, Frank A, University of Massachusetts Press, ISBN 9780870233081 McRae, John R. (2000), "The Antecedents of Encounter Dialogue in Chinese Ch'an Buddhism" , in Heine, Steven; Wright, Dale S. (eds.), The Kōan: Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism , Oxford University Press, archived from the original on 2012-07-25 , retrieved 2013-02-19 McRae, John (2003), Seeing Through Zen , The University Press Group Ltd.

Mullin, Glenn H. (2001), The Fourteen Dalai Lamas: A Sacred Legacy of Reincarnations , Clear Light Publishers, ISBN 1-57416-092-3 .

Saunders, Kenneth J. (1923), "Buddhism in China: A Historical Sketch", The Journal of Religion : Vol. 3.2, pp. 157–169, Vol. 3.3, pp. 256–275 Welch, Holmes (1964), The Practice of Chinese Buddhism , Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press Welch, Holmes (1968), The Buddhist Revival in China , Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press Welch, Holmes (1972), Buddhism under Mao , Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press Welter, Albert (2000), "Mahakasyapa's smile. Silent Transmission and the Kung-an (Koan) Tradition", in Heine, Steven; Wright, Dale S. (eds.), The Koan: Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism , Oxford, England: Oxford University Press Yang, Fenggang; Wei, Dedong, THE BAILIN BUDDHIST TEMPLE: THRIVING UNDER COMMUNISM (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on June 6, 2010 Yü, Chün-fang (2020), Chinese Buddhism: A Thematic History , Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-8348-5 Zhu, Caifang (June 2003), "Buddhism in China Today: The Example of the Bai Lin Chan Monastery" (PDF) , Perspectives , 4 (2), archived from the original on 2010-09-29 Zvelebil, Kamil V. (1987), "The Sound of the One Hand", Journal of the American Oriental Society , 107 (1): 125– 126, doi : 10.2307/602960 , JSTOR 602960 Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Chinese Buddhism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Wikiquote has quotations related to Chinese Buddhism .

History [ edit ] Nan Huai-Chin (1998), Basic Buddhism: Exploring Buddhism and Zen , translated by J.C. Cleary, Red Wheel Weiser Nan Huai-Chin (1995), The Story of Chinese Zen , translated by Thomas Cleary, Charles E. Tuttle Company Tansen Sen (2003), Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The realignment of Sino-Indian Relations, 600–1400 , Association for Asian Studies & University of Hawaiʻi Press Shinko Mochizuki, Leo M. Pruden, Trans. (1999). Pure Land Buddhism in China: A Doctrinal History, Chapter 1: A General Survey. In: Pacific World Journal, Third Series, Number 1, 91–103. Archived from the original Shinko Mochizuki, Leo M. Pruden, Trans. (2001). Pure Land Buddhism in China: A Doctrinal History, Chapter 2: The Earliest Period; Chapter 3: Hui-yuan of Mt.Lu; and Chapter 4: The Translation of Texts-Spurious Scriptures. In: Pacific World Journal, Third Series, Number 3, 241–275. Archived from the original Shinko Mochizuki, Leo M. Pruden, Trans. (2002). Pure Land Buddhism in China: A Doctrinal History, Chapter Five: The Early Pure Land Faith: Southern China, and Chapter Six: The Early Pure Land Faith: Northern China. In: Pacific World Journal, Third Series, Number 4, 259–279. Archived from the original Shinko Mochizuki, Leo M. Pruden, Trans. (2000). Pure Land Buddhism in China: A Doctrinal History, Chapter 7: T'an-luan. In: Pacific World Journal, Third Series, Number 2, 149–165. Archived from the original First Buddhist revival [ edit ] Pittman, Don Alvin (2001), Toward a Modern Chinese Buddhism: Taixu's Reforms , University of Hawaii Press Daoru, Wei (n.d.), Buddhism in China and Modern Society: An Introduction Centering Around the Teachings of Taixu and Yinshun (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on April 2, 2013 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: year ( link ) Lancashire, Douglas (n.d.), Buddhism in Modern China (PDF) {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: year ( link ) Contemporary Chinese Buddhism [ edit ] Chau, Adam Yuet (2010), Religion in Contemporary China: Revitalization and Innovation , Taylor & Francis Miller, James (2006), Chinese Religions in Contemporary Societies , ABC-CLIO Baumer, Christoph (2011), China's Holy Mountain: An Illustrated Journey into the Heart of Buddhism , London: I.B.Tauris, ISBN 978-1-84885-700-1 Master Sheng Yen (2007), Orthodox Chinese Buddhism , Translated by Douglas Gildow and Otto Chang, North Atlantic Books Munro, Robin; Spiegel, Mickey (1994).

Detained in China and Tibet: A Directory of Political and Religious Prisoners . Human Rights Watch.

ISBN 978-1-56432-105-3 .

List first published in: "Appendix: Sects and Societies Recently or Currently Active in the PRC".

Chinese Sociology & Anthropology .

21 (4): 103– 104. 1989.

doi : 10.2753/CSA0009-46252104102 .

v t e Religion in China Major religions in China Chinese folk religion Ancestor veneration Folk ritual ministries Chinese salvationist religions Confucianism Taoism Buddhism Chinese Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Theravada Buddhism Christianity Protestant Roman Catholic Orthodox Islam Falun Gong Other religions Baháʼí Faith Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Dongbaism Hinduism Judaism Manchu shamanism Manichaeism Miao folk religion Mo Mongolian folk religion Qiang folk religion Sikhism Yao folk religion By region Hong Kong Macau Northeast Inner Mongolia Tibet Related Freedom of religion in China Heterodox teachings (Chinese law) Irreligion in China Regional Religious System Ghosts in Chinese culture Three Persian religions Huichang Persecution of Buddhism v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Chinese Buddhist pantheon Buddhas 佛 (Fó)/如來 (Rúlái) Five Wisdom Tathāgatas (Wǔfāng Fó) Seven Buddhas of Antiquity (Guòqù Qīfó) Buddhas of the Ten Directions (Shífāng Fó) [zh] Eighty-eight Buddhas (Bāshíbā Fó) Śākyamuni (Shìjiāmóuní Fó) Vairocana (Pílúzhēnǎ Fó) Amitābha (Āmítuó Fó) Bhaisajyaguru (Yàoshī Fó) Amoghasiddhi (Bùkōngchéngjiù Fó) Akshobhya (Āchù Fó) Ratnasambhava (Bǎoshēng Fó) Dīpankara (Rándēng Fó) Vipassī (Pípóshī Fó) Vessabhū (Píshèpó Fó) Kakusandha (Jūliúsūn Fó) Koṇāgamana (Jūnàhán Fó) Kassapa (Jiāshè Fó) Bodhisattvas 菩薩 (Púsà) Four Great Bodhisattvas (Sìdà Púsà) [zh] Eight Great Bodhisattvas (Bādà Púsà) [zh] Twelve Bodhisattvas of Perfect Enlightenment (Shí'èr Yuánjué Púsà) Avalokiteśvara (Guānyīn Púsà) Manjushri (Wénshū Púsà) Samantabhadra (Pǔxián Púsà) Kṣitigarbha (Dìzàng Púsà) Mahāsthāmaprāpta (Dàshìzhì Púsà) Vajrapāṇi (Jīngāngshǒu Púsà) Maitreya (Mílè Púsa) Ākāśagarbha (Xūkōngzàng Púsà) Cundī (Zhǔntí Púsà) Tara (Duōluó Púsà) Sūryaprabha (Rìguāng Púsà) Candraprabha (Yuèguāng Púsà) Bhaiṣajyarāja (Yàowáng Púsà) Bhaiṣajyasamudgata (Yàoshàng Púsà) Cintāmaṇicakra (Rúyìlún Guānyīn) Vajrasattva (Jīngāng Sàduǒ Púsà) Nagarjuna (Lóngshù Púsà) Sitātapatrā (Báisǎngài Fódǐng) Wisdom Kings 明王 (Míngwáng) Eight Wisdom Kings (Bādà Míngwáng) Ten Wisdom Kings (Shídà Míngwáng) Mahamayuri (Kǒngquè Míngwáng) Ucchuṣma (Huìjì Jīngāng) Kuṇḍali (Jūntúlì Míngwáng) Hayagriva (Mǎtóu Guānyīn) Acala (Bùdòng Míngwáng) Trailokyavijaya (Xiángsānshì Míngwáng) Yamāntaka (Dàwēidé Míngwáng) Mahacakra (Dàlún Míngwáng) Padanaksipa (Bùzhì Míngwáng) Mahabala (Dàlì Míngwáng) Aparajita (Wúnéngshēng Míngwáng) Vajrahāsa (Dàxiào Míngwáng) Deities and Demons 諸天鬼神 (Zhūtiān Guǐshén) Twenty-Four Protective Deities (Èrshísì Zhūtiān) Twelve Heavenly Generals (Shí'èr Shénjiāng) Eight Great Yakṣa Generals (Bādà Yèchā Dàjiàng) Eight Legions of Devas and Nāgas (Tiānlóng bābù) Four Heavenly Kings (Sì Tiānwáng) Ulkāmukha Pretarāja (Miànrán Dàshì) Brahma (Fàntiān) Indra (Dìshìtiān) Shiva (Dàzìzàitiān) Lakshmi (Gōngdétiān) Saraswati (Biàncáitiān) Surya (Rìtiān) Chandra (Yuètiān) Pañcika (Sànzhī Dàjiàng) Hārītī (Guǐzǐmǔ) Yama (Yánluó Wáng) Marici (Mólìzhītiān) Prithvi (Jiānláo Dishén) Sāgara (Suōjiéluó Lóngwáng) Vajra-Weilding God (Zhíjīngāng shén) Gunyapati (Mìjī Jīngāng) Narayana (Nàluóyántiān) Mahākāla (Dàhēitiān) Sudhana (Shàncái) Nagakanya (Lóngnǚ) Puti Shushen Ziwei Emperor Dongyue Emperor (Dōngyuè Dàdì) Thunder god (Léigōng) Skanda (Wéituó) Sangharama Bodhisattva (Qíelán Púsà) Deva (Tiān) Nāga (Lóng) Asura (Āxiūluō) Yaksha (Yèchà) Garuda (Jiālóuluó) Gandharva (Gāntàpó) Kinnara (Jǐnnàluō) Mahoraga (Móhóuluójiā) Apsara (Fēitiān Nǚshén) Kalaviṅka (Jiālíngpínqié) Arhats 羅漢 (Luóhàn) Five Hundred Arhats (Wǔbǎi luóhàn) Eighteen Arhats (Shíbā Luóhàn) Sixteen Arhats (Shíliù Luóhàn) Mahākāśyapa (Xiánglóng Luóhàn) Nagasena(Wāěr Luóhàn) Rahula (Chénsāi Luóhàn) Pindola Bharadvaja (Qílù Luóhàn) Bodhidharma (Guojiāng Luóhàn) Asita (Chángméi Luóhàn) Kanaka the Vatsa (Xǐqìng Luóhàn) Kanaka the Bharadvaja (Jǔbō Luóhàn) Subinda (Tuōda Luóhàn) Nakula (Jìngzuò Luóhàn) Kalika (Qíxiàng Luóhàn) Vijraputra (Xiàoshī Luóhàn) Gobaka (Kāixīn Luóhàn) Pantha the Elder (Tànshǒu Luóhàn) Vanavasa (Bājiāo Luóhàn) Pantha the Younger (Kānmén Luóhàn) Sangha 高僧・祖師 (Gāosēng・Zǔshī) Ānanda Moggallāna Bodhidharma (Damo) An Shigao Kumarajiva Zhiyi Xuanzang Faxian Yijing Yixing Shandao Huiguo Amoghavajra (Bukong) Vajrabodhi (Jingangzhi) Śubhakarasiṃha (Shanwuwei) Hanshan Deqing Yunqi Zhuhong Ouyi Zhixu Budai Jigong Emperor Ming Emperor Wu Fu Dashi Mahayana Chan Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tantrism Chinese mythology Religion in China NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2rhtf
Cached time: 20250817043910
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.866 seconds
Real time usage: 2.167 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8607/1000000
Revision size: 77158/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 393381/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14065/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 347048/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.037/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20339981/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1602.172      1 -total
 29.86%  478.388      2 Template:Reflist
 12.76%  204.375     35 Template:Citation
  9.68%  155.119      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
  8.44%  135.302      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.04%   96.830      2 Template:Cite_news
  5.87%   94.093     15 Template:Cite_web
  5.24%   84.012      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  5.07%   81.240      1 Template:Buddhism_and_China
  4.96%   79.393     11 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:226808:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043910 and revision id 1306142180. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chinese_Buddhism&oldid=1306142180 " Categories : Buddhism in China Buddhism by country History of Buddhism in Asia Three teachings Hidden categories: Pages with reference errors Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) Pages with broken reference names Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2025 CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup and no ISO hint Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from February 2024 Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from February 2024 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: year This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 05:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chinese Buddhism 33 languages Add topic

