Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Origins 3 Academic communitarianism Toggle Academic communitarianism subsection 3.1 Social capital 3.2 Positive rights 4 Responsive communitarianism movement Toggle Responsive communitarianism movement subsection 4.1 Influence 5 Comparison to other political philosophies 6 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 6.1 Opposition 7 List of communitarian political parties 8 List of communitarian philosophers 9 See also 10 Notes 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Communitarianism 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political philosophy Not to be confused with Communism or Communalism (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Communitarianism Ideas Civil society Common good Community Consensus decision-making Diversity Political particularism Positive rights Social capital Solidarity Social responsibility Value pluralism Workplace democracy Intellectuals Aristotle Barber Barzilai Bellah Seyla Benhabib Blond Etzioni Galston Hauerwas Jean Bethke Elshtain Hegel Kuczewski MacIntyre Marglin Adán Preve Putnam Rousseau Reich Sandel Taylor Tönnies Walzer Related topics Catholic social teaching Christian democracy Libertarian socialism Progressivism Radical centrism Republicanism Social democracy Utopian socialism Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Community Academic studies Social sciences Community studies Community practice Community psychology Social work Computational sociology Cultural anthropology Internet studies Philosophy of social science Rural sociology Social geography Social philosophy Sociocultural evolution Urban planning Key concepts Affinity (sociology) Collectivism and individualism Community engagement Community education Community cohesion Community of interest Community practice Community of practice Community of place Community service Communitarianism Community politics Group cohesiveness Group (sociology) Group dynamics Imagined community Organization Prosocial behavior Sense of community Small-group communication Sobornost Social alienation Social capital Social death Social exclusion Socialization Social rejection Social support Solidarity (sociology) Community development Community-based management Community building Community economic development Community development planning Community organizing See also Outline Category:Community building Category:Community development Category:Localism (politics) v t e Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Communitarianism is a philosophy that emphasizes the connection between the individual and the community . Its overriding philosophy is based on the belief that a person's social identity and personality are largely molded by community relationships, with a smaller degree of development being placed on individualism . Although the community might be a family, communitarianism usually is understood, in the wider, philosophical sense, as a collection of interactions , among a community of people in a given place (geographical location), or among a community who share an interest or who share a history.

[ 1 ] Communitarianism is often contrasted with individualism , and generally opposes laissez-faire policies that deprioritize the stability of the overall community.

Terminology [ edit ] The philosophy of communitarianism originated in the 20th century, but the term "communitarian" was coined in 1841, by John Goodwyn Barmby , a leader of the British Chartist movement, who used it in referring to utopian socialists and other idealists who experimented with communal styles of life . However, it was not until the 1980s that the term "communitarianism" gained currency through association with the work of a small group of political philosophers . Their application of the label "communitarian" was controversial, even among communitarians, because, in the West, the term evokes associations with the ideologies of socialism and collectivism ; so, public leaders—and some of the academics who champion this school of thought—usually avoid the term "communitarian", while still advocating and advancing the ideas of communitarianism.

The term is primarily used in two senses: [ 2 ] [ attribution needed ] Philosophical communitarianism considers classical liberalism to be ontologically and epistemologically incoherent, and opposes it on those grounds. Unlike classical liberalism, which construes communities as originating from the voluntary acts of pre-community individuals , it emphasizes the role of the community in defining and shaping individuals. Communitarians believe that the value of community is not sufficiently recognized in liberal theories of justice.

Ideological communitarianism is characterized as a radical centrist ideology that is sometimes marked by socially conservative and economically interventionist policies. This usage was coined recently. When the term is capitalized (Communitarianism), it usually refers to responsive communitarianism , the movement of Amitai Etzioni and other philosophers.

Czech and Slovak philosophers like Marek Hrubec, [ 3 ] Lukáš Perný [ 4 ] and Luboš Blaha [ 5 ] extend communitarianism to social projects tied to the values and significance of community or collectivism and to various types of communism and socialism (Christian, scientific, or utopian), including: Historical roots of collectivist projects from Plato , through François-Noël Babeuf , Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , Mikhail Bakunin , Charles Fourier , Robert Owen to Karl Marx Contemporary theoretical communitarianism ( Michael J. Sandel , Michael Walzer , Alasdair MacIntyre , Charles Taylor ), originating in the 1980s Pro-liberal, pro-multicultural (Walzer, Taylor) Anti-liberal, pro-national (Sandel, MacIntyre) The vision of practical, self-sustaining communities as described by Thomas More ( Utopia ), Tommaso Campanella ( Civitas solis ) and practised by Christian Utopians ( Jesuit Reduction ) or utopian socialists like Charles Fourier ( List of Fourierist Associations in the United States ), Robert Owen ( List of Owenite communities in the United States ). This line includes various forms of cooperatives , self-help institutions, or communities ( Hussite communities, The Diggers , Habans , Hutterites , Amish , Israeli kibbutz , Slavic community ; examples include the Twelve Tribes communities , Tamera (Portugal), Marinaleda (Spain), the monastic state of Mount Athos [ 6 ] and the Catholic Worker Movement ).

Origins [ edit ] While the term communitarian was coined only in the mid-nineteenth century, ideas that are communitarian in nature appeared much earlier. They are found in some classical socialist doctrines (e.g. writings about the early commune and about workers' solidarity), and further back in the New Testament . Communitarianism has been traced back to early monasticism .

A number of early sociologists had strongly communitarian elements in their work, such as Ferdinand Tönnies in his comparison of Gemeinschaft (oppressive but nurturing communities) and Gesellschaft (liberating but impersonal societies), and Emile Durkheim 's concerns about the integrating role of social values and the relations between the individual and society. Both authors warned of the dangers of anomie (normlessness) and alienation in modern societies composed of atomized individuals who had gained their liberty but lost their social moorings.  Modern sociologists saw the rise of mass society and the decline of communal bonds and respect for traditional values and authority in the United States as of the 1960s. Among those who raised these issues were Robert Nisbet (Twilight of Authority), [ 7 ] Robert N. Bellah Habits of the Heart , [ 8 ] and Alan Ehrenhalt (The Lost City: The Forgotten Virtues Of Community In America).

[ 9 ] In his book Bowling Alone (2000), Robert Putnam documented the decline of "social capital" and stressed the importance of "bridging social capital," in which bonds of connectedness are formed across diverse social groups.

[ 10 ] In the twentieth century communitarianism also began to be formulated as a philosophy by Dorothy Day and the Catholic Worker movement . In an early article the Catholic Worker clarified the dogma of the Mystical Body of Christ as the basis for the movement's communitarianism.

[ 11 ] Along similar lines, communitarianism is also related to the personalist philosophy of Emmanuel Mounier .

Responding to criticism that the term 'community' is too vague or cannot be defined, Amitai Etzioni , one of the leaders of the American communitarian movement, pointed out that communities can be defined with reasonable precision as having two characteristics: first, a web of affect-laden relationships among a group of individuals, relationships that often crisscross and reinforce one another (as opposed to one-on-one or chain-like individual relationships); and second, a measure of commitment to a set of shared values, norms, and meanings, and a shared history and identity – in short, a particular culture.

[ 12 ] Further, author David E. Pearson argued that "[t]o earn the appellation 'community,' it seems to me, groups must be able to exert moral suasion and extract a measure of compliance from their members. That is, communities are necessarily, indeed, by definition, coercive as well as moral, threatening their members with the stick of sanctions if they stray, offering them the carrot of certainty and stability if they don't." [ 12 ] What is specifically meant by "community" in the context of communitarianism can vary greatly between authors and periods. Historically, communities have been small and localized. However, as the reach of economic and technological forces extended, more expansive communities became necessary to provide effective normative and political guidance to these forces, prompting the rise of national communities in Europe in the 17th century. Since the late 20th century there has been some growing recognition that the scope of even these communities is too limited, as many challenges that people now face, such as the threat of nuclear war and that of global environmental degradation and economic crises, cannot be handled on a national basis. This has led to the quest for more encompassing communities, such as the European Union . Whether truly supra-national communities can be developed is far from clear.

More modern communities can take many different forms, but are often limited in scope and reach. For example, members of one residential community are often also members of other communities – such as work, ethnic, or religious ones. As a result, modern community members have multiple sources of attachments, and if one threatens to become overwhelming, individuals will often pull back and turn to another community for their attachments. Thus, communitarianism is the reaction of some intellectuals to the problems of Western society, an attempt to find flexible forms of balance between the individual and society, the autonomy of the individual and the interests of the community, between the common good and freedom, rights, and duties.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Academic communitarianism [ edit ] Whereas the classical liberalism of the Enlightenment can be viewed as a reaction to centuries of authoritarianism, oppressive government, overbearing communities, and rigid dogma, modern communitarianism can be considered a reaction to excessive individualism, understood as an undue emphasis on individual rights, leading people to become selfish or egocentric.

[ 15 ] The close relation between the individual and the community was discussed on a theoretical level by Michael Sandel and Charles Taylor , among other academic communitarians, in their criticisms of philosophical liberalism, especially the work of the American liberal theorist John Rawls and that of the German Enlightenment philosopher Immanuel Kant . They argued that contemporary liberalism failed to account for the complex set of social relations that all individuals in the modern world are a part of. Liberalism is rooted in an untenable ontology that posits the existence of generic individuals and fails to account for social embeddedness. To the contrary, they argued, there are no generic individuals but rather only Germans or Russians, Berliners or Muscovites, or members of some other particularistic community. Because individual identity is partly constructed by culture and social relations, there is no coherent way of formulating individual rights or interests in abstraction from social contexts. Thus, according to these communitarians, there is no point in attempting to found a theory of justice on principles decided behind Rawls' veil of ignorance , because individuals cannot exist in such an abstracted state, even in principle.

[ 15 ] Academic communitarians also contend that the nature of the political community is misunderstood by liberalism. Where liberal philosophers described the polity as a neutral framework of rules within which a multiplicity of commitments to moral values can coexist, academic communitarians argue that such a thin conception of political community was both empirically misleading and normatively dangerous. Good societies, these authors believe, rest on much more than neutral rules and procedures—they rely on a shared moral culture. Some academic communitarians argued even more strongly on behalf of such particularistic values, suggesting that these were the only kind of values which matter and that it is a philosophical error to posit any truly universal moral values.

In addition to Charles Taylor and Michael Sandel, other thinkers sometimes associated with academic communitarianism include Michael Walzer , Alasdair MacIntyre , Seyla Benhabib , Shlomo Avineri , and Patrick J. Deneen .

[ 15 ] Social capital [ edit ] Beginning in the late 20th century, many authors began to observe a deterioration in the social networks of the United States. In the book Bowling Alone , Robert Putnam observed that nearly every form of civic organization has undergone drops in membership exemplified by the fact that, while more people are bowling than in the 1950s, there are fewer bowling leagues.

This results in a decline in " social capital ", described by Putnam as "the collective value of all ' social networks ' and the inclinations that arise from these networks to do things for each other". According to Putnam and his followers, social capital is a key component to building and maintaining democracy.

[ 10 ] Communitarians seek to bolster social capital and the institutions of civil society . The Responsive Communitarian Platform described it thus: [ 16 ] Many social goals require partnerships between public and private groups. Though the government should not seek to replace local communities, it may need to empower them by strategies of support, including revenue-sharing and technical assistance. There is a great need for study and experimentation with creative use of the structures of civil society, and public-private cooperation, especially where the delivery of health, educational and social services are concerned.

Positive rights [ edit ] Important to some supporters of communitarian philosophy is the concept of positive rights , which are rights or guarantees to certain things. These may include state-subsidized education, state-subsidized housing, a safe and clean environment, universal health care, and even the right to a job with the concomitant obligation of the government or individuals to provide one. To this end, communitarians generally support social security programs, public works programs, and laws limiting such things as pollution.

A common objection is that by providing such rights, communitarians violate the negative rights of the citizens; rights to not have something done for you. For example, taxation to pay for such programs as described above dispossesses individuals of property. Proponents of positive rights, by attributing the protection of negative rights to the society rather than the government, respond that individuals would not have any rights in the absence of societies—a central tenet of communitarianism—and thus have a responsibility to give something back to it. Some have viewed this as a negation of natural rights . However, what is or is not a "natural right" is a source of contention in modern politics, as well as historically; for example, whether or not universal health care, private property or protection from polluters can be considered a birthright.

Alternatively, some agree that negative rights may be violated by a government action, but argue that it is justifiable if the positive rights protected outweigh the negative rights lost.

Still, other communitarians question the very idea of natural rights and their place in a properly functioning community. They claim that instead, claims of rights and entitlements create a society unable to form cultural institutions and grounded social norms based on shared values. Rather, the liberalist claim to individual rights leads to a morality centered on individual emotivism, as ethical issues can no longer be solved by working through common understandings of the good. The worry here is that not only is society individualized, but so are moral claims.

[ 17 ] Responsive communitarianism movement [ edit ] In the early 1990s, in response to the perceived breakdown in the moral fabric of society engendered by excessive individualism, Amitai Etzioni and William A. Galston began to organize working meetings to think through communitarian approaches to key societal issues. This ultimately took the communitarian philosophy from a small academic group, introduced it into public life, and recast its philosophical content.

Deeming themselves "responsive communitarians" in order to distinguish the movement from authoritarian communitarians, Etzioni and Galston, along with a varied group of academics (including Mary Ann Glendon , Thomas A. Spragens , James Fishkin , Benjamin Barber , Hans Joas , Philip Selznick , and Robert N. Bellah , among others) drafted and published The Responsive Communitarian Platform [ 18 ] based on their shared political principles, and the ideas in it were eventually elaborated in academic and popular books and periodicals, gaining thereby a measure of political currency in the West. Etzioni later formed the Communitarian Network to study and promote communitarian approaches to social issues and began publishing a quarterly journal, The Responsive Community .

The main thesis of responsive communitarianism is that people face two major sources of normativity: that of the common good and that of autonomy and rights, neither of which in principle should take precedence over the other. This can be contrasted with other political and social philosophies which derive their core assumptions from one overarching principle (such as liberty/autonomy for libertarianism). It further posits that a good society is based on a carefully crafted balance between liberty and social order, between individual rights and personal responsibility, and between pluralistic and socially established values.

Responsive communitarianism stresses the importance of society and its institutions above and beyond that of the state and the market, which are often the focus of other political philosophies. It also emphasizes the key role played by socialization, moral culture, and informal social controls rather than state coercion or market pressures. It provides an alternative to liberal individualism and a major counterpoint to authoritarian communitarianism by stressing that strong rights presume strong responsibilities and that one should not be neglected in the name of the other.

Following standing sociological positions, communitarians assume that the moral character of individuals tends to degrade over time unless that character is continually and communally reinforced. They contend that a major function of the community, as a building block of moral infrastructure, is to reinforce the character of its members through the community's "moral voice", defined as the informal sanction of others, built into a web of informal affect-laden relationships, which communities provide.

Influence [ edit ] Responsive communitarians have been playing a considerable public role, presenting themselves as the founders of a different kind of environmental movement, one dedicated to shoring up society (as opposed to the state) rather than nature. Like environmentalism, communitarianism appeals to audiences across the political spectrum, although it has found greater acceptance with some groups than others.

Although communitarianism is a small philosophical school, it has had considerable influence on public dialogues and politics. There are strong similarities between communitarian thinking and the Third Way, the political thinking of centrist Democrats in the United States, and the Neue Mitte in Germany. Communitarianism played a key role in Tony Blair's remaking of the British socialist Labour Party into "New Labour" and a smaller role in President Bill Clinton's campaigns. Other politicians have echoed key communitarian themes, such as Hillary Clinton, who has long held that to raise a child takes not just parents, family, friends and neighbors, but a whole "village".

[ 19 ] It has also been suggested [ 14 ] that the compassionate conservatism espoused by President Bush during his 2000 presidential campaign was a form of conservative communitarian thinking, although he did not implement it in his policy program. Cited policies have included economic and rhetorical support for education, volunteerism, and community programs, as well as a social emphasis on promoting families, character education, traditional values, and faith-based projects.

President Barack Obama gave voice to communitarian ideas and ideals in his book The Audacity of Hope , [ 20 ] and during the 2008 presidential election campaign he repeatedly called upon Americans to "ground our politics in the notion of a common good," for an "age of responsibility," and for foregoing identity politics in favor of community-wide unity building. However, for many in the West, the term communitarian conjures up authoritarian and collectivist associations, so many public leaders – and even several academics considered champions of this school – avoid the term while embracing and advancing its ideas.

Reflecting the dominance of liberal and conservative politics in the United States, no major party and few elected officials openly advocate communitarianism. Thus there is no consensus on individual policies, but some that most communitarians endorse have been enacted. Nonetheless, there is a small faction of communitarians within the Democratic Party; prominent communitarians include Bob Casey Jr.

, Joe Donnelly , and Claire McCaskill . Many communitarian Democrats are part of the Blue Dog Coalition . It is quite possible [ according to whom?

] that the United States' right-libertarian ideological underpinnings have suppressed major communitarian factions from emerging.

[ 21 ] Dana Milbank , writing in The Washington Post , remarked of modern communitarians, "There is still no such thing as a card-carrying communitarian, and therefore no consensus on policies. Some, such as John DiIulio and outside Bush adviser Marvin Olasky , favor religious solutions for communities, while others, like Etzioni and Galston, prefer secular approaches." [ 22 ] In August 2011, the right-libertarian Reason Magazine worked with the Rupe organization to survey 1,200 Americans by telephone. The Reason-Rupe poll found that "Americans cannot easily be bundled into either the 'liberal' or 'conservative' groups". Specifically, 28% expressed conservative views, 24% expressed libertarian views, 20% expressed communitarian views, and 28% expressed liberal views. The margin of error was ±3.

[ 23 ] A similar Gallup survey in 2011 included possible centrist/moderate responses. That poll reported that 17% expressed conservative views, 22% expressed libertarian views, 20% expressed communitarian views, 17% expressed centrist views, and 24% expressed liberal views. The organization used the terminology "the bigger the better" to describe communitarianism.

[ 23 ] The Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party, founded and led by Imran Khan , is considered the first political party in the world which has declared communitarianism as one of their official ideologies.

[ 24 ] Comparison to other political philosophies [ edit ] A variant of the Nolan chart using traditional political color coding ( red leftism versus blue rightism ) with communitarianism on the top left Early communitarians were charged with being, in effect, social conservatives. However, many contemporary communitarians, especially those who define themselves as responsive communitarians, fully realize and often stress that they do not seek to return to traditional communities, with their authoritarian power structure, rigid stratification, and discriminatory practices against minorities and women. Responsive communitarians seek to build communities based on open participation, dialogue, and truly shared values.

Linda McClain , a critic of communitarians, recognizes this feature of the responsive communitarians, writing that some communitarians do "recognize the need for careful evaluation of what is good and bad about [any specific] tradition and the possibility of severing certain features . . . from others." [ 25 ] And R. Bruce Douglass writes, "Unlike conservatives, communitarians are aware that the days when the issues we face as a society could be settled on the basis of the beliefs of a privileged segment of the population have long since passed." [ 26 ] One major way the communitarian position differs from the social conservative one is that although communitarianism's ideal "good society" reaches into the private realm, it seeks to cultivate only a limited set of core virtues through an organically developed set of values rather than having an expansive or holistically normative agenda given by the state. For example, American society favors being religious over being atheist, but is rather neutral with regard to which particular religion a person should follow. There are no state-prescribed dress codes, "correct" number of children to have, or places one is expected to live, etc. In short, a key defining characteristic of the ideal communitarian society is that in contrast to a liberal state, it creates shared formulations of the good, but the scope of this good is much smaller than that advanced by authoritarian societies." [ 27 ] Criticism [ edit ] Liberal theorists, such as Simon Caney, [ 28 ] disagree that philosophical communitarianism has any interesting criticisms to make of liberalism. They reject the communitarian charges that liberalism neglects the value of community, and holds an "atomized" or asocial view of the self.

According to Peter Sutch the principal criticisms of communitarianism are: that communitarianism leads necessarily to moral relativism ; that this relativism leads necessarily to a re-endorsement of the status quo in international politics; and that such a position relies upon a discredited ontological argument that posits the foundational status of the community or state.

[ 29 ] Other critics emphasize close relation of communitarianism to neoliberalism and new policies of dismantling the welfare state institutions through development of the third sector.

[ 30 ] Opposition [ edit ] Bruce Frohnen – author of The New Communitarians and the Crisis of Modern Liberalism (1996) Charles Arthur Willard – author of Liberalism and the Problem of Knowledge: A New Rhetoric for Modern Democracy , University of Chicago Press, 1996.

List of communitarian political parties [ edit ] American Solidarity Party (United States) [ 31 ] Australian Progressives (Australia) [ 32 ] Centre Party (Germany) [ 33 ] Christian Democratic Party (Norway) [ 34 ] Christian Democratic Union of Germany (Germany) [ 35 ] Christian Union (Netherlands) [ 36 ] Democratic Unionist Party (United Kingdom) [ 37 ] European Social Democratic Party (Moldova) [ 38 ] Fidesz (Hungary) [ 39 ] Finns Party (Finland) [ 40 ] Islamic Society Party (Afghanistan) Law and Justice (Poland) [ 41 ] Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (Russia) [ 42 ] Poland 2050 (Poland) [ 43 ] Prohibition Party (United States) [ 44 ] Social Democratic Party (Romania) (Romania) [ 45 ] Social Democratic Party (United Kingdom) [ 46 ] Sovereign Poland (Poland) [ 47 ] United Russia (Russia) [ 48 ] Xiluva (South Africa) List of communitarian philosophers [ edit ] Earlier theorists and writers [ citation needed ] Aristotle Martin Buber Confucius Charles Fourier T. H. Green Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel L. T. Hobhouse J. A. Hobson Niccolò Machiavelli Robert Owen Jean-Jacques Rousseau Alexis de Tocqueville in Democracy in America Contemporary theorists Benjamin Barber Gad Barzilai Robert N. Bellah Phillip Blond Patrick Deneen Amitai Etzioni William Galston Mark Kuczewski Alasdair MacIntyre Alexandre Marc Stephen Marglin Roger Scruton Emmanuel Mounier Michael Sandel Non-conformists of the 1930s Costanzo Preve Robert Putnam Jose Perez Adan Joseph Raz Charles Taylor Michael Walzer Yoram Hazony See also [ edit ] African communalism Civics Civil religion Classical republicanism Community organizing Corporatism Corporate statism Communalism (South Asia) Distributism List of Fourierist Associations in the United States List of Owenite communities in the United States Medieval commune Nationalism National conservatism One-nation conservatism Postliberalism Public sphere Radical centrism Singaporean communitarianism Third Way Tribalism Ubuntu philosophy Venezuelan Communal Councils Yellow socialism Notes [ edit ] ^ Avineri, S.and de-Shalit, Avner. (1992) Communitarianism and Individualism , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ "Communitarianism - By Branch / Doctrine - The Basics of Philosophy" .

www.philosophybasics.com . Retrieved 2024-01-24 .

^ HRUBEC, M. Úvod. In: COHEN, G. A. (2006):Iluze liberální spravedlnosti. Praha: Filosofia, ISBN 8070072342 ^ PERNÝ, Lukáš. Vybrané kapitoly zo súčasnej anglo-americkej sociálnej filozofie: Liberalizmus, komunitarizmus, neomarxizmus.. [s.l.]: Vydavateľstvo Prešovskej univerzity v Prešove 160 s. Dostupné online.

ISBN 9788055520452 . (slovensky) Google-Books-ID: lSp1DwAAQBAJ.

^ BLAHA, L. (2018): Antiglobalista. Bratislava: VEDA, ISBN 978-80-224-1628-3 .

^ PERNÝ, Lukáš. Lukáš Perný: Komunitarizmus ako alternatíva individualizmu. DAV DVA – kultúrno-politický magazín ^ Nisbet, Robert, Twilight of Authority. Indianapolis: LibertyFund, 1975.

^ Bellah, Robert N., Habits of the Heart, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1985.

^ Ehrenhalt Ehrenhalt, Alan, The Lost City: The Forgotten Virtues Of Community In America. New York: BasicBooks, 1995.

^ a b Putnam, Robert D., Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000.

^ David E. Walker "The Catholic Worker Movement," Mary House Catholic Worker of Austin .  Retrieved 2019-12-13 ^ a b Beckert, Jen. "Communitarianism." International Encyclopedia of Economic Sociology. London: Routledge, 2006. 81.

^ Etzioni, Amitai (2018).

"Communitarianism: A Historical Overview" (PDF) .

Handbuch Kommunitarismus . pp.

1– 27.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-658-16864-3_37-1 .

ISBN 978-3-658-16864-3 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-07-09 . Retrieved 2023-02-19 .

^ a b "Communitarianism – A synthesis: Rights and responsibilities | Britannica" .

^ a b c "Communitarianism | political and social philosophy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-08-16 .

^ The Communitarian Network, Responsive Communitarian Platform Text Archived 2010-01-14 at the Wayback Machine .

^ MacIntyre, Alasdair C. After Virtue. Notre Dame, IN: U of Notre Dame, 1984.

^ "Responsive Communitarian Platform" .

communitariannetwork.org . Archived from the original on 2013-07-09 . Retrieved 2013-07-10 .

^ Dionne, E.J., Our Divided Political Heart: The Battle for the American Idea in an Age of Discontent, New York: Bloomsbury USA, 2012, 83–99.

^ Obama, Barack.

The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream . New York: Crown Publishers, 2006.

^ The Responsive Community, Vol. 3, Issue 1. Winter 1992/93. Retrieved May 27, 2011.

^ "Needed: Catchword For Bush Ideology; 'Communitarianism' Finds Favor" .

janda.org . Retrieved 1 October 2014 .

^ a b Ekins, Emily (August 29, 2011).

"Reason-Rupe Poll Finds 24 Percent of Americans are Economically Conservative and Socially Liberal, 28 Percent Liberal, 28 Percent Conservative, and 20 Percent Communitarian" .

Reason Magazine . Retrieved January 1, 2012 .

^ "No Archived Copy" . Archived from the original on 2014-01-16 . Retrieved 2013-04-02 .

^ McClain, Linda, C , "Rights and irresponsibility," Duke Law Journal (March 1994): 989–1088.

^ Douglass, R. Bruce. "The renewal of democracy and the communitarian prospect." The Responsive Community 4.3 (1994): 55–62.

^ Etzioni, Amitai, What is Political? (2003). CSA Worldwide Political Science Abstracts, 2006. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2157170 ^ 'Liberalism and communitarianism: a misconceived debate'. Political Studies 40, 273–290 ^ Peter Sutch, Ethics, Justice, and International Relations , p. 62 ^ Pawel Stefan Zaleski, Neoliberalizm i spoleczenstwo obywatelskie (Neoliberalism and Civil Society) , Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Mikołaja Kopernika, Torun 2012.

^ "Principles & Platform" .

American Solidarity Party .

^ "FAQs" .

Australian Progressives .

^ "Centre Party" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

^ Nordic variation of Christian democracy - A comparison of Christian Democratic parties in the north (Report). 2021.

ending up in positions leaning towards national oriented communitarianism or conservatism where the specific delimited community is understood as the key political entity and its specific traditions are defended ^ "Overview" .

Christian Democratic Union . 23 April 2013.

^ "Onze standpunten" .

ChristenUnie .

^ "Moving Forward Together" .

Democratic Unionist Party .

^ Moldova, Europa Liberă (22 May 2012).

"Liderul PD Marian Lupu condamnă homosexualitatea dar anunță că deputații partidului vor vota Legea denumită a șanselor egale" .

Radio Europa Liberă .

^ "Fidesz" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 13 December 2023.

^ "Finns Party - In English" .

Perussuomalaiset .

^ Adekoya, Remi (November 3, 2017).

"Why Poland's Law and Justice Party Remains So Popular" .

Foreign Affairs . United States: Council on Foreign Relations.

^ "Liberal Democratic Party of Russia" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

^ "O nas" .

Polska 2050 . 24 December 2022.

^ "2024 PARTY PLATFORM OF THE PROHIBITION PARTY" .

Prohibition Party .

^ "Social Democratic Party" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

^ "The New Declaration" .

Social Democratic Party . 8 January 2022.

We are communitarians. We reject laissez-faire libertarianism as indifferent and ineffective.

^ Wesołowski, Włodzimierz; Gawkowska, Aneta (2004).

" "Communitarian" Motives in Polish Political Thought" .

Polish Sociological Review (145): 15– 31.

JSTOR 41274880 .

^ "Everything you need to know about United Russia party" .

TASS . Moscow, Russia. 22 Dec 2017.

Further reading [ edit ] Amitai Etzioni , 1996, The New Golden Rule , Basic Books ISBN 0465049990 .

Charles Taylor , 1992, Sources of the Self , Cambridge: Harvard University Press ISBN 0674824261 .

Daniel Bell , 2000, East Meets West , Princeton: Princeton University Press ISBN 0691005087 .

David L. Kirp , 2001, Almost Home: America's Love-Hate Relationship with Community , Princeton University Press ISBN 0691095175 .

Gad Barzilai , 2003, Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities , Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press ISBN 978-0-472-03079-8 .

Judith Harris & Donald Alexander, 1991, "Beyond capitalism and socialism: The communitarian alternative." Environments , 21(2), 29–37. Retrieved from: http://hdl.handle.net/10613/2733 .

Michael J. Sandel , 1998, Liberalism and the Limits of Justice , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ISBN 0521567416 .

Sterling Harwood, 1996, Against MacIntyre's Relativistic Communitarianism , in Sterling Harwood, ed., Business as Ethical and Business as Usual, Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company), Chapter 3, ISBN 0-534-54251-4 and ISBN 978-0-534-54251-1 .

External links [ edit ] Look up communitarianism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Bell, Daniel.

"Communitarianism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Fareed Zakaria , The ABCs of Communitarianism. A devil's dictionary , Slate , July 26, 1996.

Civil Practices Network v t e Political spectrum Far-left Left Centre-left Centre Centre-right Right Far-right Political positions Post-leftism Ultra-leftism Anti-Stalinist left New Left Centrist Marxism Third Way Radical centrism New Right Political ideologies Anarchism Marxism Communism Socialism Social democracy Liberalism Christian democracy Conservatism Nationalism Fascism Nazism Religious politics Buddhist socialism Christian left Jewish left Islamic socialism Christian right Hindutva Islamism Religious Zionism Political pejoratives Baizuo Champagne socialist Hard left Liberal elite Limousine liberal Loony left Moonbat Red fascist Regressive left Social fascism Social imperialism Social justice warrior Soft left Wingnut Models Horseshoe theory Left–right political spectrum Nolan Chart Overton window Open–closed political spectrum Pournelle chart Right-wing authoritarianism See also Anti-authoritarianism Democratic transition Libertarianism Syndicalism Progressivism Green politics Identity politics Corporatism Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Revolutionary Reactionary Anti-establishment Collectivism Communitarianism The Establishment Individualism Hardline Populism Radical politics Triangulation v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communitarianism&oldid=1300507253 " Categories : Communitarianism Anti-capitalism Collectivism Communalism Community building Community organizing Political ideologies Political science theories Political theories Majority–minority relations Social justice Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from February 2023 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 19:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communitarianism 41 languages Add topic

