Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Alexandrian "Canon of Ten" 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Attic orators 23 languages Afrikaans Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Galego Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th–4th century BC group of Greek speakers Lives of the Ten Orators , from an unknown writer whose allonym is Pseudo-Plutarch , delivers a pseudepigraphy for the ten Attic orators; here Demosthenes practises his craft.

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e The ten Attic orators were considered the greatest Greek orators and logographers of the classical era (5th–4th century BC). They are included in the "Canon of Ten", which probably originated in Alexandria .

[ 1 ] A.E. Douglas has argued, however, that it was not until the second century AD that the canon took on the form that is recognised today.

[ 2 ] Alexandrian "Canon of Ten" [ edit ] Aeschines Andocides Antiphon Demosthenes Dinarchus Hypereides Isaeus Isocrates Lycurgus Lysias As far as Homer (8th or 9th century BC), the art of effective speaking was of considerable value in Greece. In Homer's epic, the Iliad , the warrior, Achilles, was described as "a speaker of words and a doer of deeds".

[ 3 ] Until the 5th century BC, however, oratory was not formally taught. It was not until the middle of that century that the Sicilian orator, Corax , along with his pupil, Tisias , began a formal study of rhetoric . In 427 BC, another Sicilian named Gorgias of Leontini visited Athens and gave a speech which dazzled the citizens. Gorgias’s "intellectual" approach to oratory, which included new ideas, forms of expression, and methods of argument, was continued by Isocrates , a 4th-century BC educator and rhetorician. Oratory eventually became a central subject of study in the formalized Greek education system.

The work of the Attic orators inspired the later rhetorical movement of Atticism , an approach to speech composition in a simple rather than ornate style.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Smith, R.M. (1995). "A New Look at the Canon of the Ten Attic Orators".

Mnemosyne .

48 (1): 74.

^ Douglas, A.E. (1956). "Cicero, Quintillian, and the Canon of Ten Attic Orators".

Mnemosyne .

9 (1): 40.

^ Iliad 9.443 References [ edit ] Carawan, Edwin (ed.): Oxford readings in the Attic orators . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.

ISBN 9780199279920 Smith, R.M. "A New Look at the Canon of the Ten Attic Orators", Mnemosyne 48.1 (1995): 66-79.

External links [ edit ] Lives of the Ten Orators , translated by H.N. Fowler v t e Attic orators Antiphon Andocides Lysias Isocrates Isaeus Aeschines Lycurgus Demosthenes Hypereides Dinarchus Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attic_orators&oldid=1281065667 " Category : Attic orators Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 02:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Attic orators 23 languages Add topic

