Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early biographies and historiographical disputes Toggle Early biographies and historiographical disputes subsection 1.1 Konrad Heiden 1.2 Alan Bullock 1.3 Eberhard Jäckel 1.4 Structuralism 2 Major biographies since the 1970s Toggle Major biographies since the 1970s subsection 2.1 Joachim Fest 2.2 John Toland 2.3 Ian Kershaw 2.4 Volker Ullrich 3 Historikerstreit re Nazi Germany 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Adolf Hitler 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Adolf Hitler in 1933 This article is part of a series about Adolf Hitler Personal Family Military career Political views Religious views Health possible monorchism Psychopathography Sexuality Wealth and income Vegetarianism Bodyguard Private library Columbus Globe for State and Industry Leaders Rise to power Naturalization Beer Hall Putsch Reichstag fire Enabling Act of 1933 Führer of Germany Nazi Germany Cabinet Economy German rearmament World War II Anschluss Occupation of Czechoslovakia Western Front Eastern Front Assassination attempts Death alleged doubles conspiracy theories last will and testament Crimes against humanity Nuremberg Laws The Holocaust Final Solution Romani Holocaust Electoral campaigns 1930 March 1932 July 1932 November 1932 March 1933 November 1933 Works Paintings Mein Kampf Hitlers Zweites Buch Speeches Legacy Bibliography Historiography Nazi salute Oaths Hitler Oath Personal standard Cult of personality In popular culture Eponymous streets Killing baby Hitler " Hitler was right " Reductio ad Hitlerum v t e The historiography of Adolf Hitler deals with the academic studies of Adolf Hitler from the 1930s to the present. In 1998, a German editor said there were 120,000 studies of Hitler and Nazi Germany . Since then many more have appeared, with many of them decisively shaping the historiography regarding Hitler.

[ 1 ] Early biographies and historiographical disputes [ edit ] Konrad Heiden [ edit ] The first important biography was written in exile in Switzerland by Konrad Heiden (1901–1966), Hitler: A Biography (2 vol Zürich, 1936–1937); an English version appeared as Der Führer – Hitler's Rise to Power (1944). Heiden was a journalist for a liberal newspaper who witnessed Hitler's rise to power and fled to exile when he realized that he was a target of the regime (he managed to escape the Gestapo). In his introduction Heiden wrote "the 'hero' of this book is neither a superman nor a puppet. He is a very interesting contemporary and, viewed quantitatively, a man who is stirred up the masses more than anyone else in human history." [ 2 ] Heiden was successful in analyzing Hitler as an orator, how he drew strength from his audience, learning which points to emphasize to maximize his impact. Hitler realized it was emotion, not rationality, he had to appeal to, using repetition, exaggeration, little lies and big lies, all the while vehemently denouncing the horrors of the past and promising  a sparkling bright visions of the future. Like all early biographers, Heiden paid little attention to the anti-Semitic fulminations, or to Hitler's goals of destroying the Jews and Generalplan Ost the seizure of control of Eastern Europe for German resettlement.

[ 3 ] Alan Bullock [ edit ] The Allies seized vast masses of documents in 1945, which British historian Alan Bullock (1914–2004) used with a brilliant writing style. Bullock's biography Hitler: A Study in Tyranny (1952) depicts Hitler as the product of the chaos in Germany after 1918, where uncertainty and anger inflamed extremism and created the ideal setting for Hitler's demagoguery to succeed. Bullock tells of a totally unprincipled opportunist, who had no deep values or goals, except seizing power by any means possible. In 1991, John Campbell wrote "Although written so soon after the end of the war and despite a steady flow of fresh evidence and reinterpretation, it has not been surpassed in nearly 40 years: an astonishing achievement." [ 4 ] Eberhard Jäckel [ edit ] Bullock has generally stood the test of time, except that historians today reject the idea that Hitler was unprincipled, thanks especially to the work by German scholar Eberhard Jäckel (1929–2017),  Professor of Modern History at the University of Stuttgart.

[ 5 ] In the 1970s and 1980s his demonstration of Hitler's unwavering commitment to a few extreme principles of removing Jews and conquering living space in the East is no longer disputed.

[ 6 ] Jäckel argues that Mein Kampf was not only a "blueprint" for power, but also for genocide. In Jäckel's view, He had to annihilate the Jews, thus restoring the meaning of history, and with the thus restored, nature-intended struggle for existence, he at the same time had to conquer new living space for the German people. Each of these tasks was inextricably linked to the other. Unless the Jews were annihilated there would very soon no longer be any struggle for living space, nor therefore any culture and consequently nations would die out; not just the German nation, but ultimately all nations. But if, on the other hand, the German people failed to conquer new living space, it would die out because of that and the Jews would triumph".

[ 7 ] Structuralism [ edit ] Main article: Functionalism versus intentionalism Academic historians by the 1960s were committed to social history, and rejected the great man interpretation of the past. Biography could be a popular art form, but was theoretically incapable of explaining great events.  Popular historians, biographers, and the general public disregarded these abstract laws history, and demanded colorful history based on idiosyncratic personality traits. This popular approach was based on what scholars call "intentionalism".

[ 8 ] Who ordered the Holocaust has been a central theme of the debate. Intentionalists maintained that Adolf Hitler intended from the earliest days of his political career to exterminate Jews. Functionalists (or structuralists) argued that although Hitler had a longstanding murderous hatred of Jews, his plan to exterminate them did not arise until bureaucratic opportunities and world events (such as war with Russia) converged to make extermination possible.  The debate largely faded away after 1980 as such scholars as Ian Kershaw and Michael Burleigh increasingly agreed that "intention" and "structure" are both essential to understanding Nazi Germany and need synthesis rather than opposition.

[ 9 ] Taking note of the shift of interest among professional historians toward social history in the 1960s, Alan Bullock agreed that in general deep long-term social forces are decisive in history but not always, he argued, for there are times when the Great Man is decisive. In revolutionary circumstances, "It is possible for an individual to exert a powerful even a decisive influence on the way events develop and the policies that are followed....After the pendulum has swung between exaggerating and underestimating [individuals]...the longer perspective suggests that in both cases neither the historical circumstances nor the individual personality is sufficient explanation by itself without the other".

[ 10 ] Those historians who took an intentionalist line, like Andreas Hillgruber , argued that everything that happened after the invasion of the  USSR in 1941 was part of a master plan he credited Hitler with developing in the 1920s. Hillgruber wrote in his 1967 book Germany and the Two World Wars that for Hitler, The conquest of European Russia, the cornerstone of the continental European phase of his program, was thus for Hitler inextricably linked with the extermination of these "bacilli", the Jews. In his conception they had gained dominance over Russia with the Bolshevik Revolution. Russia thereby became the center from which a global danger radiated, particularly threatening to the Aryan race and its German core. To Hitler, Bolshevism meant the consummate rule of Jewry, while democracy—as it had developed in Western Europe and Weimar Germany—represented a preliminary stage of Bolshevism, since the Jews there won a leading, if not yet a dominant, influence. This racist component of Hitler's thought was so closely interwoven with the central political element of his program, the conquest of European Russia, that Russia's defeat and the extermination of the Jews were—in theory as later in practice—inseparable for him. To the aim of expansion per se , however, Hitler gave not racial, but political, strategic, economic and demographic underpinnings.

[ 11 ] The German historian Helmut Krausnick argued that, What is certain is that the nearer Hitler's plan to overthrow Russia as the last possible enemy on the continent of Europe approached maturity, the more he became obsessed with an idea—with which he had been toying as a "final solution" for a long time—of wiping out the Jews in the territories under his control. It cannot have been later than March 1941, when he openly declared his intention of having the political commissars of the Red Army shot, that he issued his secret decree—which never appeared in writing though it was mentioned verbally on several occasions—that the Jews should be eliminated.

[ 12 ] Streim wrote that Krausnick had been taken in by the line invented after the war to reduce the responsibility of the Einsatzgruppen leaders brought to trial.

[ 13 ] Against the intentionalist interpretation, functionalist historians like Martin Broszat argued that the lower officials of the Nazi state had started exterminating people on their own initiative.

[ 14 ] Broszat argued that the Holocaust began “bit by bit” as German officials stumbled into genocide.

[ 15 ] Broszat argued that in the fall of 1941 German officials had begun "improvised" killing schemes as the "simplest" solution.

[ 16 ] In Broszat's analysis, Hitler subsequently approved of the measures initiated by the lower officials and allowed the expansion of the Holocaust from Eastern Europe to all of Europe.

[ 17 ] In this way, Broszat argued that the Shoah was not begun in response to an order, written or unwritten, from Hitler but was rather "a way out of the blind alley into which the Nazis had manoeuvred themselves." [ 18 ] The American historian, Christopher Browning , has argued that, Before the invasion, the Einsatzgruppen were not given explicit orders for the total extermination of Jews on Soviet territory. Along with the general incitement to an ideological and racial war, however, they were given the general task of liquidating "potential" enemies. Heydrich's much-debated directive of 2 July 1941 was a minimal list of those who had to be liquidated immediately , including all Jews in state and party positions. It is very likely, moreover, that the Einsatzgruppen leaders were told of the future goal of a Judenfrei [Jew-free] Russia through systematic mass murder.

[ 19 ] The Swiss historian, Philippe Burrin, argues that such a decision was not made before August 1941 at the earliest.  Browning argues that sometime in mid-July 1941 Hitler made the decision to begin general genocide owing to his exhilaration over his victories over the Red Army, whereas Burrin contends that the decision was made in late August 1941 owing to Hitler's frustration over the slowing down of the Wehrmacht.

[ 20 ] Kershaw argues that the dramatic expansion in both the range of victims and the intensity of the killings after mid-August 1941 indicates that Hitler issued an order to that effect, most probably a verbal order conveyed to the Einsatzgruppen commanders through either Himmler or Heydrich.

[ 21 ] Major biographies since the 1970s [ edit ] Joachim Fest [ edit ] Joachim Fest (1926–2006) was a German historian who wrote a biography of Hitler, Hitler: Eine Biographie (1973) (which was translated into English as Hitler (1974) by Richard and Clara Winston) which was the first major biography of Hitler since Alan Bullock 's Hitler: A Study in Tyranny (1952) and was the first by a German writer. It was much praised by reviewers for its elegant style. Fest relied almost entirely on published sources, thereby avoiding the archival research that historians specialize in. He sees Hitler as a "singular personality," and downplays structuralism or indeed any systematic analysis of political and social context.  He made his strongest statement against the structuralist historiography. Historians agreed to the quality of the work, but they noted that he downplayed the key role of conservative elites who enabled the Nazis come to power in 1933.

[ 22 ] John Toland [ edit ] American historian John Toland (1912–2004) wrote a biography of Hitler (1976) which was based on an extensive amount of original research, such as previously unpublished documents, diaries, notes, photographs, and interviews with Hitler's colleagues and associates.

Ian Kershaw [ edit ] British historian Ian Kershaw (born 1943) wrote a two-volume biography of Hitler between 1998 and 2000 ( Hitler 1889–1936: Hubris and Hitler 1936–1945: Nemesis ) which has been hailed by historians as definitive, and as of 2012 [update] has not been displaced at the top of the bibliographies.

[ 23 ] His approach is to emphasize structural factors, and then bring in Hitler's personality by arguing that the top leadership, the middle leadership, and even the lower ranks of the Nazi movement devoted themselves to working towards the Führer's supposed wishes, whether or not he had ever expressed those wishes, in the hopes of gaining the Führer's approval. Kershaw depicts Hitler's leadership as charismatic, which emphasizes his profound influence on the audience, and so the audience—and thereby the German society as a whole—was acting under his very broad command.

[ 24 ] Volker Ullrich [ edit ] German historian and journalist Volker Ullrich (born 1943) wrote a two-volume biography of Hitler. The first edition was published in German in 2013 and was translated into English in 2016 ( Hitler – A Biography, Volume 1: Ascent 1889–1939 ); the second was published in 2018 and appeared in English translation in 2020 ( Hitler – A Biography. Volume II: Downfall 1939–1945 ). Ullrich depicts Hitler as a narcissist who was both clownish and deceitful and who rose to power using slick propaganda at a time the German elite was too dysfunctional to realize the danger he posed.

[ 25 ] Historikerstreit re Nazi Germany [ edit ] Main articles: Historikerstreit and Nazi foreign policy debate The Historikerstreit ("historians' quarrel") was an intellectual and political controversy in the late 1980s in West Germany about the crimes of Nazi Germany , including their comparability with the crimes of the Soviet Union .

The Historikerstreit pitted right-wing against left-wing intellectuals. The positions taken by the right-wing intellectuals were largely based on the totalitarianism approach which takes a comparative approach to totalitarian states, while left-wing intellectuals argued that fascism was uniquely evil, referred to as the Sonderweg thesis and could not be equated with the crimes of Soviet communism. The former were accused by their critics of downplaying Nazi crimes, while the latter were accused by their critics of downplaying Soviet crimes.

[ 26 ] The debate attracted much media attention in West Germany, with its participants' frequently giving television interviews and writing op-ed pieces in newspapers. It flared up again briefly in 2000 when one of its leading figures, Ernst Nolte , was awarded the Konrad Adenauer Prize for science.

[ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Historiography of Germany Bibliography of Adolf Hitler Nazi foreign policy debate Appeasement Historiography of World War II Causes of World War II International relations (1919–1939) Germany–Soviet Union relations, 1918–1941 Foreign policy of the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration References [ edit ] ^ Volker Ullrich, Hitler: ascent, 1889–1939 (2016) p. 5 ^ Ullrich, Hitler: ascent, 1889–1939 (2016) p 2.

^ Ullrich, Hitler: ascent, 1889–1939 (2016) pp 2–3.

^ "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" – via Google News Archive Search.

^ Ullrich, Hitler: ascent, 1889–1939 (2016) pp 1–12 ^ Eberhard Jäckel, Hitler and history (1984) ^ Cited in Michael Marrus, The Holocaust In History (2000) p. 15.

^ Ian Kershaw, Hitler 1889–1936: Hubris (1998) pp xii–xiii ^ Richard Bessel , "Functionalists vs. Intentionalists: The Debate Twenty Years on 'or' Whatever Happened to Functionalism and Intentionalism?" German Studies Review (2003) 26#1 pp 15–20.

^ Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (1991) pp 976, 977 ^ Andreas Hillgruber, Germany And The Two World Wars (1981) p 51.

^ Marrus p 39.

^ Alfred Stream, "The Tasks of the SS Einsatzgruppen" in Michael Marrus, ed., The Nazi Holocaust, Part 3, The "Final Solution": The Implementation of Mass Murder, Volume 2 (1989)  pp 436–454, [439–440] ^ Martin  Broszat, "Genesis of the 'Final Solution': An Assessment of David Irving's Theses" in H. W. Koch, ed., Aspects of the Third Reich (1985).  pp. 390–429, [399–404] ^ Marrus, p. 41.

^ Broszat, "Genesis of the 'Final Solution'” p. 408 ^ Broszat, "Genesis of the 'Final Solution'” pp 408–413 ^ Marrus p. 41 ^ Browning, Christopher R. (1995).

The Path to Genocide: Essays on Launching the Final Solution . Cambridge UP. p. 101.

ISBN 9780521558785 .

^ Cited in Laurence Rees, The Nazis: A Warning From History (1997) p. 195.

^ Ian Kershaw, Hitler, the Germans, and the Final Solution (2008) p. 259 ^ Ullrich, Hitler: ascent, 1889–1939 (2016) p 4.

^ Michael Lynch (2012).

Hitler . Routledge. p. 281.

ISBN 9781136210433 .

^ Ian Kershaw, Hitler 1889–1936: Hubris (1998) xii–xiii.

^ Michiko Kakutani, "In ‘Hitler,’ an Ascent From ‘Dunderhead’ to Demagogue" New York Times Sept. 27, 2016 ^ Pakier, Małgorzata; Stråth, Bo (2010).

A European Memory?: Contested Histories and Politics of Remembrance . Berghahn Books. p. 264.

^ Cohen, Roger (June 21, 2000).

"Hitler Apologist Wins German Honor, and a Storm Breaks Out" .

New York Times .

Further reading [ edit ] Bessel, Richard . "Functionalists vs. Intentionalists: The Debate Twenty Years on 'or' Whatever Happened to Functionalism and Intentionalism?" German Studies Review (2003) 26#1 pp 15–20 Dobry, Michel. "Hitler, charisma and structure: Reflections on historical methodology." Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions 7#2 (2006): pp  157–171.

Englund, Steven. "Napoleon and Hitler" Journal of the Historical Society (2006) 6#1 pp 151–169.

Evans, Richard J. "From Hitler To Bismarck:‘Third Reich’and Kaiserreich in Recent Historiography." Historical Journal 26#2 (1983): pp 485–497.

Fox, John P. "The Final Solution: intended or contingent? The Stuttgart Conference of May 1984 and the historical debate." Patterns of Prejudice 18.3 (1984): pp 27–39.

Kershaw, Ian.

The Nazi Dictatorship: Problems and Perspectives of Interpretation (4th ed. 2015).

excerpt Marrus, Michael.

The Holocaust In History (2000).

Stackelberg,  Roderick, ed.

The Routledge Companion to Nazi Germany (2007); emphasis on historiography.

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historiography_of_Adolf_Hitler&oldid=1292920686 " Categories : Adolf Hitler Historiography of World War II Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 16:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Adolf Hitler 1 language Add topic

