Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of gene banks Toggle Types of gene banks subsection 1.1 Seed bank 1.2 In vitro bank 1.3 Cryobank 1.4 Storage of pollen 1.5 Field gene banks 1.6 Animal genetic resource bank 2 Facilities 3 Management Systems 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gene bank 19 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी മലയാളം Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Facility that preserves genetic material This article is about preservation of genetic material. For gene banks in Molecular Biology, a collection of DNA from one organism, see Genomic library . For Duke University star and former NBA basketball player, see Gene Banks .

The active gene bank of the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics in Patancheru, India.

A gene bank is a type of biorepository that is used across the world to store the genetic material of animals, plants, and other organisms. It preserves their genetic information in the form of reproductive material like seeds, sperm, eggs, embryos , cells and other kinds of DNA. Often times, these banks house the genetic material of species that are endangered or close to extinction.

They are also used for the preservation of major crop species and cultivars, in order to preserve crop diversity .This protects the organism from threats like extinction , diseases , and climate change .

Preservation is done via the collection and storage of reproductive material from an organism. For example, seeds and cuttings may be collected from plants, spores may be collected from fungi , and sperm and egg cells may be collected from animals.

Pollen is also an essential component for the reproduction of seed plants. It contains the male genetic material for fertilization of other plants and is stored through cryopreservation .

Aquatic organisms, such as coral , are preserved via the collection of fragments that are sustained alive in a carefully controlled aquatic environment.

The collected material is oftentimes stored at a temperature below 0 °C (32 °F). It may also be stored in cryogenic conditions using liquid nitrogen . Certain gene banks, called Field gene banks, are based around the continuous cultivation of living organisms, such as certain species of plants being raised in a controlled nutrient medium, or artificially created habitats that then harbor certain species.

The database of the largest gene banks in the world can be queried via a common website, Genesys . A number of global gene banks are coordinated by the CGIAR Genebank Platform .

Types of gene banks [ edit ] This section may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( January 2016 ) Inside Svalbard Global Seed Vault Seed bank [ edit ] Seed banks , also known as seed vaults, are large repositories where many different species of seeds are stored at freezing temperatures. They are used to preserve genetic diversity for possible uses in the future.
The temperature that the seeds are stored at depends on the type of seed and length of preservation. Durations of 3–5 years are referred to as short term storage, 10-15 years are called medium term storage, and 50+ years are considered long term storage. All three time spans will typically have storage temperatures of 5 to 10 °C (41 to 50 °F), 0 °C (32 °F) and −18 to −20 °C (0 to −4 °F) respectively. It is also important that when seeds are stored, the moisture content of the seeds and the surrounding medium is kept low, otherwise the seeds will not be viable after long periods in freezing temperatures.

[ 1 ] The largest seed bank in the world is the Millennium Seed Bank housed at the Wellcome Trust Millennium Building (WTMB), located on the grounds of Wakehurst Place in West Sussex , near London .

[ 2 ] Beans stored at a seed vault In vitro bank [ edit ] An in vitro bank is another type of gene bank that stores plant or animal genetic material. It is a controlled, lab based environment rather than a traditional vault with dry or cyrogenetic conditions, like the seed banks. It is responsible for storing genetic material such as plant cells, embryos , and tissues. The samples are usually preserved in a nutrient medium, such as a test tube or culture dish. For example, buds, protocorm and meristematic cells are preserved through particular light and temperature arrangements in a nutrient medium, which is either a gel or in liquid form. This technique is used to preserve seedless plants and plants that reproduce asexually or that require preservation as clones such as commercial cultivars.

[ 3 ] Often times, these specimens require specific conditions for growth, so this bank is useful for preserving living tissues in a controlled and artificially supported environment.

[ 4 ] Cryobank [ edit ] In a cryobank, biological material such as sperm , eggs, and embryos , are preserved at very low temperatures. It is usually preserved in liquid nitrogen at −196 °C (−320.8 °F).

[ 5 ] By freezing the seeds or embryos at this temperature, they can stay viable for at least a century.

[ 1 ] Cryobanks are often utilized for the Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources , which is helpful for the conservation of species facing extinction.

[ 6 ] An example of one of the largest animal cryobanks in the world is the Frozen zoo made by the San Diego Zoo , in San Diego California .

[ 7 ] The Frozen Zoo's collection contains over 10,000 living cells, oocytes, embryos, and other genetic material from thousands of species, including one extinct species.

[ 8 ] With animal cryobanks, freezing embryos is the preferred method instead of separating the egg and sperm because they are more resistant to the freezing process.

[ 9 ] USDA cryopreservation gene bank Storage of pollen [ edit ] Pollen is stored through a cryopreservation technique called vitrification . Vitrification in this context is based around the freezing of pollen grains without the formation of ice crystals, which would heavily damage the pollen.

[ 6 ] The pollen, which is stored in liquid nitrogen , is kept at temperatures of −180 to −196 °C (−292.0 to −320.8 °F).

The National Seed Storage Lab in Fort Collins , Colorado currently uses this technique to store pollen.

[ 10 ] Pollen can also be freeze dried and stored at temperatures of 5 to −18 °C (41 to 0 °F).

[ 1 ] An important element that must be considered is the levels of moisture in the pollen. If the pollen grains have a low moisture content it helps increase the length of the pollen’s life. Low levels of moisture help the pollen freeze without creating ice or ice crystals, which helps preserve the life span of the pollen while it is being stored.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Ideal levels of moisture content to be allowed in the pollen depends on the type of plant. The pollen from different plant species can be divided into two groups. One is binucleate pollen, which has a thicker exine and the second is trinucleate pollen, which has a thinner exine . Binucleate pollen has a higher lifespan when frozen at a low moisture level. Trinucleate pollen, however, has a higher lifespan when frozen at a high moisture level.

[ 11 ] Moisture level in the pollen can be decreased by exposing the pollen to diluted salt solutions, silica gel and dry air or by chemical treatment with vitrification solutions.

[ 13 ] Field gene banks [ edit ] Field gene bank in Malaysia Field gene banks are gene banks based around the management of live specimens, such as fruit trees and other plants, that require specific conditions to grow. In contrast to a seed bank , a Field gene bank focuses on the facilitation of backups of germplasm , typically in the form of seeds. Field gene banks are vulnerable to natural disasters, pests and disease. As such, they are typically used as a method of last resort if a species cannot be preserved via normal means, such as if it didn't produce seeds . This method also uses more land, energy and water than other methods, thus making it a less ideal option.

An example of a Field gene bank includes the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) located in the Philippines . This organization contributes to the preservation of thousands of rice species by maintaining Field gene banks of the rice varieties.

[ 14 ] These rice species often have special traits such as the resistance to pests, disease, and drought . Each variety is important for the future development of new and more resilient species to address challenges around food security in countries with higher poverty and hunger concerns.

Animal genetic resource bank [ edit ] In an Animal Genetic Resource bank, genetic material is stored to ensure the long term preservation and accessibility of it for possible future uses. The DNA inhabited here comes from a variety of different animal species that range from livestock and poultry to other organisms like insects and aquatic animals.

[ 15 ] More specifically, eggs, embryos , sperm , and other tissues are stored at very low temperatures using the advanced techniques of cryopreservation . These banks are crucial for guarding the genetic diversity of these populations, which is essential for the long term survival and adaptability of these populations.

These facilities are particularly important for conserving genetic material from endangered species to support breeding programs that aim to save them. For species that risk extinction, the DNA in these banks provide a form of genetic insurance. It allows for the possibility of bringing back genetic diversity to the species if need be. Genetic material can be used to reintroduce diversity to a wild population who faces threats, such as genetic drift or inbreeding .

[ 16 ] In a situation where an animal cannot reproduce naturally due to disease or environmental changes, the genetic material can be used to assist the populations natural reproductive efforts via genetic rescue.

[ 17 ] This type of preservation allows for a wide range of management strategies for future interventions.

Facilities [ edit ] The Centre for Pacific Crops and Trees (CePaCT) plant gene bank in Suva , Fiji, focuses on propagating (and re-propagating) seedlings of plants (using clippings and tissue culture , rather than as seeds), to  preserve the genetic diversity of the most important varieties of food crops of the Pacific region, such as banana, taro, breadfruit and yam.

[ 18 ] Gene banks are present all over the world, with differing objectives and resources. One of the largest is the Svalbard Global Seed Vault .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Management Systems [ edit ] The Federal Ex situ gene bank is another example of one of the largest germplasm collections. It's established to collect, conserve, and characterize plant genetic resources to promote conservation.

[ 21 ] The Federal Ex situ gene bank also conducts relevant research to develop new techniques for resource conservation.

[ 21 ] In context of the United states, the Federal Ex situ gene bank includes facilities managed by government agencies such as the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). The USDA helps to maintain a variety of gene banks like the National Plant Germplasm System (NPGS). The NPGS serves to store genetic resources for crops and wild plants, thus providing a backup against the loss of biodiversity as well an option for breeding programs and research.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Sperm bank Ova bank Biobank Biological database Germplasm Seed bank Plant genetic resources Multi-Crop Passport Descriptor (MCPD) References [ edit ] ^ a b c Babasaheb, Jige Sandipan (December 2021).

" 'NEW TRENDS IN BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION' " .

www.jetir.org .

8 . Retrieved 11 October 2023 .

^ Gosling, Rebecca (2 December 2020).

"What is a seed bank, how does it work and why is it important?" .

Woodland Trust . Retrieved 11 October 2023 .

^ "In vitro bank" .

cropgenebank.sgrp.cgiar.org . Archived from the original on 16 April 2024 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ "In vitro bank" .

cropgenebank.sgrp.cgiar.org . Retrieved 4 April 2025 .

^ "Cryo bank" .

cropgenebank.sgrp.cgiar.org . Archived from the original on 17 August 2016 . Retrieved 1 November 2023 .

^ a b "Cryoconservation of Animal Genetic Resources" (PDF) .

Rep. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . FAO Animal Production and Health Guidelines No. 12. Print. 2012.

^ Prisco, Jacopo (31 March 2022).

"Back from the brink: How 'frozen zoos' could save dying species" .

CNN . Retrieved 1 November 2023 .

^ "Frozen Zoo®" .

San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance . 26 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 April 2025 .

^ "The Frozen Zoo" . 21 May 2010. Archived from the original on 21 May 2010 . Retrieved 1 November 2023 .

^ Connor, Kristina F.; Towill, Leigh E. (1 January 1993).

"Pollen-handling protocol and hydration/dehydration characteristics of pollen for application to long-term storage" .

Euphytica .

68 (1): 77– 84.

Bibcode : 1993Euphy..68...77C .

doi : 10.1007/BF00024157 .

ISSN 1573-5060 .

^ a b Janick, Jules (7 April 2010).

Plant Breeding Reviews, Volume 13 . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-470-65004-2 .

^ Kartha (3 April 1985).

Cryopreservation of Plant Cells and Organs . CRC Press.

ISBN 978-0-8493-6102-9 .

^ Dinato, N. B.; Santos, I. R. I.; Vigna, B. B. Z.; Ferreira de Paula, A.; Favero, A. P. (2020). "PERSPECTIVE: Pollen Cryopreservation for Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources Conservation".

Cryo Letters .

41 (3): 115– 127.

ISSN 0143-2044 .

PMID 33988640 .

^ "About us" .

International Rice Research Institute . Retrieved 4 April 2025 .

^ "Conservation of Genetic Resources Animals" .

agrin.ars.usda.gov . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ "Genome Resource Banking" .

SEZARC . Retrieved 4 April 2025 .

^ "Animal genetic resources conservation by management, data banks and training" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ Smith, Carl.

Inside the Pacific's CePaCT plant gene bank, a last line of defence for crop species loss , ABC News , 17 October 2023. Retrieved 8 September 2024.

^ On practical and theoretical differences between a storage and a gene bank, see Nicole C. Karafyllis (ed.): Theorien der Lebendsammlung. Pflanzen, Mikroben und Tiere als Biofakte in Genbanken (in German), Freiburg: Karl Alber 2018 ( Lebenswissenschaften im Dialog Vol. 25) ISBN 978-3-495-48975-8 ^ Liu, Rita (15 April 2022).

"Seed banks: the last line of defense against a threatening global food crisis" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 .

^ a b "Gene Bank - Leibniz-Institut (IPK)" .

www.ipk-gatersleben.de . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ National Plant Germplasm System , USDA Agricultural Research Service, 21 December 2017 , retrieved 8 April 2025 Further reading [ edit ] Ellis, R.H.; T.D. Hong; E.H. Roberts (1985).

Handbook of Seed Technology for Genebanks Vol. II: Compendium of Specific Germination Information and Test Recommendations . IBPGR (now Bioversity International). Rome, Italy. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008.

Engels, Jan; Visser, Bert, eds. (2003).

A Guide to Effective Management of Germplasm Collections . CABI, IFPRI, IPGRI, SGRP. Archived from the original on 25 May 2007.

174 p.

Kameswara, N.; J. Hanson; M. E. Dulloo; K. Ghosh; A. Nowell; M. Larinde. (2006).

Manual of Seed Handling in Genebanks . Bioversity International, CTA (Technical Center for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation), FAO, ILRI. Archived from the original on 21 January 2008.

147 p.

Koo, B.; Pardey, P. G.; Wright, B. D.; et al. (2004).

Saving Seeds . CABI, IFPRI, IPGRI, SGRP. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008.

External links [ edit ] AEGIS A European Genebank Integrated System The Crop Genebank Knowledge Base Archived 14 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine Genebanks Genesys DAD-IS: Domestic Animal Diversity Information System v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases National Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gene_bank&oldid=1305241990 " Category : Gene banks Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2024 Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from January 2016 All articles needing rewrite Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 22:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gene bank 19 languages Add topic

