Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Definition 3 Mathematical modeling 4 History 5 Sensory Observations 6 Perceptual Observations 7 Statements of Paradox Toggle Statements of Paradox subsection 7.1 See:Visual 7.2 Hear:Auditory 7.3 Touch:Tactile 7.4 Smell:Olfactory 7.5 Taste:Gustatory 7.6 Electric 8 Conclusion 9 References Toggle the table of contents Perceptual paradox Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A perceptual paradox illustrates the failure of a theoretical prediction.

Theories of perception are supposed to help a researcher predict what will be perceived when senses are stimulated.

A theory usually comprises a mathematical model (formula),
rules for collecting physical measurements for input into the model,
and rules for collecting physical measurements to which model outputs should map.  When arbitrarily choosing valid input data, the model should reliably generate output data that is indistinguishable from that which is measured in the system being modeled.

Although each theory may be useful for some limited predictions,
theories of vision, hearing, touch, smell, and taste are not typically
reliable for comprehensive modeling of perception based on sensory inputs.  A paradox illustrates where a theoretical prediction fails.
Sometimes, even in the absence of a predictive theory,
the characteristics of perception seem nonsensical.

This page lists some paradoxes and seemingly impossible properties of perception.  When an animal is not named in connection with the discussion, human perception should be assumed since
the majority of perceptual research data applies to humans.

Terminology [ edit ] S U N w h i t e {\displaystyle SUN_{white}} light Normal white sunlight is black-body radiation containing a broad and largely featureless spectrum covering the entire range of human vision.

R G B w h i t e {\displaystyle RGB_{white}} light Televisions and computer screens fool the eye by generating photons of three narrow wavelength bands where the proportion of photons from industry standard (but improperly named) R (red) , G (green) , and B (blue) sources is known to be perceived as white.

Definition [ edit ] A perceptual paradox , in its purest form is a statement
illustrating the failure of a formula to predict
what we perceive from what our senses transduce .

Example: standard information theory limits spatial frequency based hyperacuity to a factor of approximately 4 over the spatial frequency of photoreceptor cells .  Yet, reliable scientific journals have published reports of hyperacuity in excess of a factor of 10.

A seemingly nonsensical characteristic is a statement of factual observation
that is sufficiently intractable that no theory has been proposed to account for it.

Example: the optical path in an eye, from the cornea to the photoreceptors, goes through a non-spherical cornea and lens that refract and non-circular apertures that diffract such that, in a normal eye, the image on the retina for a point-source is an irregular color-fringed, color-eccentric coaxial bullseye-like pattern with many pathological properties, with the central bright feature covering many photoreceptors.

[ 1 ] Yet, the point-source is perceived clearly, and can be discriminated from other such points as little distance away as 1/10 the visual angle of a photoreceptor.  According to Roorda, in a "perfect" eye, a foveal cone subtends 30 arcseconds, and the diameter of the central "Airy" disk varies between 10 cones (1mm pupil used for reading) to about 1.5 cones (8mm pupil used during fight/flight response).

Mathematical modeling [ edit ] One branch of research into perception attempts to explain
what we perceive by applying formulae to sensory inputs
and expecting outputs similar to that which we perceive.
For example: what we measure with our eyes should be predicted
by applying formulae to what we measure with instruments that imitate our eye.

Past researchers have made formulae that predict
some, but not all, perceptual phenomena from their sensory origins.
Modern researchers continue to make formulae to overcome
the shortcomings of earlier formulae.

Some formulae are carefully constructed to mimic
actual structures and functions of sensory mechanisms.
Other formulae are constructed by great leaps of faith
about similarity in mathematical curves.

No perceptual formulae have been raised to the status of "natural law"
in the way that the laws of gravitation and electrical attraction have.
So, perceptual formulae continue to be an active area of development
as scientists strive towards the great insight required of a law.

History [ edit ] Some Nobel laureates have paved the way with clear statements of good practice: In the preface to his Histology [ 2 ] Santiago Ramón y Cajal wrote that "Practitioners will only be able to claim that a valid explanation of a histological observation has been provided if three questions can be answered satisfactorily: what is the functional role of the arrangement in the animal; what mechanisms underlie this function; and what sequence of chemical and mechanical events during evolution and development gave rise to these mechanisms?" Allvar Gullstrand described the problems that arise
when approaching the optics of the eye as if they were as predictable as camera optics.

Charles Scott Sherrington , considered the brain to be
the "crowning achievement of the reflex system",
(which can be interpreted as opening all aspects of perception to simple formulae
expressed over complex distributions).

Sensory Observations [ edit ] See:Visual Hear:Auditory Touch:Tactile Smell:Olfactory Taste:Gustatory Electric Perceptual Observations [ edit ] See:Visual Hear:Auditory Touch:Tactile Smell:Olfactory Taste:Gustatory Electric Statements of Paradox [ edit ] See:Visual [ edit ] Contrast Invariance Boundaries between brighter and darker areas
appear to remain of constant relative contrast
when the ratio of logarithms of the two intensities
remains constant: C o n t r a s t ∝ ∝ l o g I a l o g I b {\displaystyle Contrast\propto {\frac {logI_{a}}{logI_{b}}}} But the use of logarithms is forbidden
for values that can become zero such as I a {\displaystyle I_{a}\,} ,
and division is forbidden
by values that can become zero such as l o g I b {\displaystyle logI_{b}\,} .

No published neuroanatomical model predicts the perception
of contrast invariance.

10 Decade Transduction Local Contrast Color Constancy When observing objects in a scene, colors appears constant.
An apple looks red regardless of where it is viewed.
In bright direct sunshine, under a blue sky with the sun obscured,
during a colorful sunset, under a canopy of green leaves,
and even under most man-made light sources,
the color of the apple remains unchanging.

Color perception appears to be independent of light wavelength.

Edwin Land demonstrated this by illuminating a room with
two wavelengths of light of approximately 500 nm and 520 nm
(both improperly called "green").
The room was perceived in full color,
with all colors appearing unattenuated,
like red, orange, yellow, blue, and purple,
despite the absence of photons other than two close to 510 nm.
Note that R G B w h i t e {\displaystyle RGB_{white}} light misuses the terminology RGB
since color is a perception and
there are no such things as Red , Green , or Blue photons.

Jerome Lettvin wrote an article in the Scientific American [ 3 ] illustrating the importance of boundaries and vertices
in the perception of color.

Yet, no published formula predicts the perceived color of objects
in a single image of arbitrary scene illumination.

Transverse Chromatic Deaberration Light that goes through a simple lens such as found in an eye
undergoes refraction, splitting colors.
An R G B w h i t e {\displaystyle RGB_{white}} point-source that is off-center to the eye
projects to a pattern where with color separation along a line radial to
the central axis of the eye.
The color separation can be many photoreceptors wide.

Yet, an R G B w h i t e {\displaystyle RGB_{white}} pixel on a television or computer screen appears white
even when seen sidelong.

No published neuroanatomical model predicts the perception of
the eccentric white pixel.

Longitudinal Chromatic Deaberration As in Transverse Chromatic Deaberration,
color splitting projects also projects the R, G, and B components
of the R G B w h i t e {\displaystyle RGB_{white}} pixel to different focal lengths,
resulting in a bulls-eye-like color distribution of light
even at the center of vision.

No published neuroanatomical model predicts the perception of
the centered white pixel.

Spherical Deaberration Eyes have corneas and lenses that are imperfectly spherical.
This inhomogeneous shape results in a non-circular distribution of photons on the retina.

No published neuroanatomical model predicts the perception of
the non-circularly distributed white pixel.

Hyperacuity People report discrimination much finer than can be predicted
by interpolating sense data between photosensors.
High performing hyperacute vision in some people
has been measured to less than a tenth the radius of a single photoreceptor.
Among measures of hyperacuity are the vernier discrimination of two adjacent lines
and the discrimination of two stars in a night sky.

No published neuroanatomical model predicts the discrimination of
the two white pixels closer together than a single photoreceptor.

Pupil Size Inversion When pupils are narrowed to around 1mm for reading fine print,
the size of the central "Airy" disk increases to a diameter of 10 photoreceptors.
The so-called "blur" is increased for reading.
When pupils are widened for fight/flight response,
the size of the central "Airy" disk decreases to a diameter of about 1.5 photoreceptors.
The so-called "blur" is decreased in anticipation of large movements.

No published neuroanatomical model predicts that discrimination
improves when pupils are narrowed.

Pupil Shape Inversion Eyes have pupils (apertures) that cause diffraction.
A point-source of light is distributed on the retina.
The distribution for a perfectly circular aperture
is known by the name "Airy rings".

Human pupils are rarely perfectly circular.
Cat pupils range from almost circular to a vertical slit.
Goat pupils tend to be horizontal rectangular with rounded corners.
Gecko pupils range from circular, to a slit, to a series of pinholes.
Cuttlefish pupils have complex shapes.

No published neuroanatomical model predicts the perception of
the various pupil shape distributed white pixel.

Hear:Auditory [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( February 2018 ) Touch:Tactile [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( February 2018 ) Smell:Olfactory [ edit ] One paradoxical perception concerning the sense of smell is the theory of one's own ability to smell. Smell is intrinsic to being alive, and is even shown to be a matter of genetics.

Taste:Gustatory [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( February 2018 ) Electric [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( February 2018 ) Conclusion [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( July 2010 ) References [ edit ] ^ Roorda, A. “A Review of Optics” chapter 2 in Wavefront Customized Visual Correction: The Quest for SuperVision  II. (Macrae, S.M., Krueger, R.R., Applegate, R.A., ed). Slack Inc. Thorofare, NJ (2004) ^ Histology of the Nervous System: Spanish edition ^ 1986 The colors of things, Scientific American, Vol.255.3, pp. 84-91; (with Brou, Philippe, Sciascia, and Linden) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐gplxb
Cached time: 20250812151426
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.090 seconds
Real time usage: 0.163 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 597/1000000
Revision size: 11404/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 20120/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 217/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 12464/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.035/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1503474/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   85.936      1 -total
 63.65%   54.702      1 Template:Original_research
 60.03%   51.585      6 Template:Ambox
 21.17%   18.189      5 Template:Empty_section
 12.20%   10.480      1 Template:Reflist
  1.19%    1.020      1 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7652097:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812151426 and revision id 1279316959. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Perceptual_paradox&oldid=1279316959 " Categories : Perception Paradoxes Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research from February 2008 All articles that may contain original research Articles to be expanded from February 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from February 2018 All articles with empty sections Articles to be expanded from July 2010 Articles with empty sections from July 2010 This page was last edited on 7 March 2025, at 20:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Perceptual paradox Add languages Add topic

