Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dyssemic adults 2 A difference rather than a disability 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Dyssemia 1 language Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Difficulties with nonverbal communication This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dyssemia is a difficulty with receptive and/or expressive nonverbal communication . The word comes from the Greek roots dys (difficulty) and semia (signal). The term was coined by psychologists Marshall Duke and Stephen Nowicki in their 1992 book, Helping The Child Who Doesn't Fit In , to decipher the hidden dimensions of social rejection .  These difficulties go beyond problems with body language and motor skills . Dyssemic persons exhibit difficulties with the acquisition and use of nonverbal cues in interpersonal relationships . "A classic set of studies by Albert Mehrabian showed that in face-to-face interactions, 55 percent of the emotional meaning of a message is expressed through facial, postural, and gestural means, and 38 percent of the emotional meaning is transmitted through the tone of voice. Only seven percent of the emotional meaning is actually expressed with words." [ 1 ] Dyssemia represents the social dysfunction aspect of nonverbal learning disorder .

Dyssemic adults [ edit ] The social interactions of dyssemic adults tend to be immature and complex, even though their non-relational reasoning ranges from normal to gifted. Dyssemic individuals exhibit varying degrees of social awkwardness and various types of nonverbal communication difficulties. Some might only have trouble with reception or expression alone, while others struggle with both. Severity fluctuates among individuals; difficulty does not necessarily equate to total inability, nor occur in all situations. Occasionally, expressive difficulty may only be a delay between the emotion and the facial muscles. Socially awkward adults with nonverbal shortcomings often report feeling "a little out of it socially" or feeling "left out." [ 2 ] Dyssemic adults frequently experience success in temporary or accidental situations, but their sense of success can be short-lived, returning to an often common pattern of disappointment and self-reproach. Many times dyssemic individuals may say something in a way they had not intended and worry about the consequences. Dyssemic adults may sometimes struggle with interpreting the feelings or social interests of new acquaintances, causing potential resentment and/or rejection. They also may have difficulty with subtler aspects of social interaction, for example, timing and opportunity. This may aggravate the situation, baffling acquaintances, coworkers, and even relatives. Dyssemic individuals may also become targets of adult bullies. If dyssemic adults are in an environment or situation with adequate verbal input or other cues, however, they have a frame for understanding or constructing appropriate responses, and these problems can be greatly reduced.

There is presently little research on adults with dyssemia/ NLD compared to the research on children, making it difficult to treat medically. Until more adults are included in the research on diagnosis and treatment, misperceptions may occur and their quality of life may deteriorate over time into loneliness, isolation, anger, and even aggression as a result of a lack of understanding on the part of both populations. However, it may be treated socially to some extent. Through intense observation or asking questions, as of a supportive friend or colleague, the individual with dyssemia can often eventually "pass" in most situations once he or she has learned the typical gestures for a given situation. Since many adults with dyssemia or NLD are quite competent in reading or writing, it is often helpful to clarify one's communication using fully worded sentences, or supplementing gestures or facial expressions with a verbal clue as to meaning.

Social anxiety or social phobia are medical classifications that can be used to designate nonverbal communication problems; however, dyssemia is not an anxiety or phobia when it applies to NLD or specific brain damage, for example to the right hemisphere. Chronic dyssemia is a condition that some neurologists term social-emotional processing disorder (SEPD).

A difference rather than a disability [ edit ] Dyssemia is considered a difference rather than a disability; as such, it is not classified as a standard medical condition.  Many times dyssemia springs from cultural differences; other times, dyssemia constitutes an offshoot of attention deficit disorder (ADD). However, the differences can be devastating. Problems associated with dyssemia in the establishment and maintenance of interpersonal relationships are often at the root of people's social and occupational troubles. Sometimes, persons affected with mild autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or social anxiety disorder also struggle with characteristics of dyssemia. Dyssemia can be remediated through a variety of programs designed to assess its presence and alter its adverse impact. Such programs, not unlike acculturation , emphasize virtual and social learning .

See also [ edit ] Asperger syndrome Autism spectrum disorder Body language Developmental coordination disorder Emotional intelligence (EQ) Friendship Nonverbal learning disorder Observational learning Rejection Self-efficacy Social behavior Social learning theory Social learning (social pedagogy) Social pedagogy References [ edit ] ^ Nowicki, S. & Duke, M. (1992).

Helping the Child Who Doesn't Fit In . Atlanta: Peachtree Publishers, p. 7.

^ Nowicki, S. & Duke, M. (2002).

Will I Ever Fit In? - The Breakthrough Program for Conquering Adult Dyssemia . Riverside, NJ: Free Press, Simon & Schuster.

Duke, M.P., Martin, E.A., & Nowicki, S. (1996).

Teaching Your Child the Language of Social Success.

Atlanta, GA: Peachtree Publishers.

Feldman, R.S. & Rimé, B., Editors. (1991, 2000).

Fundamentals of Nonverbal Behavior: Studies in Emotion and Social Interaction . New York: Cambridge University Press.

Manoach, D. S., Weintraub, S., Daffner, K. R., & Scinto, L. F. M. (1997).  Deficient antisaccades in the social-emotional processing disorder.

NeuroReport , 8 (4) pp. 901–905 (24 ref.) ISSN 0959-4965. Hagerstown, MD: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins Publishers.

Phillips, M. (2004).

"Facial processing deficits and social dysfunction: How are they related?" , Brain 127 (8) pp. 1691–1692.

v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dyssemia&oldid=1240249264 " Categories : Symptoms and signs of mental disorders Nonverbal communication Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 14 August 2024, at 10:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dyssemia 1 language Add topic

